BANK: RBNZ
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Some Policy Lessons from a Year of COVID-19
DATE: 04/03/2021
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/speeches/2021/speech2021-04-03.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

With special thanks to my Reserve Bank colleague Karsten Chipeniuk, and many others who provided 
wise copy and comment. 
Some Policy Lessons from a Year of 
COVID-19
A speech delivered to the 2021 New Zealand Economics Forum 
University of Waikato 
On 4 March, 2021 
Adrian Orr, 
Governor 


 
2 
 
 
 
 
Introduction 
 
Tēnā koutou katoa, welcome everybody. Thank you for the opportunity to speak today on an 
important and live topic ‘The policy lessons from a year of living with COVID-19’.   
 
In the beginning… 
 
From late-2019 citizens of the world have watched the COVID-19 virus evolve into a global 
pandemic. We observed global decision makers face what seemed an incalculable dilemma: 
whether to implement measures to contain the spread of the virus - potentially sacrificing 
lifestyles and livelihoods - or to endure the health consequences of allowing the virus to 
spread. This policy dilemma was quickly, and unfortunately, resolved by compounding 
hospitalisations, threatening the sustainability of health care systems.  Policy inaction was not 
an option and social mobility has been dramatically curtailed as a result.  
 
In Aotearoa, New Zealand, we have now been living in this constrained world for a year. The 
level of social restrictions has fluctuated with our COVID Alert Levels – as we have seen in 
the events of this week – between the extremes of being one of the most mobility-constrained 
societies on the planet to one of the most free (Figures 1 and 2).  As citizens, our economic 
fortune has been closely linked to these actions.  
 
Figure 1: Cross-Country Lockdown Comparisons 
 
Source: Corona Virus Government Response Tracker from Oxford University (Hale et al., 2020) 
 
 
 
 


 
3 
 
 
 
 
Figure 2: International Arrivals 
 
 
At the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Te Pūtea Matua, we were also watching this global 
health crisis evolve and brew into a pending economic crunch. However, we were also in the 
midst of preparing a broader range of monetary policy and financial stability tools to bolster 
the resilience of New Zealand’s financial system. This is our kaitiaki (guardian) role.1  
 
Our work agenda followed largely from lessons learnt from the Global Financial Crisis a 
decade earlier. Our efforts included increasing banks’ liquidity, capital buffers, and risk 
management awareness and ownership.  We were also developing additional monetary policy 
tools to be used if the Official Cash Rate (OCR) reached a lower nominal bound. And, we were 
finalising the implementation of a superior payment and settlement system for New Zealand, 
while also formalising a more co-ordinated regulatory relationship between colleagues through 
the Council of Financial Regulators. 2 3 4 
 
An urgent, collaborative response 
 
Our preparedness efforts proved timely given the arrival of COVID-19. Te Pūtea Matua was 
in a sound position to support cash-flow and confidence in the economy and continue to meet 
our core mandates in the face of the COVID-induced economic shock. These mandates are 
maintaining low and stable consumer price inflation while contributing to maximum sustainable 
employment, promoting and maintaining a sound and efficient financial system, meeting the 
                                               
1 The Journey of Te Pūtea Matua: Our Tāne Mahuta 
2 Reserve Bank Statement of Intent 2019 – 2022  
3 Reserve Bank Statement of Intent 2020 – 2023 
4 Council of Financial Regulators  


 
4 
 
 
 
 
cash needs of the public, and providing robust payment and settlement services for New 
Zealand’s financial institutions. 5   
 
Of course we were far from alone in the preparation for, and provision of, economic support 
in the face of shocks.  At best we have played an important support role.  
 
New Zealand’s broader economic policy settings provided scope and optionality for economic 
policymakers. A low level of government debt, favourable terms of trade, and solid economic 
momentum at the commencement of the pandemic put Aotearoa in good stead to weather the 
initial economic brunt. Likewise, the rapid development and mobilisation of a suite of fiscal 
support measures significantly bolstered the balance sheets of households and businesses.   
 
I am very proud that Te Pūtea Matua has been able to assist in the whole of government effort 
to develop, implement, and support this wide range of policy responses. We delivered a broad 
range of actions, including:  
 
Easing monetary conditions, including through the deployment of additional monetary 
policy tools to lower interest rates; 6 
 
Introducing a range of liquidity facilities to support the smooth functioning of New 
Zealand’s financial markets and to allow banks to swap their assets for cash in order 
to keep lending; 
 
Ensuring public access to cash was maintained during the social restrictions;   
 
Assisting the Government design and implement the mortgage payment deferral 
scheme and the business finance guarantee scheme; and  
 
Reprioritising our regulatory reform priorities – in coordination with COFR – to enable 
financial institutions to focus on the urgent tasks at hand. 
And throughout this period, we worked very closely with industry, with two-way flows of 
information proving extremely important in shaping policy responses, understanding 
operational resilience, business dynamics, and credit and liquidity risks.  
 
These initiatives continue to develop and advance as we speak. Working together – mahi tahi 
– (Figure 3)7 proved to be a critical catchphrase and one that we will continuously foster. ‘Mahi 
tahi’ acknowledges that no one individual, enterprise, or policy institution can succeed alone. 
 
                                               
5 Reserve Bank Annual Report 2020  
6 Tools to support the economy 
7 Mahi Tahi: Working together to ensure cash-flow and confidence 


 
5 
 
 
 
 
Figure 3: Working Together: Mahi-Tahi Diagram 
 
Source: RBNZ.  Released in March 2020 
 
Being prepared beats guessing  
 
The ability of New Zealand to sustain the current economic momentum remains in large part 
at the will of the COVID-19 virus in the short-term, and our confidence and adaptability in the 
longer-term.  
 
Our recent Monetary Policy Statement (MPS)8 outlines that New Zealand has been in the 
relatively fortunate position of having dealt swiftly with the initial COVID wave. This health 
outcome, combined with the economic policy response, has seen domestic activity pick up. 
However, we continue to emphasise that the current pick up is sector and event specific, and 
that we will not be ‘resuming business as previous’ in its entirety any time soon.   
 
The initiation of global vaccination programmes is positive for both future health and economic 
activity. However, there remains a significant period before widespread immunity is achieved. 
In the meantime, economic uncertainty will remain heightened and international mobility 
restrictions will continue. Confidence and investment will be needed to sustain economic 
performance. For this reason we have retained a stimulatory monetary stance. 
                                               
8 Reserve Bank February 2021 Monetary Policy Statement  


 
6 
 
 
 
 
 
Given this elevated uncertainty, at the Bank we are still operating with scenarios in mind rather 
than predictions. Our recent Briefing to the Incoming Minister outlined some of the challenges 
confronting society globally and in Aotearoa, and their impact on Te Pūtea Matua policy 
considerations. We summarised the challenges under the long-term headings of Prosperity, 
Sustainability, Cohesion, and Inclusion. These headings reinforce a long-term horizon and the 
inter-related forces that will determine our success. 9   
 
For example, New Zealanders have all weathered the economic implications of the pandemic 
differently based on a wide range of drivers, e.g. demographics, location, sector of economy, 
connectedness to the labour force, and individual’s reliance on wages or profits. Aggregate 
economic statistics mask a myriad of distributional implications for health and economic 
outcomes. This is a topic I will return to with regard to housing and house prices.  
 
The pandemic also occurred during a secular decline in nominal and real (inflation-adjusted) 
interest rates (Figure 4). Lower real interest rates reflect lower expected future GDP growth 
rates and higher savings.  Lower nominal interest rates reflect the addition of declining inflation 
expectations. The extremely low level of nominal interest rates has led central banks – 
including us – to develop additional monetary policy tools which remain effective but relatively 
untested.10 
 
Figure 4: 10-year Government Bond yields in selected countries 
 
Source: Haver Analytics 
                                               
9 Reserve Bank Briefing to the Incoming Minister 2020  
10 Monetary Policy: Same Objectives, Different Challenges, Speech by Adrian Orr, Governor RBNZ, 
September 2020  


 
7 
 
 
 
 
 
The pace and magnitude of the pandemic-induced economic shock also necessitated 
unprecedented coordination between policy agencies, and between Government and the 
private sector. ‘Outsourcing’ policy implementation – such as mortgage deferral or wage 
subsidies - has proved necessary.  
 
Of significant interest to central banks globally was how timely and effective fiscal policy could 
prove to be in support of demand management? ‘Quite timely and very effective’ was the 
answer across many countries – with a ‘very timely and effective’ answer here in New Zealand.  
In recent months we have seen significant fiscal and monetary policy collaboration in both 
demand-side management and ensuring financial markets remain liquid and functioning.   
 
Along with this collaboration, the Reserve Bank has been actively ensuring that people 
understand the similarities and differences between ‘quantitative easing’ (our Large Scale 
Asset Programme)11 and direct financing of debt.  While there appears to only be subtle 
operational differences between the two concepts, there are significant institutional 
differences.  
 
The Government’s debt issuance – or bond programme – is purely a fiscal policy decision, 
based on the Government’s spending and investment intentions. Under the Bank’s LSAP 
programme, the quantum and timing of our government bond purchases were decisions made 
by our operationally independent Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), with our purchase solely 
from the secondary market. The MPC’s aims were to lower interest rates across the New 
Zealand dollar yield curve so as to meet their inflation and employment remit. 
 
MPC’s decision making processes and the Bank’s LSAP operations ensure that monetary 
policy and the Government’s debt management policy are independent.  A Crown indemnity 
insulates the Bank’s balance sheet from the financial risks associated with LSAPs in the 
absence of a significant increase in Bank capital.  This provides the MPC sufficient capacity 
and optionality to discharge its duties consistent with the Reserve Bank Act and MPC remit. 12 
 
Another interesting twist to the pandemic is the role of our currency and payment systems.  
Technology transformation is permanent and we are in the midst of re-thinking the role of cash 
in society and how we deliver transactional capability to New Zealanders.   
 
                                               
11 See Large-Scale asset purchases 
12 Letter from the Reserve Bank to the Minister of Finance – 6 August 2020  


 
8 
 
 
 
 
Our recent work has highlighted the ongoing important role that cash plays with regard to 
financial inclusion and social cohesion. We are a ‘less cash’ not ‘cashless’ society.13 Cash use 
continued to change with the arrival of COVID-19, so we are capturing the lessons and will 
need to adapt quickly. Expect to hear more from us on this topic shortly.  
 
Monetary policy with relative benefits 
 
As already mentioned, the Bank acted on a number of fronts to cushion the impact of the 
COVID-19 economic shock and promote cash-flow and confidence. Our main action was to 
significantly ease monetary conditions by lowering the OCR to a record 0.25 per cent and 
progressively implementing alternative monetary instruments - such as the Large-Scale Asset 
Purchase (LSAP) and Funding for Lending Programmes (FLP) still operating.  
 
While the operational backgrounds differ for these tools, they all act to lower the interest rates 
faced by households and businesses so as to incentivise spending and investment and keep 
the NZ dollar exchange rate lower than otherwise. These actions aimed to head off 
unnecessarily low inflation or deflation and unnecessarily high and persistent unemployment 
resulting from the COVID-19 economic shock.  
 
Monetary policy remains a blunt tool, however, with its relative impacts on individuals varying 
significantly. The impact of monetary policy decisions on wealth and income equality is an 
important topic for considering overall economic wellbeing. As Janet Yellen recently noted, 
despite the fact that the tools of monetary policy are generally not well-suited to achieve 
distributional objectives, it is nevertheless important that policymakers understand and monitor 
the effects of macroeconomic developments on different groups within society.14  
 
Our current assessment of the international literature on the distributional impacts of monetary 
policy suggests it is unclear, on net, whether lower real interest rates increase or decrease 
income and wealth inequality.15 The net results are an empirical rather than theoretical 
outcome and appear country and time specific. There are several channels through which 
lower interest rates can impact on the return on capital (profits) and the return on labour 
(wages). Our work is ongoing as to which channels are more important and under what 
circumstances.   
                                               
13 The Future of Cash – Te Moni Anamata 
14 Macroeconomic Research After the Crisis, Remarks by Janet L. Yellen at the 60th annual economic 
conference sponsored by the Federal Reserve of Boston, October 14, 2016, 
https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/files/yellen20161014a.pdf   
15 Distributional Impact of Monetary Policy, Leong, J., RBNZ 2020 (Work in progress) 


 
9 
 
 
 
 
 
The house as a home and an asset 
What is clear for one monetary policy transmission channel, however, is that lower interest 
rates assist in inflating asset prices, with the subsequent ‘wealth effect’ supporting spending 
by the owners of these assets. This ‘wealth effect’ directly benefits the owners of the assets, 
but it only indirectly impacts others in the economy through the subsequent increase in 
economic activity and jobs. The impact of low nominal interest rates and significant fiscal 
stimulus on asset prices is very evident over recent years. Global equity market prices have 
risen to historic highs both in market capitalisation terms and relative to companies’ underlying 
earnings (Figure 5).   
 
House prices have also risen in general across many of our trading partners and here in New 
Zealand, especially relative to household incomes. Given that adequate housing is a basic 
economic need, affordable housing and sustainable house prices will always be in the front 
line of economic policy importance. The Reserve Bank must have a clear understanding of 
the impacts its policy decisions have on the housing market both directly and indirectly – that 
is both our monetary and financial stability policies.  
 
Figure 5: Asset prices in New Zealand and around the world 
 
Source: Bloomberg, REINZ 


 
10 
 
 
 
 
 
Before talking directly to the impact of the Bank’s policies, I briefly allude to the many factors 
– including the level of interest rates – that impact on both housing affordability and house 
prices (Figure 6).  
 
Recent studies have identified housing supply as the most significant determinant of house 
prices in New Zealand, with responsive housing supply essential for ensuring positive and 
sustainable housing outcomes.16 Likewise, housing demand factors can influence house 
prices, but increasing or suppressing housing demand generally only has a temporary impact 
on house prices and affordability.17  
 
Ensuring house prices are sustainable, thus requires coordination and consistency across 
many government policies and agencies and non-government participants. Table 1 provides 
a simple snapshot of the many policy levers that can influence the demand, supply, and 
ultimately price of houses and housing affordability.  
 
Figure 6: Factors affecting house prices and housing costs (or affordability) 
 
Source: Adapted from the Productivity Commission’s Inquiry into Housing Affordability (2012). 
 
 
 
 
 
                                               
16 See, for example, the Productivity Commission’s 2012 Inquiry into housing affordability in New 
Zealand, and Eaqub, Howden-Chapman and Johnson (2018), A Stocktake of New Zealand’s Housing. 
17 Ministry of Business, Innovation & Employment. Briefing for the Incoming Minister of Housing and 
Urban Development (2017).  


 
11 
 
 
 
 
Table 1: Existing housing policy levers 
 
Supply 
Demand 
Tax policy 
Tax policy 
Fiscal transfers 
Fiscal transfers 
Social housing 
Overseas investment restrictions 
Land availability / housing plans 
Rental standards 
Building standards (including materials) 
Immigration 
Infrastructure building 
Capital market development 
 
Kiwisaver policy 
Immigration (for example, hiring foreign 
builders) 
Monetary policy 
Education (for example, training programmes) 
Financial policy 
 
 
Monetary policy and housing  
The Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) takes into account the impact of house prices 
on its inflation and employment remit targets in a number of ways. Housing demand affects 
the demand for housing-related goods and services, such as property construction, rents, and 
property maintenance. These components account for around one quarter of the Consumer 
Price Index weight – the target index for the Committee’s Remit.  
 
The level of interest rates also influences asset values, including house prices, and the 
decision to own or rent a house.  In particular, house price variations influence households’ 
spending decisions, and eventually economic growth, inflation, and employment. This ‘wealth 
effect’ is especially strong in New Zealand given that equity ownership in housing represents 
more than two-thirds of New Zealand households’ total wealth.18 And, higher house prices 
relative to the costs of house building will also encourage increased building activity.  
 
These factors add up to a complex relationship between monetary policy, housing affordability, 
and house prices. For example, the current low interest rates are simultaneously contributing 
to both a rise in house prices while also improving housing affordability. The latter occurs 
through the lift in employment and household incomes and the lower debt-servicing costs of 
mortgage borrowers.  
 
Financial stability policy and housing 
 
Asset (including house) price volatility poses risks to New Zealand’s financial system 
soundness. This is why, for example, retail banks actively manage their lending. They need to 
                                               
18 RBNZ estimate: Household balance sheet ($m) – C22.  Estimate includes housing, land, and rental 
properties. 


 
12 
 
 
 
 
ensure their balance sheets (and economic returns) are not unnecessarily vulnerable to 
variations in both house prices and households’ ability to service their mortgages.   
 
These risks to financial system stability become particularly acute when many mortgage 
borrowers are highly indebted - relative to either their incomes and/or home values.  The risk 
of borrowers defaulting on their loans is further exacerbated when banks provide a large 
amount of credit to higher-risk borrowers, in particular housing investors.  It is easier to enter 
and exit ownership of an investment property as you are not the occupant.  
 
Bank balance sheets overly exposed to higher-risk investment property loans is a recipe to 
amplify house price volatility. The recent rapid rise in higher-risk house lending – in particular 
high-LVR investor lending – is largely why the Reserve Bank recently reinstated more stringent 
Loan-to-Value Restrictions (LVR).19  
 
The Reserve Bank also has a number of other financial (prudential) tools which we are 
continuously reviewing to assist us to maintain financial stability. These include shining a light 
on financial risks (mostly via the twice-yearly Financial Stability Report); imposing capital and 
liquidity requirements on banks; stress testing banks’ balance sheets; and supervising banks 
as to how they manage their financial exposures. 
 
Even then, when it comes to economic equality, our financial stability (macro-prudential) tools 
have significantly different relative impacts over time. For example, higher prudential 
requirements generally imply higher deposit requirements, lower credit ceilings, and/or higher 
interest costs for the mortgage borrower.  While these factors can suppress house prices over 
the short to medium term, they can disadvantage lower income and lower wealth households 
more immediately. The relative benefits and costs of our financial stability actions vary over 
time horizons.   
                                               
19 Media Release, February 2021: Financial stability strengthened by firmer LVR restrictions 


 
13 
 
 
 
 
New policy goals and consideration 
In line with its recently announced housing policy objectives, the Government issued a 
direction to require the Reserve Bank’s financial stability policy to have regard to “support[ing] 
more sustainable house prices, including by dampening investor demand for existing housing 
stock which would improve affordability for first-home buyers”.20  
We welcomed the direction as it makes specific how our financial stability policies and actions 
can assist the Government’s housing policy objectives, while operating consistently with our 
financial stability mandate. We are mandated to promote a sound and efficient financial 
system, under section 68 of the Reserve Bank Act.21 The Government’s direction is also in 
line with our recent advice to them in which we detailed the many influences on house prices, 
including the actions of the Reserve Bank.22  
We will be considering our financial stability policy settings via our prudential tools – like loan-
to-value ratios, bank stress testing, and capital requirements – against particular types of 
mortgage lending. This is done with a view to moderating housing demand, particularly from 
investors, to best ensure house price sustainability. We also welcome the Minister’s request 
for more information and analysis on debt-to-income ratios and interest-only mortgages, and 
will respond in due course. 
Importantly, the Monetary Policy Committee’s remit targets remain unchanged. We remain 
focussed on maintaining low and stable consumer price inflation and contributing to maximum 
sustainable employment, as recently outlined in our Monetary Policy Statement.  
The Bank will be required to outline, amongst other things, the impact of its decisions on the 
Government’s housing objectives. This MPC Remit adjustment sits well with our long-standing 
commitment to transparency about our policy actions and approaches.  
                                               
20 The Government’s policy objectives for the housing market includes: 
 
Ensure every New Zealander has a safe, warm, and dry and affordable home to call their own – 
whether they are renters or owners.  
 
In the short to medium-term, support more sustainable house prices by dampening investor 
demand for existing housing stock, which will allow additional opportunities for first-home 
buyers.  
 
Create a housing and urban land market that credibly responds to population growth and changing 
housing preferences, that is competitive and affordable for renters and homeowners, and is well-
planned and well-regulated.  
21 Media Release, February 2021: RBNZ supports focus on housing  
22 Media Release, December 2020: Reserve Bank’s response to Minister of Finance  


 
14 
 
 
 
 
The Government’s direction creates important work for the Bank, both on our own and in 
collaboration with other government and non-government organisation. The multifaceted 
nature of the housing market necessitates a multipronged response.  
 
For starters, the Bank (and our colleagues and stakeholders) will need to develop a collective 
understanding of what ‘sustainable house prices’ means, and how ‘having regard to’ fits within 
our broader financial stability mandate (section 68 of our legislation).   
 
We will also discuss the effectiveness and efficiency of our current financial stability tools at 
influencing actual house prices toward ‘sustainable’ levels, and of course managing the 
public’s expectations of our time horizons.  This work and understanding necessitates us 
viewing the housing market from both an ‘occupiers’ and an ‘investors’ perspective.   
 
The occupier’s decision largely comes down to whether to rent or buy a house. To assess a 
sustainable house price, we need to understand how buying a house (and hence servicing a 
mortgage) stacks up against paying rent over the long-term.  Buying implies you will own the 
house at the end of the mortgage period, hence it is a form of compulsory savings in a single 
asset.  In a purely financial sense, this decision would depend on expected rental costs versus 
mortgage costs, plus expected capital gains in the house versus other forms of 
investing/saving.  Of course there are also a broad range of additional considerations, 
including the availability of housing in the location of choice or need, and factors associated 
with the sense of long-term belonging to a community.  
 
From an ‘investors’ perspective, we need to understand how decisions to build new homes or 
buying existing ones fit into an efficient investment portfolio.  There is a wide universe of asset 
classes readily available to savers/investors, with a range of expected risk and return 
characteristics. And, there are limits to ‘how much is too much’ of any one asset class, 
including residential property.  This means we should be able to financially-explain what an 
‘optimal’ allocation of savings/investment to residential investment property would be. The 
drivers of residential property investment can then be explained by factors influencing 
expected risk and return such as, for example, the ability to leverage (a 20% deposit on a 
house implies 5:1 leverage), tax (dis)advantages of competing investments, and/or myopic 
investment behaviours leading to under- over-investment.  
 
I view the recent section 68b - financial policy - directive from the Government as a significant 
display of confidence in the Bank’s capabilities and operational independence and 
transparency. It places a high level of trust in the Reserve Bank to apply our analysis and tools 


 
15 
 
 
 
 
to support a specific objective – sustainable house prices - while remaining within our 
legislated mandate.  The directive is also provided with a clear understanding that we are only 
one of the many stakeholders that influence the demand for, supply and price of houses. 
 
Conclusion  
 
I have covered a lot of ground today with a necessary light touch. The economic environment, 
the roles of monetary and fiscal policy, the challenges of building and operating new monetary 
tools, the perennial concerns related to excessive financial risk taking, and issues of income 
and wealth inequality.  
 
We have been reminded that with low global inflation, and hence low neutral interest rates, 
our new monetary policy tools will become increasingly mainstream. We have also been 
reminded that fiscal and monetary policy coordination remains critical to economic wellbeing. 
In New Zealand our institutional relationships are strong, providing complementarity of fiscal 
and monetary actions. This collaboration has been supported – not deterred – by clarity 
around the Reserve Bank’s purpose and operational independence.  
 
Our ability to engage and communicate in a manner which all New Zealanders can understand 
remains key to our ongoing success. And, we have much to learn and communicate ahead.  I 
encourage your interest and participation in our work. I hope you can at least feel my desire 
to lead a modern Central Bank that has the vision of operating as a ‘Great Team at the Best 
Central Bank’.23 As I said at the beginning, ‘mahi tahi’ means working collectively and 
collaboratively, so ensure we remain effective, relevant, and a cornerstone of New Zealand’s 
economy and society.   
 
Thank you for your attention today.  
 
Meitaki ma’ata.  
                                               
23 Reserve Bank Vision and Values
