BANK: RBNZ
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Housing Matters
DATE: 02/11/2021
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/speeches/2021/speech2021-11-02-housing-matters.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Ref #X091875 v1.18 
 
 
 
 
Housing Matters 
Speech delivered to the  
Property Council of New Zealand  
Retail Conference 2021 
 
Adrian Orr, Reserve Bank Governor  
2 November 2021 


 
1 
 
1  
Housing Matters - Delivered to the Property Council of New Zealand Conference - Adrian Orr, Reserve Bank Governor  
Introduction 
Tēnā koutou katoa.  
Thank you for the opportunity to speak to you all today – it is very timely because tomorrow, 3 
November, we will publish our latest Financial Stability Report. It will come as no surprise to you 
that in our Report we will again elaborate on why we view the level of house prices in New Zealand 
as unsustainable and why this poses financial stability risks. 
Spoiler alert – today I will provide the gist of our analysis:  
 
Why we at the Reserve Bank - Te Pūtea Matua must care about both the level of house prices 
and the concentration of housing assets in both household and bank balance sheets;  
 
The drivers that continue to lead to volatile house prices; and,  
 
What is being done to promote a more functional housing market and sustainable house 
prices.    
At the source of the financial stability risk is the inability of housing supply to respond in a timely 
fashion to changes in demand, and the drivers that lead to a bias towards housing as an 
investment choice beyond simply a place to reside. Simple, but not easy, solutions to these issues 
are being implemented.  
Why Te Pūtea Matua Cares About Housing and House Prices 
The Reserve Bank is charged with maintaining both monetary (price) and financial stability. While 
we sensibly do not target house prices with our policy settings, activity in the housing market is an 
important driver of both price and financial stability. This is why house prices both influence and, in 
part, are determined by our policy actions. 1 2   
Monetary Stability 
House building, house prices, the cost of being housed, and investment in housing, all influence 
the level of economic activity, and the level of consumer price inflation and employment.3 These 
influences come via the use of economic resources to build houses, measures of Consumer Price 
Inflation, and through changes in perceived household wealth.   
House building activity commands significant economic resources in New Zealand, and hence in 
part determines the overall demand for resources and domestic cost pressures.   
House prices also directly influence a number of components of the Consumers Price Index 
directly, such as the costs of construction and rents. Rising or falling house prices will impact on 
consumer price inflation directly, and also expected inflation and measures of maximum 
sustainable employment over time. 
And, changes in people’s perceived wealth is an important driver of their willingness to spend and 
invest, which again influences monetary and financial stability.  In New Zealand, homeowners’ 
equity in housing represents over half of total household net wealth.   
____________ 
1  Reserve Bank Monetary Policy Handbook (2019, 1 April). Retrieved from https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/about-monetary-policy/monetary-policy-handbook   
2  Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2021, May 5). Financial Stability Report May 2021. Retrieved from https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/financial-stability/financial-stability-report/fsr-may-2021  
3  Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2021, June 29). Statement of Intent 2021-2024. Retrieved from https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/about-us/statements-of-intent/statement-of-intent-1-july-
2021-30-june-2024   


 
2 
 
2  
Housing Matters - Delivered to the Property Council of New Zealand Conference - Adrian Orr, Reserve Bank Governor  
This is why housing matters to the Reserve Bank when pursuing our monetary policy mandate.  
We set short-term interest rates to maintain low and stable consumer price inflation – which is 
both influenced by, and a determinant of, housing market activity and house prices.   
However, the extent to which house prices respond to the level of interest rates largely depends 
on the functioning of the housing market – especially the ability of housing supply to respond to 
demand changes.  This flexibility in housing supply is a key issue I will return to.  
Financial Stability 
Another core role of Te Pūtea Matua is to promote financial stability – including banks and other 
financial institutions4. When house prices move away from their sustainable levels5 they can pose a 
threat to financial stability.  
We view New Zealand’s house prices as currently above a level that can be viewed as sustainable - 
given the outlook for the supply of, and demand for, housing.  A sustainable level for house prices 
is one that reflects their underlying economic drivers: household incomes, demand from 
population growth, housing supply responsiveness, tax settings, and interest rates.  
Households 
The higher a house price the larger the housing mortgage relative to a borrower’s income.  This 
means the more vulnerable an individual is to any change in economic circumstance such as 
changes in their employment status, interest rates, or other personal issues.    
High house prices also necessitate larger house deposits. The need to front with a large house 
deposit creates a significant hurdle for new entrants into the housing market.  Such barriers to 
home ownership can create economic inequality and many related societal issues.  
Banks 
Banks too have a significant egg in their kete.6 In New Zealand, over 60 percent of all bank lending 
is in the form of mortgage debt.7 The banking system is exposed to sudden corrections to house 
prices and the ability of mortgage borrowers to service their debt.  
New Zealand’s lending institutions are significantly more insulated than households from any 
specific shock to the housing market, including falling house prices. As well as insisting borrowers 
make a deposit, banks also assess borrowers’ debt servicing capability in a variety of ways. Banks 
also have their own equity that can act as a buffer, and they keep receiving mortgage payments 
even if the house becomes worth less than the amount borrowed. Banks are also diversified across 
the economic performance of a wide range of borrowers and geographies.  
But, banks can be both impacted by a shock to the housing market, and accentuate downturns 
through their own behaviours or response. A fear of a downturn in the asset quality of a bank’s 
balance sheet too often leads to credit rationing, thereby creating a self-fulfilling prophecy.  
And, given the significant role housing plays in determining the overall level of economic activity 
and household wealth, New Zealand’s banks are exposed both directly and indirectly to housing 
____________ 
4  Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2021, June 29). Statement of Intent 2021-2024. Retrieved from https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/about-us/statements-of-intent/statement-of-intent-1-july-
2021-30-june-2024   
5  Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2021, August 19). Retrieved from https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/news/2021/08/house-prices-above-sustainable-levels   
6  Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2021, May 5). Financial Stability Report May 2021. Retrieved from https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/financial-stability/financial-stability-report/fsr-may-2021 
7  Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2021, May 5). Financial Stability Report May 2021. Retrieved from https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/financial-stability/financial-stability-report/fsr-may-2021 


 
3 
 
3  
Housing Matters - Delivered to the Property Council of New Zealand Conference - Adrian Orr, Reserve Bank Governor  
market swings and roundabouts. Like households, banks are not isolated from a sudden 
deterioration in economic conditions. 
This is why Te Pūtea Matua works with banks to ensure their lending portfolios are ‘sound’, both 
for the banks themselves and for those borrowing.  
An Oversize Egg in Our Wealth Kete? 
The aggregate value of land and housing in New Zealand, including rental properties, is current 
around $1.5 trillion.8  This equates to over half of all household wealth. New Zealanders have one 
very large egg in their wealth kete.  
Figure 1: Housing share of wealth 
 
New Zealand is not alone in this wealth concentration. OECD figures for developed countries show 
housing is the largest asset in households’ portfolios, representing on average around half of total 
assets. This weighting ranges from around 70 percent in the Slovak Republic to around 25 percent 
in Germany9. 
The share of who is doing the borrowing for housing has changed in the past couple of years, with 
the proportion of new commitments to owner occupiers at about two-thirds, while the share to 
investors has declined.10 
____________ 
8  Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Household Balance sheet data (C22). Retrieved from https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/statistics/c22  
9  Orsetta Causa, Nicolas Woloszko and David Leite, (2019, December 16). Housing, wealth accumulation and wealth distribution: Evidence and stylized facts. Retrieved from 
https://www.oecd.org/officialdocuments/publicdisplaydocumentpdf/?cote=ECO/WKP(2019)58&docLanguage=En  
10  Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2021), New residential mortgage lending by borrower type (C31). Retrieved from https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/statistics/c31  


 
4 
 
4  
Housing Matters - Delivered to the Property Council of New Zealand Conference - Adrian Orr, Reserve Bank Governor  
Figure 2: Share of new commitments by borrower type 
 
   
A Place to Live 
There are social and financial reasons for the concentration of housing in household balance 
sheets, with the social reasons explaining a lot of the cross country results.   
There are obvious societal drivers to owning the home you live in - or at least having certainty 
over where and how long you can remain in your home. People choose – as best they can – their 
location based on community services, proximity to work, and a desire for stability as needs 
change through life. Around two-thirds of all households in New Zealand own their home 
according to the 2018 Census11.  
Home ownership rates vary across countries determined in part by the relative financials of buying 
versus renting, and the relative societal benefits. The more availability and certainty of rental 
dwellings, the more it will be favoured relative to home ownership.   
A Store of Wealth 
However, investing in housing is driven by more than just the desire to live in a particular place.  
Housing is a valid asset class to invest in as part of a wealth portfolio.  
Deciding to invest in property beyond your own family home is more of a financial, rather than 
social, decision. This is why investing in housing as a commodity needs to be stacked up against all 
other asset classes, and considered as part of an overall portfolio.  
The Benefits of Diversity 
An investment portfolio is an aggregation of assets that can provide an expected return with 
certain risk, over a specific time horizon. Expected return, risk, and time horizon are the basic 
components of any single asset, and an aggregation of assets i.e., a diversified portfolio.  
____________ 
11  Stats NZ (2020, December 8) Media Release: Homeownership rate lowest in almost 70 years. Retrieved from http://www.stats.govt.nz/news/homeownership-rate-lowest-in-
almost-70-years   


 
5 
 
5  
Housing Matters - Delivered to the Property Council of New Zealand Conference - Adrian Orr, Reserve Bank Governor  
When investing in an asset (a nest egg), or building an investment portfolio (a basket of nest eggs), 
having a view on your investment horizon, and your ability to identify and manage the risks that 
come with each investment, is necessary.  
Investors need to be asking themselves the right questions to manage the risks. On horizon, am I 
considering my needs in two years or 20 years? What happens if my needs change and I need 
cash? What happens if my circumstances change, and I can’t cash-flow my investment? What if the 
asset value is highly volatile, and unfavourable when I most need to sell it?  
Identifying and managing these risks can be life-changing.  
How often have we heard about people needing to sell an asset – especially a house - when they 
least wanted to (e.g., when the value of the house was less than the mortgage owed). Or, when 
investors have had to be directly involved in managing their property when they were either 
unable to, or highly inconvenienced. Or, when they were unable to access a better investment 
opportunity due to the inability of being able to sell their investment property?  
Stacking your investment kete with only one asset (or asset type) accentuates these risks.  
For example, while all houses are not the same (i.e., there is some financial diversification within 
housing investment), there are some strong common factors that will drive your returns and lead 
to concentrated risks. These common factors include, for example, the state of the local economy 
(especially if your employment is also local), the level of interest rates, local climate conditions and 
insurability, and a wide variety of central and local government policies related to building 
standards and tax.   
Simply ‘doubling down’ on the same set of risks (i.e., similar assets) is not diversification.  
Diversification is one of the few ‘free lunches’ in finance. Diversification in asset holdings can bring 
the same expected financial return for less risk, or a higher expected return for the same risk. In 
general, the broader the variety of eggs in your investment basket, the better.  
Diversity Aversion 
Diversification in household wealth has been supported over recent years by the introduction of 
Kiwisaver retirement savings schemes, now worth circa $87 billion in the June 2021 quarter.12 
However, New Zealand’s household balance sheet still remains highly concentrated in housing.   
The recent extraordinary rise in Kiwisaver balances has been outstripped by recent house price 
increases. The benefits of diversification are not being fully overlooked by New Zealanders. But the 
weight of money is still favoured toward housing – helping drive house prices unsustainably 
higher.  
The drive for better investment diversity still needs a significant nudge – both in terms of 
investment options (more offerings from our capital markets), investor awareness, and at times 
regulatory imposts where market failure exists.   
 
Is housing in New Zealand such a superior asset class that it outweighs the benefits of 
diversification and/or outperforms all other asset classes in risk and return?   
 
Or, are some of the associated investment risks neither identified, priced nor managed?  
____________ 
12  Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2021), Kiwisaver: Assets by sector (T43). Retrieved from https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/statistics/t43  


 
6 
 
6  
Housing Matters - Delivered to the Property Council of New Zealand Conference - Adrian Orr, Reserve Bank Governor  
 
And what role does the relatively easy access to bank mortgage debt, and hence the ability to 
gear (leverage) your mortgage deposit, play in the bias toward housing as an investment 
class? 
 
And what do differing tax rates on housing equity versus other returns make to investors’ 
choice?   
Property will always be an important asset class in a well-diversified investment portfolio. However, 
there are strong grounds to believe that in New Zealand many of the associated risks have been 
inadequately priced, identified, and managed. As such, New Zealand households continue to hold 
uncompensated risk and are overly exposed to mortgage debt.  
This investment preference has worked well over time for many. However, this is not the case all of 
the time, for all people, and compared to all of the benefits that a more diversified portfolio will 
provide for the same or less risk.  
House Price Volatility 
One indicator of an asset’s risk is the volatility of its price. We do not always get to choose when 
we need to sell the asset, and not all times are equal. House prices are highly volatile in New 
Zealand.  This price variability reflects the very slow and limited supply response to changes in 
housing demand, and the many drivers of housing demand.  
Figure 3: Annual House Price Inflation 
 
You don’t have to go back far in New Zealand’s economic history to get a feel for house price 
volatility.  We have experienced periods of sustained house price growth (e.g., the early 1970s and 
mid-2000s), and declining house prices (e.g., in the late-1970s and early-2000s) in both real and 
nominal terms.  
The big drivers have been net migration (population growth relative to the supply of houses) and 
broader economic conditions, especially interest rates and income growth.13 14   
____________ 
13 Coleman, Andrew and Landon-Lane, John (2007). Housing Markets and Migration in New Zealand, 1962-2006. Retrieved from https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-
/media/ReserveBank/Files/%20Publications/%20Discussion%20papers/2007/dp07-12.pdf    
14  Herring, Richard J (2006), Booms and Busts in Housing Markets: How Vulnerable is New Zealand? Retrieved from https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-
/media/reservebank/files/publications/research/fellowship/3324563.pdf  


 
7 
 
7  
Housing Matters - Delivered to the Property Council of New Zealand Conference - Adrian Orr, Reserve Bank Governor  
We are not alone.   
Asset (including house) price volatility is a global fact. For example, a number of countries 
experienced house price declines of more than 30 percent during the Global Financial Crisis. 
Likewise, OECD studies show that many countries experienced price falls in excess of 25 percent, 
and house price slumps lasting between 3 to 10 years, between 1970 and 2006.15 
Figure 4: Advanced economy house price corrections since 1970 
 
More Recent House Price Drivers 
Over recent years New Zealand house prices have again risen significantly, mimicking a global 
trend in asset prices. Over the past 18 months both share prices and house prices have risen 
around the world, houses more in New Zealand than elsewhere, with shares up more in the US.   
____________ 
15  Herring, Richard J (2006), Booms and Busts in Housing Markets: How Vulnerable is New Zealand? Retrieved from https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-
/media/reservebank/files/publications/research/fellowship/3324563.pdf  


 
8 
 
8  
Housing Matters - Delivered to the Property Council of New Zealand Conference - Adrian Orr, Reserve Bank Governor  
Figure 5: International Asset Prices 
 
Source: S&P, Australian Bureau of Statistics, REINZ, OECD, Haver Analytics. 
Note: Share prices are capital indices. House prices for OECD members serve as a proxy for world prices. 
One important explanation of the asset price movements are low global interest rates.   
We have witnessed a secular decline in global nominal interest rates as inflation expectations 
declined, and productivity growth stalled. These low global interest rates have appropriately 
encouraged people to take on more risk in search of returns, and made debt (funding) more 
accessible in terms of servicing costs.   
The rise in house prices is widespread around the world, with double-digit increases seen in many 
countries in Europe, Asia-Pacific, the United States and Canada, supported by low interest rates 
coinciding with greater government spending or stimulus to help offset the economic impact of 
COVID-1916. 
It is worth noting, I have only mentioned global interest rates so far. New Zealand is a ‘price taker’ 
when it comes to determining the level of long-term interest rates.  We are a small economy, and 
must accept the fact that saving and investment decisions in the rest of the world determine the 
bulk of our interest rate levels.   
But I am not avoiding all responsibility.  
Te Pūtea Matua – via its Monetary Policy Committee - does set shorter-term interest rates, and 
hence determines the shape of the ‘yield curve’ in New Zealand to achieve our monetary stability 
mandate.   
We have over recent years had to follow the level of global interest rates down as inflation 
expectations eased, and over recent quarters ease monetary conditions to support demand (and 
hence employment and inflation).  
____________ 
16 Montagu-Pollock, Matthew (2021, September 8) Q2 2021: Global house price boom seems unstoppable, particularly in Europe, U.S., Canada and parts of Asia-Pacific. Retrieved 
from https://www.globalpropertyguide.com/investment-analysis/Q2-2021-Global-house-price-boom-seems-unstoppable-particularly-in-Europe-US-Canada-and-parts-of-Asia-
Pacific  
 


 
9 
 
9  
Housing Matters - Delivered to the Property Council of New Zealand Conference - Adrian Orr, Reserve Bank Governor  
Figure 6: US long-term interest rate and the US-NZ interest rate difference over time 
 
Our recent research efforts suggest that it is the secular decline in global interest rates that most 
explains house price moves globally, with Official Cash Rate (OCR) surprises playing only a ‘bit 
part’.17  
It is also worth noting that while New Zealand mortgage rates have fallen, they are not exceptional 
internationally. Mortgage rates here are still higher than most other advanced economies, which 
makes New Zealand’s more pronounced rise in house prices harder to explain. 
Figure 7: Residential mortgage rates since the GFC18  
 
 
____________ 
17  Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2021, November 2), Analytical Note: Measures for assessing the sustainability of house prices in New Zealand. 
18 Data are sourced from www.interest.co.nz and Haver Analytics https://www.haver.com/. The 2-year fixed rate for new customers is used for New Zealand, the variable rate is used 
for Australia, 5-year average residential mortgage lending rate for Canada. 


 
10 
 
10  
Housing Matters - Delivered to the Property Council of New Zealand Conference - Adrian Orr, Reserve Bank Governor  
What Else Can Explain New Zealand’s Extreme House Price Volatility? 
Recent house price increases in Aotearoa have been more pronounced than in other countries19. 
This has pushed house price-to-income ratios in New Zealand towards the highest level in the 
OECD. New Zealand house prices have increased sharply and appear unsustainable and 
vulnerable to a decline20.   
Figure 8: OECD House Prices to Income Ratio 2021 Q1 
 
Supply Constraints Drive House Price Extremes 
Studies have identified housing supply as an important determinant of high house prices in New 
Zealand.21 A responsive housing and urban land supply is essential for ensuring sustainable 
housing outcomes22.  
If supply is constrained, then suppressing demand for housing, by limiting lending or raising 
lending rates, can reduce house prices. But this is likely to be temporary and result in other 
significant costs and issues, such as inequality, deflation, unemployment, and an over-valued 
exchange rates.   
The long-term fix to ensuring a well-functioning housing market – one that responds to changes in 
demand – is to ensure new homes can be built when needed.  
____________ 
19  Real Estate Institute of New Zealand (REINZ), (2021, October 14) Residential Property Data. Retrieved from https://reinz.co.nz/residential-property-data-gallery   
20  Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2021, May 5). Financial Stability Report May 2021. Retrieved from https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/financial-stability/financial-stability-report/fsr-may-2021  
21 Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2013, December) Analytical Note: A closer look at some of the supply and demand factors influencing residential property markets. Retrieved from 
https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/reservebank/files/publications/analytical%20notes/2013/an2013-11.pdf  
22 Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2020, December 11). Reserve Bank’s response to the Minister. Retrieved from https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/news/2020/12/reserve-banks-response-to-
minister-of-finance   
 


 
11 
 
11  
Housing Matters - Delivered to the Property Council of New Zealand Conference - Adrian Orr, Reserve Bank Governor  
In most advanced countries, house building has been able to keep up with demographic changes 
- such as aging populations and falling birth rates. House availability has been able to support 
changing demands over time (see Figure 9).  
However, in recent years housing supply in New Zealand has not been able to keep up with high 
population growth23, leading to the lowest availability of housing in the OECD. 
Figure 9: Dwellings per 1000 inhabitants 
 
Notes: The data are sourced from the OECD Questionnaire on Affordable and Social Housing (2021). Data are for 2020, except for 
Australia (2018), Canada (2016), France (2019), Germany (2018), Ireland (2019), New Zealand (2018), Norway (2019), Spain (2017), the UK-
England 
In New Zealand, restrictive land zoning, tight planning rules, lack of public infrastructure for new 
developments, complex consenting processes, and capacity constraints in the building sector have 
contributed to the unresponsive supply of housing and urban land. As a result, any increase in 
demand for housing typically pushes up the price of developable land and this pushes up house 
prices – more so than elsewhere over recent years. 
What is being done to improve this situation?  
Demand management and access to mortgage debt 
I have already stated that any short-term efforts to stem housing demand – and hence house 
prices and investment concentration – are largely temporary in effect.  
As the first, and most important, ‘demand management’ tool, mortgage lenders set credit 
worthiness criteria when making their loan decisions. It is the banks’ role to allocate their credit in a 
sustainable and profitable manner. As the prudential regulator of banks, we expect each bank to 
set clear standards on credit tests, to ensure that its balance sheet is resilient to a wide range of 
economic circumstances.    
Note I am talking about each bank’s balance sheet, and the financial institutions balance sheets as 
a whole. We do not regulate household balance sheets, and have no direct role or tools to 
influence the shape or diversity of household balance sheets. 
____________ 
23 Stats NZ (2021, August 17) Media Release: Births drive population growth. Retrieved from https://www.stats.govt.nz/news/births-drive-population-growth  
 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
New
Zealand
Australia
Canada
USA
UK
(England)
Ireland
Germany
France
Spain
Sweden
Norway
Denmark
OECD
Around 2011
2020 or latest year available


 
12 
 
12  
Housing Matters - Delivered to the Property Council of New Zealand Conference - Adrian Orr, Reserve Bank Governor  
Rather, as a prudential regulator, our main concern at Te Pūtea Matua is to ensure banks are 
conducting their business on a sound basis. To the extent that we see the sum of individual bank 
decisions adding up to a broader financial stability risk we insist on some regulated lending 
standards. Likewise if we see household balance sheets in aggregate become excessively risky, our 
first port of call is to assess the role of the lenders in creating this situation. 
However, we are the first to acknowledge the limitations of our bank lending rules or regulatory 
tools in promoting a more diverse investment portfolio for New Zealanders. At best, our prudential 
tools either build resilience in our financial institutions to weather severe conditions (e.g., our bank 
capital expectations), or minimise the damage if a particular shock hits economic activity (e.g., our 
lending restrictions). And, these regulations ‘bite’ only if aggregate bank lending has gone beyond 
what we would consider financially sound for the system.   
Our tools are limited. For example, our loan to value ratio restriction (LVR) tool can only impose 
bank lending constraints on new loans – as they are being made. It does not impact on the vast 
bulk of loans already made. This means it takes time to influence the risk of the whole bank 
lending book. LVR restrictions are about minimising the scale of the damage, not preventing it in 
the first place.  
As we announced in September24, the Reserve Bank has from this week, 1 November, restricted the 
amount of lending banks can do above an LVR of 80 percent to 10 percent of all new loans to 
owner-occupiers, down from 20 percent previously. 
We are also currently well advanced in our work to commence consulting on additional ‘debt 
servicing ratio’ tools that can assist us to limit the more extreme lending that banks can make. 
These tools impose a cap on the overall mortgage debt a person can borrow based on their 
income. Again, this tool supplements the work banks already do. We will be commencing our 
consultation later this month and will be encouraging significant input and feedback.   
Monetary Policy and interest rates 
With regard to using interest rates to target house prices, this is not in our mandate - nor does it 
make sense. Monetary policy is best used to manage overall consumer price inflation stability i.e., 
an aggregate consumption price index, rather than being used to target a specific asset price.25 
Likewise, trying to target both consumer prices and house prices with monetary policy will quickly 
lead to confusion and suboptimal outcomes.26   
In summary, our monetary and financial stability tools do not increase the ability to supply more 
houses in response to changes in housing demand, and they only – very indirectly – incentivise 
broader investment awareness and portfolio diversification.  
We are required to have regard to the impact of our actions on the Government’s policy of 
supporting more sustainable house prices, including by dampening investor demand for existing 
housing stock, which would improve affordability for first-home buyers.27 The Monetary Policy 
Committee sets monetary policy to achieve its inflation and employment objectives in the Remit. It 
____________ 
24 Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2021, September 23). Media release: Reserve Bank tightens LVR restrictions. Retrieved from https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/news/2021/09/reserve-bank-
tightens-lvr-restrictions  
25  Reserve Bank Monetary Policy Handbook (2019, 1 April). Retrieved from https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/about-monetary-policy/monetary-policy-handbook   
26  Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2020, December 11). Reserve Bank’s response to the Minister. Retrieved from https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/news/2020/12/reserve-banks-response-to-
minister-of-finance   
27  Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2021, February 25). Media release: RBNZ supports focus on housing. Retrieved from https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/news/2021/02/rbnz-supports-focus-
on-housing   


 
13 
 
13  
Housing Matters - Delivered to the Property Council of New Zealand Conference - Adrian Orr, Reserve Bank Governor  
considers the outlook for the housing market because house prices can influence broader 
economic activity, employment, and consumer price inflation 28 
A benefit of the addition to our Monetary Policy Remit is that we are empowered to work closely 
with broader government agencies and industries involved in the housing market, to ensure we 
collaborate on policy where it makes sense, and share knowledge. Amongst our work, we have 
established a working group on housing issues with the Ministry of Housing and Urban 
Development (HUD) and Treasury. The working group reports to the CEOs of each agency and is 
proving to be an effective research and information sharing hub. We are also working with these 
agencies to pursue a collective work agenda on issues that will create a dynamic housing market. 
Supply Capability and Capacity  
Over very recent quarters we have been witnessing a step change in the supply capacity of New 
Zealand houses – with house building reaching record highs - at a time when housing demand is 
waning due to low population growth. 
Figure 10: Net growth in housing stock and household formation rate (12-month moving average) 
 
High house prices are incentivising a transition towards a more dense urban landscape.   
This trend will be further enabled the recent Government-announced changes to urban planning 
rules that allows more medium-density housing across most of New Zealand’s largest cities.29 The 
Government’s announcement – which received bipartisan support – will facilitate a transition to 
higher, more-dense housing throughout New Zealand cities over time.  
There is additional work ongoing on across government agencies to tackle issues of infrastructure 
support as new land is put into housing and urban centres become more densely populated.  
A more responsive housing and urban land supply, all things equal, should support more 
sustainable house prices over time. A dampening of the ‘boom-bust’ cycle of house building, with 
less variable house prices as a result, is a desirable outcome, and is achievable with coordination. 
One example of this has been the housing supply response post the 2011 Christchurch 
____________ 
28  Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2021, August 18), Monetary Policy Statement August 2021. Retrieved from https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/monetary-policy-
statement/mps-august-2021  
29  New Zealand Government (2021, October 19), Media release: Red tape cut to boost house supply. Retrieved from https://www.beehive.govt.nz/release/red-tape-cut-boost-
housing-supply  
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
3,500
4,000
0
500
1,000
1,500
2,000
2,500
3,000
3,500
4,000
1964
1972
1980
1988
1996
2004
2012
2020
Monthly
Net new household formation
Net change in housing stock


 
14 
 
14  Housing Matters - Delivered to the Property Council of New Zealand Conference - Adrian Orr, Reserve Bank Governor  
earthquakes. The rise in supply and house building flexibility has led to a more stable or “well 
behaved” housing market. 
 


 
15 
 
15  
Housing Matters - Delivered to the Property Council of New Zealand Conference - Adrian Orr, Reserve Bank Governor  
Conclusion 
Housing activity and house prices influence monetary and financial stability policy, and vice versa. 
These influences occur due to the significant size and importance of the housing market and 
construction activity to the economy, and due to the concentration of housing assets in household 
portfolios and mortgage assets in New Zealand’s bank balance sheets.  
Movements in interest rates do affect the demand – and ultimately the price – of housing assets.  
However, it is mostly the long-term trend in interest rates, as opposed to short-term changes in 
rates related to monetary policy. The secular decline in global interest rates over recent decades 
has driven asset prices – including house prices – up globally.   
The extent to which New Zealand house prices have reacted to changes in housing demand is 
mostly related to the inability of housing supply to respond. Houses have been scarce at a time 
that demand was strong. The reverse is now evolving – with housing building at record levels at a 
time that population growth is static.  
We expect to see an easing in house prices over the medium term as a result of these supply-
demand dynamics. This means house prices would be moving back toward a more sustainable 
level – a level that can be explained by underlying economic fundamentals.   
The move toward more sustainable house prices will be incentivised by slowing demand – as an 
outcome of higher interest rates and low population growth, and an increase in space to build.  
The recent Government announcements on reducing urban building restrictions is significant in 
terms of adding to the ‘space to build’.  
The role of the Reserve Bank is a ‘bit part’.  We are one cause of demand changes as we alter 
interest rates to meet our monetary policy Remit. We also work to limit mortgage lending when it 
appears excessively risky.  However, this is more about limiting the damage to banks’ balance 
sheets, rather than altering overall demand.    
More broadly, we need to continue to improve the investment landscape – investor knowledge 
and options - to ensure households develop well diversified nest eggs that meet their needs.  Why 
would you put all your money on one horse – housing – when backing your retirement? 
Finally, as is evident today, solutions to any identified problem of high house prices, housing 
affordability, and housing require the involvement of many government agencies, businesses, 
financial institutions, and broader community groups.  There is no one agency or silver bullet.  
House prices and housing affordability are affected by both supply and demand factors, ranging 
across immigration, tax policy, government benefits or transfers, land availability, building 
standards, infrastructure, and training programmes. It is access to land and space that remains the 
biggest challenge to ensuring a smooth functioning housing market.
