BANK: RBNZ
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Matangirua ki Matangireia
DATE: 29/06/2021
SPEAKER: By Adrian Orr
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/speeches/2021/speech2021-06-29-mindful-money-awards.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Ref #9829034 v1.4 
 
 
 
 
Matangirua ki 
Matangireia 
Working as one, towards our ultimate 
purpose  
 
A speech delivered to the Mindful Money Awards in 
Auckland 
 
On 29 June 2021 
 
By Adrian Orr, Governor  
 
Written with Daryn Govender 
Embargoed until 4pm 29 June 2021 


 
1 
 
1 Matangirua ki Matangireia, 29 June 2021 
Tēnā koutou katoa, welcome everyone. 
This time last year, Aotearoa New Zealand had just moved into the third week of Alert Level 
one, following 11 weeks of unprecedented social and physical restrictions, similar to what 
some parts of the worlds are still enforcing. Our relative freedoms remind us of the mahi 
(work) we have done as a nation to contain COVID-19. However, the fact that I am addressing 
you today virtually highlights the ongoing virus risks prevalent.  
Firstly, I do acknowledge that economic activity in New Zealand is returning to its pre-COVID-
19 levels which has been supported by our ability to keep COVID-19 contained, along with 
significant monetary1 and fiscal stimulus. The global economic outlook has continued to 
improve, with ongoing fiscal and monetary stimulus underpinning the recovery. New 
Zealand’s commodity export prices have benefited from this rise in global demand. However, 
divergences in economic activity, both within and between countries, remain significant. The 
sustainability of the global economic recovery remains dependent on the containment of 
COVID-19.2 
At Te Pūtea Matua, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, we are kaitiaki (guardians) of New 
Zealand’s financial ecosystem. Under the Reserve Bank Act we are required to provide a 
Statement of Intent (SOI) to the Minister of Finance before the start of each financial year. 
The SOI sets out the objectives for the next three years and the budget for the first year of 
that period.3 Our latest Statement of Intent4, released today, sets out our strategic priorities 
for the next three years and outlines how we will continue our role as kaitiaki of New 
Zealand’s financial ecosystem.  
We perform our kaitaiki role through our purpose: Toitū te Ōhanga, Toitū te Oranga – 
meaning, we enable economic wellbeing and prosperity for all New Zealanders.  
We deliver our purpose through our mandates: 
• 
maintaining low and stable consumer price inflation while contributing to 
maximum sustainable employment - ensuring that our currency retains its store of 
value and supporting the ability of all New Zealanders to participate in the economy. 
• 
promoting and maintaining a sound and efficient financial system - where all 
participants of the financial ecosystem are well-governed, well-capitalised and 
promote public confidence.  
• 
meeting the cash needs of the public - the money we print and circulate ensures 
New Zealanders have a means of exchange, a store of value, and is hard to replicate. 
• 
providing robust payment and settlement services for New Zealand’s financial 
institutions - enabling New Zealanders to make safe and efficient payments and to 
complete day-to-day transactions.  
We approach this mandate in a holistic manner. This means we look at the full range of 
challenges and opportunities available to us. We see progressing initiatives such as Te 
Ōhanga Maori, Climate Risk, and South Pacific Remittances as key to our purpose and vision. 
____________ 
1 Monetary Policy: Same Objectives Different Challenges - Reserve Bank of New Zealand (rbnz.govt.nz) 
2 https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/monetary-policy-statement/mps-may-2021 
3 https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/about-us/statements-of-intent 
4 RBNZ Statement of Intent 2021-2024 


 
2 
 
2 Matangirua ki Matangireia, 29 June 2021 
While Great Team, Best Central Bank remains our vision, we seek to deepen our 
understanding of its meaning and relevance through the concept of Matangirua ki 
Matangireia – working in unison, to fulfil our ultimate purpose.5 
At Te Pūtea Matua, being a Great Team means being ‘fit for purpose’ – cost effective, risk 
aware, and working collectively in a sustainable way. It also means being unified by our 
purpose – everyone knowing what to do and moving in sync in the same direction. 
In Te Ao Māori this concept can be described as ‘Matangirua’ (when every function on a 
sailing vessel is in use and all are in sync – ‘full steam ahead’). 
Being the Best Central Bank means scaling new heights, striving to achieve our ultimate 
purpose – in effect ‘reaching for the sky’. 
In Te Ao Māori this concept might be described as ‘Matangireia,’ the place to which Tāne 
ascended so as to bring back the three baskets of knowledge. 
We have also refreshed our values and reconceptualised these through a Te Ao Māori lens: 
o   Wānanga/Innovation: stemming from knowledge gained through our diverse 
perspectives;  
o   Tauira/Integrity: sustained through self-reflection and modelling our shared principles; 
o   Taura/Inclusion: binding our individual strengths together enabling our resilience and 
collective success. 
We recently updated our brand, as seen throughout our Statement of Intent, to better reflect 
our purpose and the work we do on behalf of all New Zealanders. This signals our 
commitment to being relevant, open and inclusive as your central bank.  
These changes will support our transformation as we implement the new Reserve Bank of 
New Zealand6 Act due for Royal Assent later this year. 
I will now touch on three areas where we are holistically delivering our mandate, in our Te Ao 
Māori, Climate Risk and South Pacific Remittances initiatives. All of these areas directly impact 
maximum sustainable employment, financial stability and access to money and cash.  
Te Ao Māori  
Te Pūtea Matua, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, has a unique position. We are not limited 
to how we respond to Treaty obligations, nor are we under obligation to follow how other 
parts of the state sector respond to theirs. However, we acknowledge that as a state sector 
entity that serves all New Zealanders, we must recognise a special relationship with Māori 
and the long-term nature of the Māori economic eco-system. 
We recognise Te Ōhanga Maori, the Māori economy as having a long-term presence. A 
recent report we commissioned, Te Ōhanga Māori 2018, the Māori Economy Report, shows 
that Te Ōhanga Māori has grown in value from $42.6b in 2013, to $68.7b in 2018.7 Māori are 
an increasing proportion of the New Zealand workforce, and we recognise the criticality of 
____________ 
5 RBNZ Statement of Intent 2021-2024 
6 https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/about-us/our-legislation/reserve-bank-act-review/reserve-bank-bill 
7 https://berl.co.nz/our-mahi/te-ohanga-maori-2018 


 
3 
 
3 Matangirua ki Matangireia, 29 June 2021 
Māori as key partners in the long term sustainability and stability of the New Zealand 
economy. I would emphasise that Te Ōhanga Māori is not a separate, distinct and clearly 
identifiable segment of the Aotearoa economy. It is a closely connected component of 
numerous pieces of the jigsaw puzzle that together make up the economy of Aotearoa. As 
kaitiaki of the financial ecosystem we must recognise and respond to this important part of 
the economy.  
Te Ohanga Maori is key to our legislative objectives and our strategic goals. It is closely 
linked with our sustainable employment and financial stability mandates by its nature, size 
and enduring presence. As Assistant Governor Christian Hawkesby recently explained in a 
speech on Te Waka Hourua, our Te Ao Māori strategy8 we are focusing our workplan 
appropriately.  
Others are also recognising the importance of Te Ōhanga Maori. A recent survey found that 
funding and access to capital were two of the greatest challenges faced by Māori businesses. 
This was supported by the Productivity Commission’s report ‘New Zealand firms: Reaching for 
the frontier’.9 We want to learn more about how factors like collective land ownership and 
lower home ownership, and systematic bias might be affecting the rates at which Māori 
businesses access debt and other forms of financing.  
In response, we have launched a work programme to better understand Māori access to 
capital in the New Zealand economy, primarily with a focus on bank lending to small and 
medium-sized Māori enterprises. The work programme will collect both quantitative and 
qualitative data through interviews with these Māori enterprises, iwi, pan-tribal groups and 
public and private sector groups. This data will form an initial report discussing policy options 
with our public and private sector peers. The final report will be released in 2022.  
It is critical for the financial ecosystem of Aotearoa that we take opportunities to build our 
understanding of our history, and Māori culture, for example through developing deeper 
understanding of Te Ōhanga Maori. Through this work we can better understand our country 
and ensure we are meeting our purpose of economic prosperity and wellbeing for all New 
Zealanders.  
Climate Risk 
Ināia tonu nei – the time is now10 – were the words of the Climate Change Commission in its 
recent advice to the Government. 
At Te Pūtea Matua we recognise that promoting and maintaining a sound financial system 
includes a global effort to understand and address the implications of climate risk for the 
economy. Starting now to get on the path to a low emission, climate-resilient economy as 
____________ 
8 Hawkesby (2021): The Future is Māori 
9 https://www.productivity.govt.nz/inquiries/frontier-firms/ 
[10] Climate Change Commission (2021) Ināia tonu nei: a low emissions future for Aotearoa. Accessed at 
https://www.climatecommission.govt.nz/our-work/advice-to-government-topic/inaia-tonu-nei-a-low-emissions-future-for-
aotearoa/  
[11] Reserve Bank responds to call for Climate Change consultation 
 
 
 


 
4 
 
4 Matangirua ki Matangireia, 29 June 2021 
part of the global effort will help reduce the risks to the stability of the financial system and 
macro-economy.11 
Our climate change strategy has three components: incorporating climate change into our 
core functions including the supervision of financial institutions; managing our direct impact 
on the climate; and leading through experience and collaboration.12  
We are contributing to the leadership group of the Sustainable Finance Forum, the Climate 
Change Commission’s work and the development of New Zealand’s first National Adaptation 
Plan led by the Ministry for the Environment. We are also working alongside our Council of 
Financial Regulators agencies on the development of mandatory climate-related financial 
reporting. Last year we collaborated with the Financial Markets Authority to upskill 
supervisors on climate risks and climate-related financial disclosures. We will continue this 
collaborative approach to training, including other agencies where appropriate.  
We also recognise that sustainability is critical for our long-term future and are considering 
how we can incorporate sustainability objectives into our balance sheet operations. However 
we are mindful that any changes to our balance sheet need to be aligned with our ability to 
effectively and efficiently execute our existing policy objectives.  
We are a proud member of the Network for Greening the Financial System (NGFS) which 
brings together 90 central banks and supervisors to share best practice on climate change. 
The NGFS recently examined a range of options for central banks to consider when adapting 
their monetary policy operational frameworks to reflect climate-related risks.13  
Although it will take time and effort, Te Pūtea Matua is committed to implementing our 
mandate with regard for climate risks.  
During my time at the New Zealand Superannuation Fund we signed the Paris Pledge for 
Action, affirming our commitment to a safe and stable climate where temperature rise is 
limited to under 2 degrees Celsius and launched a climate change strategy to ensure the 
fund was more resilient to climate risks.14  
In 2017 we exited or reducing holdings in 300 firms as part of our carbon transition. We 
believed that climate change represented a material risk which was not being properly priced 
by the markets. The Fund also increased its focus on environmental, social and governance 
factors which are now integrated into all aspects of the Fund’s investment activities. In the 
____________ 
 
[12] Reserve Bank - Our approach to climate change  
[13] Network for Greening the Financial System (2021): Adapting central bank operations to a hotter world: 
Reviewing some options. 
[14] Climate Change, NZ Super Fund 
[15] About Mindful Money 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 


 
5 
 
5 Matangirua ki Matangireia, 29 June 2021 
broader industry, organisations such as Mindful Money empower individuals to understand 
where their money is invested through KiwiSaver or Investment funds.15 
I would encourage you to examine your portfolios and see how you can incorporate climate 
risk into the way you invest and allocate your capital. Working in unison we can make a larger 
impact than anyone could alone.   
South Pacific remittances 
As kaitiaki we recognise the need to promote strong regional economies as these support 
our financial stability mandate. We believe that it is our duty to act as a responsible regional 
citizen particularly in today’s economic environment.  
In a recent article16 I outlined that the scale and complexity of the challenges facing Pacific 
Island countries are significant, including climate change and the severe economic impacts of 
COVID-19. With international travel and trade disrupted by the pandemic, we know that 
Pacific Island countries are facing tough times. 
At the latest census, Pacific people made up 8.1% of population of Aotearoa.17 I am 
personally proud to be of Cook Islands descent.We know that Pacific people living in New 
Zealand send money home, or remittances, to support their family members. Pacific Island 
countries are some of the most remittance-reliant jurisdictions in the world. World Bank data 
shows that in 2020 remittance as a share of Tonga’s GDP was close to 40%, nearly 19% for 
Samoa and just over 7% for Fiji, with New Zealand being one of the main sources of these 
funds.18  
We recognise the economic importance of Pacific people in New Zealand being able to send 
money back to their home countries through remittances and maintaining financial corridors 
and services into the South Pacific countries continues to be of importance.   
In 2019 we established the Pacific Remittances Project with support from the Ministry of 
Foreign Affairs and Trade to address challenges facing remittance services domestically and 
in the Pacific region. We are working with other agencies in New Zealand, Australia, the 
Pacific and internationally, such as the Asian Development Bank and International Monetary 
Fund to make remittances more accessible, safe and cost effective.  
Along with the Reserve Banks of Australia, Fiji, Papua New Guinea, Samoa, the Solomon 
Islands, Timor Leste, Tonga, Vanuatu and other partners we are developing a regional ‘Know 
Your Customer’ facility. This will help remitters and other businesses to meet their compliance 
needs. Ultimately we hope that it will enable access to financial services for sectors of the 
Pacific region that are in danger of being financially isolated.19 
____________ 
[16] Reserve Bank of New Zealand Governor Adrian Orr says New Zealand banks need to show courage by 
supporting banking services and remittances to the South Pacific, Interest.co.nz 
[17] Statistics New Zealand (2018) 
[18] Migration and Remittances Data, The World Bank (2020) 
[19] The FinTech Opportunity in Personal Finance, a speech delivered by Assistant Governor Simone Robbers at 
the Singapore FinTech Festival on 13 November 2019. 
 
 
 
 
 


 
6 
 
6 Matangirua ki Matangireia, 29 June 2021 
In doing so we hope to maintain financial corridors and services to enable Pacific countries’ 
recovery and growth which in turn supports the financial stability and prosperity of our 
regional economy.  
Conclusion 
Te Pūtea Matua is kaitiaki for Aotearoa’s financial ecosystem. We have a clear purpose, vision 
and values which support us in delivering kaitiakitanga for all New Zealanders. This includes 
delivering our mandates holistically with our workstreams on Te Ao Māori, Climate Risk and 
South Pacific Remittances.  
We’re incredibly proud of our Statement of Intent published today, and the mahi that is 
underway to help us achieve our ambitious, but incredibly important, workplans. As I’ve 
explained today - this work is critical to us continuing to be the central bank for all New 
Zealanders, now, and for generations to come. 
I’d encourage you to take a closer look at our Statement of Intent, and see where you can 
contribute. Embrace the concept of Matangirua ki Matangireia in your endeavours to 
promote a more inclusive and climate-friendly financial ecosystem. Working in unison, we 
fulfil our ultimate purpose.  
Meitaki ma’ata  
Tēnā koutou, tēnā koutou, tēnā koutou katoa
