BANK: RBNZ
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Testing our resilience
DATE: 26/10/2022
SPEAKER: Adrian Orr
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/speeches/2022/infinz-conference-statement-oct-2022.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Ref #X889609 v1.8 
 
 
word 
 
Testing our 
resilience. 
Speech delivered at INFINZ Conference 2022 
Adrian Orr, Governor 
 
27 October 2022 
 


 
Tēnā koutou katoa, 
Thank you for the opportunity to talk today and it is pleasing that it is in person following a series 
of virtual meetings in recent times.  
It is also a privilege to be presenting here alongside the Financial Markets Authority CEO 
Samantha Barrass. Our institutions are working increasingly hand-in-hand, which makes complete 
sense for our financial industry.  
I am deliberately keeping my remarks high level. You will be hearing from Te Pūtea Matua multiple 
times over the coming weeks. Between now and end-November you will be treated to our 
Financial Stability Report, our 5-yearly Review of our monetary policy activities, our Monetary Policy 
Statement, and round two of public consultation on the 5-yearly review of our Monetary Policy 
Remit.  
The Financial Stability Report to be released next week provides a rich assessment of the financial 
system and broader economy. The most obvious theme will be the resilience of our financial 
system to manage through challenging economic times. New Zealand is not unique in facing 
growing economic challenges – they are global in their making. However, New Zealand is well 
positioned to manage. 
Over recent months I have been able to re-engage with many global economic policy makers 
face-to-face – most recently at the IMF and World Bank joint annual meetings in Washington DC. 
While people were genuinely pleased to meet in person again, that’s where the fun stopped. The 
content of the meetings was far from positive.  
Global economic challenges are large and upon us 
The world economy is experiencing high inflation. This means central banks globally – the Reserve 
Bank of New Zealand included – are working to actively slow domestic spending by raising interest 
rates so as to constrain inflation. This means employment prospects will be increasingly 
compromised, as people delay their spending and investment decisions.  
The trade-off of the long-run benefits of low and stable inflation versus near-term spending and 
employment is being confronted in virtually every country simultaneously. Figure 1 provides a 
timely snapshot of the current inflation and unemployment position across countries. New Zealand 
is relatively well positioned but inflation is still too high in an absolute sense. Nations who are most 
impacted by food and energy price spikes and shortages stand out significantly with double-digit 
inflation rates.  
 
 


 
Figure 1: Inflation and unemployment in OECD economies 
 
Note: The data are sourced from the OECD database and the Australian Bureau of Statistics. The latest available data-
points have been used; unemployment data for 2022Q2 for all countries, and inflation data for 2022Q3 for all countries 
except Costa Rica (CRI) for which only 2021Q4 data is obtainable. Turkey has been omitted since it is an outlier with an 
exceptionally high inflation rate of 81%. 
The global coincidence of the monetary policy tightening is not surprising. COVID has been a 
global shock to the productive capacity of the entire planet. People are worse off for it, and 
spending plans have been radically disrupted. We are still working through the lingering economic 
impacts of the lingering virus.  
How are financial and economic stresses manifesting at present?  
There was a significant list of concerns repeated in many languages and accents at the recent IMF 
meetings. The list of near-term pressures goes something like: 
Returning to low inflation will, in the near-term, constrain employment growth and lead to a rise in 
unemployment. The actual extent of this trade-off remains unclear however, given the significant 
labour shortages globally and the very different means of employment being adopted post-
COVID. Importantly, it is highly unlikely that we are at maximum sustainable employment if 
inflation is still high and variable.  
Rising nominal interest rates globally are, and will continue to, test the resilience of the financial 
system and all economic participants. The financial system is complex, making it hard to pinpoint 
what, if any, particular ‘Achilles heel’ exists in real time. All we know is that the financial system has 
experienced many legal, operational, financial and/or reputational problems in the past – few of 
which were predictable in timing or scale. Most recently, for example, in the UK we saw liquidity 
issues rapidly escalate in their pension-investment industry as an unintended consequence of fiscal 
policy announcements. Meanwhile, in other countries, IMF and World Bank financial assistance is 
being drawn on heavily to manage through both short-term food and energy crises, and longer-
term climate change risk mitigation and adaptation.    


 
Notable also is the growing ‘home bias’ and ‘flight to quality’ being expressed by global investors 
as they shift their capital. Supporting these trends is the heightened geopolitical risks that exist, 
leading to increased fragmentation in global trading blocs and economic reliance.  
The rising US dollar value relative to most other currencies in the world is an important symptom 
of these capital movements. Aside from appearing as an investor’s safe haven, the US Federal 
Reserve is appropriately lifting their interest rates in order to constrain consumer price inflation. US 
dollar deposits are now yielding more and hence attracting global capital inflows.  
A strong US dollar provides challenges to smaller-open economies. For example, nations with US-
pegged or managed exchange rates are needing to use their foreign dollar reserves to support 
their currency. Those nations with floating exchange rates – such as New Zealand – are 
experiencing higher imported cost pressures, which can lead to longer-term embedded inflation if 
expectations become unanchored.  
There is also rising tension globally between monetary policy aimed at low and stable inflation, and 
governments’ longer-term fiscal priorities. Governments are looking to provide necessary support 
to those people most impacted by geopolitical tensions (e.g. defence, food, and energy support), 
and health and wellbeing related expenses accentuated by the COVID pandemic – amongst many 
other priorities. 
This fiscal tension is further accentuated by the need to progress climate change adaptation. 
Investment is needed at scale to manage a transition to more environmentally-sustainable forms 
of economic production. Investment will put demand pressure on resources and hence inflation in 
the near-term. Likewise, there are potential one-off relative energy price changes as nations move 
away from fossil fuels to more sustainable alternatives. 
The rising geopolitical tensions are also significantly constraining global trade. This is concerning 
when you consider how important the decline in the relative price of technology-related goods 
has been in maintaining low inflation over recent decades. Less access to shared resources and 
technology globally will slow potential output growth – all other things equal. Sudden changes in 
trade access will have significant economic effects.  
The tensions mentioned above between: inflation and employment; rising interest rates and 
financial stability; monetary and long-term fiscal policy; geopolitical concerns; and climate change 
are already testing political consensus within and between countries. The most used word of the 
IMF and World Bank meetings was ‘fragmentation’ of global trade and policy consensus.   
These are some of the ‘urgent’ challenges facing the global economy. Just for completeness, let’s 
not forget the ‘important’ challenges that existed prior to this COVID-affected business cycle.   
I have already briefly mentioned the critical issue of climate change adaptation. However, it is 
more, not less, pressing now due to the geopolitical tensions forcing energy prices up and 
prolonging the use of fossil fuels.  
In addition, most large economies – notably including China – have ageing populations. New 
Zealand is included in this demographic. The ratio of dependent-to-working-age population is 
rising rapidly. The health and fiscal costs associated with the ageing populations is significant. At 
the broadest brush, the youth are primarily in less developed countries and in need of significant 
investment in capability and capacity so as to be engaged fully in the global economy. Whether 
global migration will be managed or chaotic is a pressing global choice that cannot be avoided.   
I will finish my list of things to worry about with the obvious – the ongoing global health challenges 
related to COVID strains, and the ability to retain social cohesion as people compete for resources. 
Humanity has been truly challenged by the pandemic. We are managing, but we need to continue 
to collaborate.  


 
What policy options were offered up by the congregation of economic policy makers?  
The IMF and World Bank formula for success is best summarised in the following four key areas:  
Inflation needs to be contained in a 'goldilocks' manner, where tightening is sufficient to tame 
inflation expectations, but without sending countries into a deep recession. 
Fiscal policy needs to be at the least targeted and temporary. Targeted toward the people most 
impacted by higher food and energy prices, and temporary in that policies can be removed when 
the circumstances permit.  
Financial resilience building is critical, so that the financial system can do what it does best, allocate 
resources to their best long-term use. This is especially so in the rapidly growing ’non-bank’ 
sectors of the global financial system. 
Ongoing structural reform is required to enhance productivity and enable the flow of resources to 
efficient use. It is this area of global economic policy that has received least attention for some 
time, with the focus being on monetary and fiscal stabilisation through the COVID years, and now 
war, energy constraints, and food shortages. 
The four steps to ongoing economic resilience are firmly within the New Zealand way of doing 
things. We are in relatively good stead. Next week we will be publishing our biannual Financial 
Stability Report, outlining our latest assessment of the soundness and efficiency of the country’s 
financial system.  
I am pleased to provide a teaser in that New Zealand’s financial system remains well placed to 
support the economy – with banks’ capital and liquidity positions strong, and profitability and asset 
quality high. However, there will be stresses in business and amongst households as interest rates 
and asset prices adjust. Of critical importance to overall financial stability will be the robustness of 
the labour market.  
In regards to our monetary policy objective, we have our eyes firmly focused on meeting our 
inflation target. We’ll be back at the end of November with our full Monetary Policy Statement and 
outlook ahead.  
Our work reviewing our monetary policy in the past five years is also near delivery. This will canvass 
what the Monetary Policy Committee did and why, what worked, and what we could have done 
better – the lessons from our experience. The work is being reviewed by independent experts and 
our new Board, and will be published mid-November.  
Finally, I want to acknowledge the important work the Financial Market Authority and our other 
Council of Financial Regulators partners are delivering to support the functioning of New Zealand’s 
financial system. Our individual work plus our collective themes – climate, technology, data, and 
inclusion – will help ensure that New Zealand has a world-class financial system.  
In summary, I am confident that New Zealand is in a strong absolute and relative position to 
manage the challenges ahead, and that we will work together to tackle these issues. Thank you for 
the opportunity to join you today, it really is great to be here in person, and I hope you enjoy the 
rest of the conference.  
Meitaki ma’ata  
Tēnā koutou, tēnā koutou, tēnā koutou katoa
