BANK: RBNZ
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Housing (Still) Matters – The Big Picture
DATE: 29/06/2022
SPEAKER: The Big Picture
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/speeches/2022/speech2022-06-29.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

UNCLASSIFIED 
ENDORSEMENT 
 
 
 
Ref #X613034 v1.11 
 
 
 
 
UNCLASSIFIED 
ENDORSEMENT 
Housing (Still) Matters 
– The Big Picture 
A speech delivered to the National Property 
Conference 2022 
On 30 June 2022 
By Paul Conway, Reserve Bank Chief Economist  
With thanks to Punnoose Jacob, Matthew Brunton, Jonathon Adams-Kane, 
Andrew Coleman, Cuong Nguyen, and other colleagues from the RBNZ, the 
New Zealand Treasury and the Ministry of Housing and Urban Development 


UNCLASSIFIED 
ENDORSEMENT 
 
ENDORSEMENT 
UNCLASSIFIED 
Thanks for the opportunity to speak today on the critical issue of housing here in Aotearoa-New 
Zealand.  
Housing matters because everyone needs a place to live – it is fundamental to our wellbeing. It 
also matters because housing is by far the most common and most valuable investment for many 
New Zealanders. 
On the flip side, rent and mortgage costs are also the biggest expenses for many households. 
Building houses is a big source of jobs in our economy too – tens of thousands of people earn 
their livelihoods working in residential construction.  
The housing market is also a key link between the real economy and the financial system in New 
Zealand, with home loans dominating the balance sheets of commercial banks.  
So, understanding how the New Zealand housing market works is really important for us at Te 
Pūtea Matua, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand. Recent changes to the Remit for monetary policy 
– which tells us what we need to pay attention to in making interest rate decisions – also require us 
to assess the impact of our decisions on house prices.  
One thing seems clear from the get-go – housing demand has tended to outstrip housing supply 
in New Zealand. As a result, housing has gone from being abundant and reasonably affordable to 
being scarce and prohibitively unaffordable for many, with house price inflation here among the 
highest across OECD countries over recent years (Figure 1).  
While this has generated strong returns for house owners, it has also increased the wealth gap 
between New Zealanders who own houses and those who do not. Kiwis who own houses – often 
older New Zealanders – have increased their wealth, while those who do not own houses have 
seen accommodation costs steadily increase, with many prospective younger first-home buyers 
struggling to buy a home of their own.  
At the extreme, the number of families living in emergency housing such as motels, has increased 
strongly in our country and the OECD reports that we have one of the highest rates of 
homelessness across member countries.1  
Even though the market has recently turned, with house prices down over the first half of 2022, 
house prices remain at very high levels in absolute terms and relative to incomes.  
Today, I’m going to discuss various reasons for the supply-demand mismatch that has led to such 
high house prices. I will use insights from recent Reserve Bank research to steer us through some 
of the complexities of the New Zealand housing market and to better understand it.2  
____________ 
1  The number of families living in emergency housing increased from around 2600 in September 2019 to just over 4300 in May 2022. See Ministry of Social Development (2022) 
and Coughlan (2022). See also the OECD Housing Affordability Database for data on homelessness. 
2  We are publishing 5 Analytical Notes in conjunction with this speech that set out what we have learned from this research. 


UNCLASSIFIED 
ENDORSEMENT 
 
ENDORSEMENT 
UNCLASSIFIED 
Figure 1: Nominal house prices  
 
 
Note: Source – REINZ, OECD. For charts of real house prices that deliver similar insights, see Fitchett, H. and Jacob, P. (2022). ‘How do 
we stack up? The New Zealand housing market in the international context.’ Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Notes AN2022/06.  
Why People Buy Houses 
Shelter is a critical human right. So, more people imply a need for more houses. But population 
growth is not the only driver of housing demand. For example, lower interest rates create extra 
buyer demand by allowing people to service a bigger mortgage with the same repayment. The 
way returns from housing are taxed also impacts on housing demand.  
A Growing Population Needs More Houses 
The housing stock in New Zealand has not kept up with population growth – the number of 
dwellings per person in our country has fallen since 2011 up until the beginning of the COVID-19 
pandemic (Figure 2). In contrast, dwellings per person have increased in most other OECD 
countries over this period (Figure 3).  
In part, this reflects very strong population growth in New Zealand up until the beginning of the 
pandemic. Since the Global Financial Crisis (GFC), New Zealand has experienced almost the 
highest rate of population growth across the OECD, in large part off the back of a migration 
boom. Since we have failed to build enough houses for a growing population, it is not altogether 
surprising that we have had the largest increase in house prices (Figure 4).  
This reflects one of the underlying issues that New Zealand faces: our supply of new houses has 
not kept up with the demand for housing coming from a growing population. However, this is by 
no means all of the story.  


UNCLASSIFIED 
ENDORSEMENT 
 
ENDORSEMENT 
UNCLASSIFIED 
Figure 2: Dwelling availability in New Zealand 
 
Note: Source – Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 
Figure 3: Dwelling availability (per 1000 inhabitants) in the OECD 
Note: Source – OECD 
Figure 4: Growth in house prices and population since 2008 
                                                                   
Note: Source - OECD, United Nations. 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
2020 or latest year available
2011


UNCLASSIFIED 
ENDORSEMENT 
 
ENDORSEMENT 
UNCLASSIFIED 
Interest Rates – The Long and Short of It 
Interest rates are another key driver of housing demand. For example, lower mortgage rates mean 
people can borrow more for a given level of income, making it easier to fund a house purchase. 
This stimulates a higher demand for better-quality properties, pushing up prices, if more supply 
does not come on stream.  
Interest rates fell steadily after the GFC, both in New Zealand and around the world. For example, 
while a new bank customer in New Zealand could lock in a two-year mortgage at almost 9% in 
2008, they could get the same mortgage for just under 4% in 2021 (Figure 5).  
A wide-range of factors influence interest rates. Monetary policy has short-term, temporary 
impacts on interest rates over the course of the business cycle. Central banks control inflation by 
moving policy interest rates either side of the so-called “neutral” interest rate to ‘lean against’ the 
business cycle. That is, to slow things down in a boom and to stimulate activity in a slump.  
The neutral interest rate is the interest rate at which inflation is low and stable and employment is 
at its maximum sustainable level.  
The long-term decline in the cost of borrowing shown in Figure 5 reflects a drop in the neutral 
interest rate over the course of decades rather than over the business cycle. Best estimates of the 
neutral rate show it has fallen across OECD economies over many decades, and the GFC triggered 
an even sharper dip.3  
Here in Aotearoa, Reserve Bank estimates of New Zealand’s neutral rate shows a 3-percentage 
point drop since the mid-2000s.  
There are a host of possible reasons why neutral interest rates have fallen over recent decades. For 
example, with people living longer, savings have increased to pay for longer retirements. Also, the 
hardships that followed the GFC also caused people in many countries to spend less, building up 
precautionary savings to insure against income uncertainty.4 With relatively weak productivity 
growth since the GFC, the returns on investment and demand for investment funding have been 
low.5  
Overall, these and other forces buoyed global savings rates, creating vast pools of capital that 
have flowed through liberalised international financial markets to finance investment needs. In 
short, a world-wide savings glut is likely to have lowered neutral interest rates.  
As global neutral rates declined, borrowing costs dipped to historical lows, and house prices 
increased in many countries. In New Zealand, as in many other countries, falls in the global neutral 
interest rate played a dominant role in the long-term increase in house prices, dwarfing the effects 
of changes in shorter-term interest rates and rents.6 
 
 
____________ 
3  Hong, S. and Shell, H. (2019). ‘The global decline of the natural rate of interest and implications for monetary policy’. Economic Synopses, Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Issue 
4, February.  
4  Mody, A., Ohnsorge, F. and Sandri, D. (2012). ‘Precautionary savings in the Great Recession’. IMF Economic Review 60(1), pp.114-138. 
5  Dieppe, A. (2020). ‘The broad-based productivity slowdown, in seven charts’. World Bank Blog, July 14. 
6  Brunton, M. and Jacob, P. (2022). ‘New Zealand house prices and the decline in longer-term financing costs.’ Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Notes AN2022/10. 


UNCLASSIFIED 
ENDORSEMENT 
 
ENDORSEMENT 
UNCLASSIFIED 
This is not to say that temporary cyclical interest rate changes – driven by Reserve Bank monetary 
policy – are not important. The New Zealand experience is that a temporary easing of monetary 
policy (for example) leads to a temporary increase in house prices.7 However, the more persistent 
upward trend in New Zealand house prices is mainly driven by the persistent decline in the neutral 
interest rate, which has, in turn, been affected by global forces. 
Figure 5: Mortgage interest rates in selected countries 
 
Note: The details of the data are given in Fitchett, H. and Jacob, P. (2022), ‘How do we stack up? The New Zealand housing market in 
the international context’, Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Notes AN2022/06. Note that the rates in the chart are nominal 
interest rates and cross-country differences in inflation will explain some of the differences.  
Tax Settings That Favour Housing 
Our tax system may have also contributed to higher house prices over recent decades. Figure 6 is 
taken from the Tax Working Group (2018) and shows that our tax system has historically favoured 
housing as an investment asset. 
Capital gains on housing are often not taxed, whereas other forms of income are. Imputed rent 
(the rent owner-occupiers effectively pay themselves) is not taxed whereas other forms of 
investment income are. And GST is charged as a lump sum when a house is built, rather than on 
the flow of housing services as they are consumed, be that via rent or owner occupation. 
These tax distortions that favour housing become more potent when interest rates are low, 
amplifying the effects on house prices. So, as interest rates fell between 2002 and 2021, it is likely 
that the upward impact of tax settings on house prices increased.8  
If the tax system had been more ‘neutral’ in its treatment of housing, house price increases would 
have been milder over the two decades to 2021 as interest rates fell.  
 
 
____________ 
7  For evidence for New Zealand, see two of the Reserve Bank’s Analytical Notes: Chadwick, M., Dasgupta, K. and Jacob, P. (2022), ‘Housing supply, house prices, and monetary 
policy’, AN2022/08, and Chadwick, M., and Nahavandi, A. (2022), ‘How does monetary policy affect the New Zealand housing market through the credit channel?’, AN2022/09. 
For international evidence, see Williams, J. (2016), ‘Measuring the effects of monetary policy on house prices and the economy’, BIS Papers 88. Bank for International Settlements. 
8  This issue is discussed in detail in forthcoming analysis. 


UNCLASSIFIED 
ENDORSEMENT 
 
ENDORSEMENT 
UNCLASSIFIED 
Of course, a fully non-distortionary neutral tax system is merely an economist’s fantasy; indeed, 
there are practical considerations that influence the design and implementation of tax systems. 
Nonetheless, understanding the impacts of tax distortions – and their interactions with other 
relevant factors such as interest rates – on the housing market is important for understanding 
house price dynamics. 
Figure 6: Marginal effective tax rates on investments in New Zealand (2018) 
 
Note: Source- Treasury/IRD analysis, 2018. 
Constrained Housing Supply 
Higher housing demand will have a much smaller impact on house prices if new homes are built 
quickly to meet that demand. For example, our analysis shows that house prices are less sensitive 
to temporary changes in interest rates in areas of New Zealand where new homes are built 
relatively more quickly to meet demand.9  
A recent report by the New Zealand Infrastructure Commission finds that the response of house 
prices to population growth between the late 1970s and the late 2010s, was about 4 times lower 
than what it was from the late 1930s to the late 1970s.  
It would seem that consistent with rapid house price inflation, the supply of housing over recent 
years has been slower to respond to increased demand. There are two key components to 
housing supply: the house itself and the land on which it is built.  
Land Supply 
Land markets in New Zealand are critical in explaining high house prices. If the space for new 
housing – both up and out – is restricted or difficult to access, increased housing demand gets 
captured as changes in the price of land, rather than as more houses. On the other hand, when 
there is space available for new housing, increased demand will see more houses being provided 
with more modest impacts on prices.  
____________ 
9  Chadwick, M., Dasgupta, K. and Jacob, P. (2022), ‘Housing supply, house prices, and monetary policy’, Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Notes AN2022/08. 
55.7%
47.2%
55.0%
11.3%
29.4%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
Bank account
PIE,
Superannuation
Fund
Foreign shares
(Fair Dividend
Ratio method)
Owner-occupied
housing - equity
Rental property
- equity
Marginal effective tax rate
Type of capital


UNCLASSIFIED 
ENDORSEMENT 
 
ENDORSEMENT 
UNCLASSIFIED 
Modelling by the New Zealand Infrastructure Commission (2022) shows that changes to urban 
planning policies that constrained land supply explain much of the acceleration in house prices in 
recent decades.10 Similar results on the effect of land-use regulation are echoed by Lees (2019), 
who studies a number of cities in New Zealand.  
Previous work for the Ministry of Business Innovation and Employment and Ministry for the 
Environment showed that land within the urban boundary can be $200 to $300 per square metre 
more expensive than surrounding rural land. The steep difference in prices across the urban 
boundary means that land-use regulation has an important impact. 
  
Construction Costs 
World Bank data show that construction costs in New Zealand were 16% higher than in Australia 
and about double the OECD average in 2017. In 2012, the New Zealand Productivity Commission 
wrote a Housing Affordability Inquiry also showing that building costs were high here relative to 
other countries. Despite being high already, construction costs have also been increasing faster in 
New Zealand than in other countries since the GFC (Figure 8). This all strongly suggest that house 
building in New Zealand is an expensive business.  
There are no doubt many reasons why building costs are so high here. Part of the reason could be 
that the manufacture and distribution of building materials – which account for almost half of 
construction costs – take place in industries that are dominated by one or a small number of large 
firms. In addition to weak competition, some building supply businesses are likely to be relatively 
unproductive and to produce below minimum efficient scale.  
Figure 8: Nominal construction cost indices 
 
Notes:  Source – Stats NZ, Australian Bureau of Statistics, United States Census and OECD.  
‘Sustainable’ House Prices and Monetary Policy 
What do these and other fundamental drivers of the housing market mean for house prices? To 
help answer this question, Reserve Bank researchers have estimated the level of ‘sustainable’ house 
____________ 
10  Urban planning in New Zealand relies on all manner of land use regulations; building height restrictions, minimum lot sizes, minimum parking requirements or heritage 
restrictions. 


UNCLASSIFIED 
ENDORSEMENT 
 
ENDORSEMENT 
UNCLASSIFIED 
prices consistent with market fundamentals, such as the cost of alternatives to owning a property, 
the longer-term outlook for interest rates, and expected future supply and demand conditions.11 
Not surprisingly, given weaknesses in our ability to provide enough space for new housing for a 
rapidly expanding population, the tax system, and the decline in neutral interest rates 
internationally, ‘sustainable’ house prices have increased strongly in New Zealand over recent 
years (Figure 9). This increase in ‘sustainable’ house prices reflect the fact that market 
fundamentals have been key in pushing up actual house prices over the last few decades.  
Actual house prices can and do deviate from ‘sustainable’ house prices as a result of short-run 
influences, such as monetary policy and the ‘animal spirits’ of market participants. Monetary policy 
influences how house prices evolve around the sustainable level but is unable to keep house prices 
persistently above or below their sustainable level.  
Since the beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020, actual house prices have been above 
their sustainable level. Exceptionally low interest rates coupled with a “fear of missing out” would 
have contributed to this cyclical surge in house prices. In turn, stronger house prices supported 
consumer spending over this period through a wealth effect.12 This additional support to 
aggregate demand and spending in our economy played a key role in helping us avoid the worst 
effects of the pandemic on employment and income.  
Importantly, ‘sustainability’ and ‘affordability’ are very different concepts. While sustainability is 
determined by fundamental drivers in the housing market, affordability is about where the cost of 
purchasing a house sits relative to the income of the home-buyer. Unfortunately, for many New 
Zealanders trying to buy a home, the current level of sustainable house prices – determined by 
market fundamentals – is still by no means affordable.  
Figure 9: Comparing actual prices to the estimated sustainable levels 
 
Source: Updated chart from Brunton, M. (2021), ‘Measures for assessing the sustainability of house prices in New Zealand', Reserve Bank 
of New Zealand Analytical Notes AN2021/08. 
____________ 
11  Brunton, M. (2021), ‘Measures for assessing the sustainability of house prices in New Zealand', Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Notes AN2021/08. 
12  For evidence for New Zealand on the consumption wealth effect, see de Roiste, M., Fasianos, A.,  Kirkby, R. and Yao, F. (2019), ‘Household leverage and asymmetric housing 
wealth effects- Evidence from New Zealand’, Reserve Bank of New Zealand Discussion Paper Series DP2019/01. For US evidence, see Graham, J. and Makridis, A. (2022), ‘House 
prices and consumption: A new instrumental variables approach’, American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics (forthcoming). 


UNCLASSIFIED 
ENDORSEMENT 
 
ENDORSEMENT 
UNCLASSIFIED 
Safe as Houses? 
With strong demand and constrained supply, rapid house price growth over the past 20 years or 
more has meant that residential property, as an investment asset, has delivered strong financial 
returns for New Zealand house owners.  
With prices having been seemingly always on the up, it is no surprise that New Zealanders hold a 
relatively large share of their wealth in housing (Figure 10). The proportion of housing wealth in 
total wealth appears to be relatively high in New Zealand compared to other developed 
economies.13  
Given large house price increases, research based on portfolio investment theory shows that 
investing in residential property has been the logical choice for many Kiwis.14 In New Zealand, 
given policy settings, it has been rational for investors to flock into the housing market.  
Because housing can be leveraged, the flip side of strong investment in residential property is that 
mortgage lending makes up a larger proportion of commercial bank balance sheets compared to 
other OECD economies (Figure 11).  
While investing in housing has been rational, the implications of channelling a very large share of 
our savings and debt obligations into housing goes beyond optimal portfolio theory. The housing 
market has become the default savings vehicle for many New Zealanders and the key source of 
collateral or security for borrowing by households and small and medium businesses.  
It may also be that investing in housing in the hope of perpetually higher house prices may 
ultimately lead to a potential misallocations of resources that generates relatively little economic 
value. 
Figure 10: The composition of New Zealand household assets 
 
Note: Source- RBNZ, March 2021. 
____________ 
13  Cross-country comparisons of housing wealth are complex due to, for example, institutional differences and variations in definitions. Coleman (2019) has also reported a high 
share of housing wealth in total national wealth in New Zealand. Updates to this work suggest that the relevant numbers for New Zealand, Australia and the USA in early 2021 
were 65%, 62.5% and 25% respectively. For more details on the methodology, see Coleman, A. (2019), ‘Taxing capital income in New Zealand: An international perspective’, 
University of Otago Economics Discussion Papers No. 1902. 
14  Aguiar Carvalho, P., Baker, B., and Farquharson, A. (2022), ‘Housing as an investment asset in New Zealand: Looking at risk-adjusted portfolio choices’, Reserve Bank of New 
Zealand Analytical Notes AN2022/07. 
8%
30%
57%
5%
Currency and deposits
Portfolio Assets - Equity, Investment Funds,
Bonds
Housing and land value
(including rental properties)
Life insurance and superannuation funds


UNCLASSIFIED 
ENDORSEMENT 
 
ENDORSEMENT 
UNCLASSIFIED 
Figure 11: Lending in the residential property sector in the Anglophone countries 
Share of mortgage lending in aggregate lending 
 
 
 
Note: Sources: Haver Analytics, OECD. 
Where to From Here?  
Over the years, the demand side of the New Zealand housing market was boosted by strong 
population growth, steadily declining neutral interest rates and a favourable tax system. The supply 
side, however, has been held back by strict land use regulations, and a construction sector prone 
to boom-bust cycles, while carrying very high building costs. Excess demand led to New Zealand’s 
experience with some of the highest house prices relative to income in the world.  
A sense of ever-increasing house prices – along with a lack of other quality local investment 
alternatives – may have also distorted the investment options of New Zealanders. The share of 
housing on household balance sheets is very high and commercial banks hold a high share of 
mortgages on their balance sheets.  
Rapidly increasing land prices may have also led to a transfer of wealth to people who owned land 
as prices were rising from landless younger people and future generations, who have to spend 
more to buy land.15 This means that they save less, reducing the amount of alternative capital they 
own and possibly lowering lifetime consumption and incomes.  
Are these dynamics likely to continue in future? Since August 2021, the Reserve Bank has been 
tightening monetary policy, lifting the Official Cash Rate, to rein in inflation. This will likely see 
actual house prices move back towards sustainable levels that are more in line with market 
fundamentals. Indeed, in the May Monetary Policy Statement, we forecast a 15 percent decline in 
house prices from their peak, which would bring them roughly back to sustainable levels.  
Over a longer time frame, there are reasons to think that some of the core market fundamentals 
that determine sustainable house prices may also be changing. On the demand side, as the 
pandemic slowly recedes and international travel restrictions unwind, many New Zealanders are 
____________ 
15  See Feldstein, M. (1977). ‘The surprising incidence of a tax on pure rent: a new answer to an old question’. Journal of Political Economy 85(2), pp.349 – 360. 


UNCLASSIFIED 
ENDORSEMENT 
 
ENDORSEMENT 
UNCLASSIFIED 
heading overseas seeking new experiences.16 On the other hand, immigration is unlikely to return 
quickly to pre-pandemic levels, contributing to slower population growth overall.  
In the tax space, the removal of interest deductibility and the introduction of a capital gains tax on 
sales of residential property owned for less than 10 years – the ‘bright lines test’ – will have closed 
some of the gap between the effective tax rate on housing and other asset classes.  
At the same time, urban planning rules are being freed up to unlock more housing supply. The 
Resource Management Act is being replaced and the National Policy Statement on Urban 
Development directs councils to remove overly-restrictive planning rules and to enable higher 
housing density, which is a critical part of the solution.   
In the construction sector, the Commerce Commission is carrying out a market study into whether 
competition for residential building supplies in New Zealand is working well and, if not, what can 
be done to improve it.  
These changes are consistent with more houses being built and currently high building consents 
translating into more actual houses. They also imply that housing market dynamics in future are 
unlikely to be the same as in the past. Given the importance of housing in our economy and 
national psyche, this will be a huge change.  
For several decades, we have traded houses among ourselves at ever-increasing prices in the 
belief that we were creating prosperity. But the tide may well have turned against housing being a 
one-way bet for a generation of Kiwis. We need to keep building a new approach to housing and 
economic prosperity in Aotearoa-New Zealand.  
 
  
____________ 
16  See Figure 4.12, Monetary Policy Statement May 2022.
