BANK: RBNZ
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Presentation to the Annual Conference of the NZ Association of Economists (NZAE)
DATE: 30/06/2023
SPEAKER: Personnel
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/speeches/2023/bob-buckle-nzae-speech-final-21-june.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

1 
 
Monetary policy and the benefits and limits  
of central bank independence 
 
 
 
Robert A. Buckle 
Emeritus Professor, Victoria University of Wellington.  
External Member, Reserve Bank of New Zealand Monetary Policy Committee. 
 
 
Disclaimer: The views expressed in this paper are those of the author and do not necessarily 
reflect the views of colleagues, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, and other members of the 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Monetary Policy Committee. 
 
 
Abstract: Central bank independence is an important development in macroeconomics. It has 
become a lynchpin of modern central banking. The period since the Global Financial Crisis 
and the experience of the Covid-19 pandemic era posed new challenges for central banks, with 
potential implications for central bank independence. This paper reviews the scope and 
rationale for central bank independence and the reasons it spread internationally after the 
1980s. It reviews evidence of the effects of central bank independence on inflation, output 
volatility, financial stability and fiscal policy. The paper considers political threats and 
contemporary policy issues that could influence the form of central bank independence and 
credibility. These issues include matters relating to assessments of monetary policy during the 
pandemic, the scope of central bank mandates, interpretations of inflation dynamics, the 
funding of central bank operations, and the interaction between fiscal and monetary policy.  
 
 
Presented to the Annual Conference of the New Zealand Association of Economists.                     
30 June 2023. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Acknowledgments: I am grateful to Laura Austin, Vanessa Balshaw, Chris Bloor, Alan 
Bollard, Matthew Brunton, Andrew Coleman, John Creedy, Punnoose Jacob, Ross Kendall, 
Lewis Kerr, Adrian Orr, Kate Poskitt, Adam Richardson, and Grant Spencer for helpful 
discussions and suggestions while preparing for this paper. 


2 
 
Monetary policy and the benefits and limits  
of central bank independence 
 
1. Introduction 
It is a great pleasure to be invited to speak at the Annual Conference of the New Zealand 
Association of Economists (NZAE). I attended my first NZAE conference during the mid-
1970s. At that time, average annual inflation for OECD countries was persistently around 10 
per cent, and rising. Four years later it was over 15 per cent and hovered around 8 per cent until 
the early 1990s. Thereafter, inflation declined and never exceeded 8 per cent for over 30 years, 
and persisted for long periods between 1 and 3 per cent, until the resurgence after the Covid-
19 pandemic. 
The containment of inflation for over 30 years in many countries was not a chance event. A 
transformation in central banking took place during the 1990s. Many countries gave greater 
operational independence to central banks for monetary policy, supported by novel 
accountability and transparency requirements. This occurred initially among developed 
economies, although many developing economies also soon adopted this institutional 
framework for monetary policy. During this process, inflation declined globally. While other 
factors contributed to low inflation, central bank independence (CBI) came to be regarded as 
the crucial foundation for credible monetary policy and persistent low inflation.  
Central bank independence is an important development in macroeconomics, and is a lynchpin 
of modern central banking. Nevertheless, confidence in CBI has recently come under strain 
and in some instances been threatened. Some claim central banks have become far less 
independent than two decades ago.1 Others are concerned with the expanded role of central 
banks and implications for their clarity of purpose, adequate accountability and legitimacy.2 
Some have suggested central banks have become less focussed on inflation.3 Others have 
expressed concern over rising political threats to central bank independence, or that the 
constituency for low inflation has been eroded.4  
In extending this invitation, the NZAE Council suggested I speak on the broad developments 
of a topic in economics or economic policy. In the spirit of that request, I will discuss the 
background to the emergence of CBI, review its scope and meaning, its spread internationally, 
and why it was adopted by so many countries. I also will review evidence of the benefits arising 
from CBI. Finally, I will address some issues that have emerged in recent times relevant to the 
concerns mentioned above and which have potential implications for central bank 
independence and monetary policy.  
                                                          
1 See for example, Rogoff (2022), Lingle (2021) 
2 See for example, Tucker (2018a), Rajan, (2023). 
3 See The Economist (2022). 
4 See Goodhart & Lastra (2018a) on rising political threats. King (2023) suggests the constituency for low inflation is eroding. 


3 
 
2. The scope and growth of central bank independence 
Central bank independence refers to the freedom of monetary policymakers from direct 
political or governmental influence in the conduct of policy.5 This does not involve complete 
independence from government because legislation specifying the objectives of a central bank 
are determined by governments. Furthermore, funding, board appointments, and accountability 
requirements of central banks are determined by governments.  
There are different elements to CBI and the manner in which they are specified varies across 
central banks. These elements cover how the central bank aligns with the political process and 
other organs of government, the financing of a central bank, and the nature of the employment 
conditions of central bank governors and monetary policy committee members. They cover 
how the specification of central bank objectives are determined and how policy decisions are 
formed and approved. They also cover issues relating to the choice of policy instruments 
(degree of instrument autonomy), and accountability requirements.6  
To provide structure to this complexity, attempts have been made to measure the degree of 
independence using the laws of a country that establish and govern them.7 The most 
comprehensive attempt are the coding and weighting rules developed by Cukierman, Webb 
and Neyapti (1992) (CWN), shown in Table 1. The CWN scheme became a widely accepted 
basis for de jure measures of CBI (although others have been developed and used for research).  
Table 1: The CWN coding and weighting rules to measure central bank independence 
Dimension of 
independence 
Components       
(Weight in index) 
Variables 
(Weight in the component)   
Categories 
Personnel  
CEO/Governor 
(0.20) 
Term of office of CEO (0.25)                              
Who appoints the CEO (0.25)                              
Provisions for dismissal of CEO (0.25)                       
Rules about CEO holding another office in government (0.25) 
5            
5            
7            
2 
Objectives 
Objectives (0.15) 
Central Bank objectives (1) 
6 
Policy 
Policy formulation 
(0.15) 
Who formulates monetary policy (0.25)                   
Government directives and resolution of conflicts (0.50)         
Central Bank role in government budget formulation (0.25) 
4 
6 
2 
Financial 
Limitation on 
lending to 
government (0.5) 
Limitations on advances (0.30)                             
Limitations on securitized lending (0.20)                     
Who decides control of lending terms to government ((0.20) 
Beneficiaries of Central Bank lending (0.10)                  
Type of limits when they exist (0.05)                        
Maturity of loans (0.05)                                   
Restrictions on interest rates (0.05)                          
Prohibition on Central Bank lending in primary market 
to government (0.05) 
4            
4            
4            
4            
4            
4            
5            
2 
Notes: Adapted from Garriga & Rodriguez (2020) and is a summary of Table 1 in Cukierman, et al. (1992).   
                                                          
5 Walsh (2009). 
6 Bernanke (2017). 
7 These de jure measures (i.e., based on legislation) of central bank independence trace back to Bade & Parkin (1978). Their 
approach was to specify four categories of CBI. Subsequent approaches derived indices of CBI (Parkin, 2013). Examples 
are Alesina (1988), Grilli et al. (1991), Alesina & Summers (1993), Fry, et al. (2000). The development of these indices is 
reviewed in Eijffinger & de Haan (1996) and Arnone et al. (2006). 


4 
 
The most comprehensive application of the CWN rules for measuring CBI appears to be that 
by Garriga (2016) covering 182 countries over the period 1970 to 2013. Measures of CBI 
derived by Garriga for different country-income groups are shown in Figure 1. A striking 
feature is a surge in the degree of central bank independence after 1990, for all income groups. 
Garriga’s research also reveals the sources of change in central bank independence. There are 
substantial differences in the contributions of the four components in Table 1. The largest 
contributions to change in CBI have been from central bank objectives (especially a stronger 
focus on inflation), operational independence, and financial independence (this refers to 
limitations on lending to governments; it does not refer to budgetary independence). Personnel 
independence has also increased but not by as much as the other three components.  
Figure 1: Central bank independence: annual averages for country-income groups 
 
Source: Garriga (2016, Figure 5.9). Online data appendix available from publisher’s website 
https://www.tandfonline.com/journals/gini20 
 
 


5 
 
Measures of CBI based on statutes have some weaknesses. Statutes do not cover all 
contingencies that could affect the relationships between governments and central banks, and 
they can miss relevant influences on central bank independence. An example is the absence in 
the CWN coding (and other de jure measures) of a measure of restrictions on funding of some 
central bank monetary policy operations (discussed in Section 5.6). The weightings attached to 
each component of central bank laws can be contested. Nevertheless, de jure measures have 
the advantage of providing common measures of independence over time and across countries. 
Attempts have been made to derive de facto measures of independence (e.g., the turnover rate 
of central bank governors, and measures based on surveys of central bankers). But de facto 
measures also have significant weaknesses, including the difficulty of establishing a consistent 
measure across countries and over time.8 
3. Reasons why central bank independence spread internationally 
What prompted this dramatic change in the institutional framework for monetary policy during 
the 1990s? After all, it seems the performances of early independent central banks were mixed, 
and the concept had sceptics among influential monetary economists. According to Goodfriend 
(2012), independent monetary policy originated in the 19th century with the Bank of England 
and the US Federal Reserve. He considers the Bank of England’s lender of last resort policy 
served its purpose well, but the Federal Reserve ran monetary policy according to an ill-defined 
public interest and became a source of macroeconomic instability. In contrast, the independent 
Bundesbank and Swiss National Bank were relatively successful at achieving persistently low 
inflation during the post-WW2 decades. This was influential, especially in European Monetary 
System countries.9  
An early contribution to the CBI debate was by Milton Friedman (1962) in his discussion of 
monetary structures “both stable and free from irresponsible government tinkering”. He 
considered three alternatives: a commodity standard, an independent central bank, and 
legislated rules for monetary aggregates. Friedman was sceptical that an independent central 
bank could deliver low inflation consistently. He argued it was rare for an independent central 
bank to not take account of government preferences, and the degree of independence was 
dependent on the personality of central bank governors. He preferred instead that government 
legislate rules for the instruments of policy, and specifically for money supply growth.  
A dramatic change in Federal Reserve policy took place under the leadership of Paul Volcker. 
In October 1979 the focus shifted toward controlling the money supply with the aim of reducing 
inflation.10 Annual inflation had risen from 3 to 9 per cent in 18 months and was projected to 
                                                          
8 Cukierman et al. (1992) first proposed turnover rates of governors. Although often used in subsequent studies, the suitability 
of turnover rates has been questioned by Dreher et al. (2008, 2010) who found the turnover rate is subject to endogeneity 
issues. Furthermore, the turnover rate of governors does not take account of the degree of independence of other members 
of a monetary policy committee. An example of measures of CBI based on surveys of central bankers is Fry et al. (2000). 
This was based on a one-off survey responded to by central bank staff. Such surveys are not easily replicable and rely on 
the accuracy of responses which could be influenced by what staff believe or would prefer, or would like others to believe.  
9 See Cuikerman (1994). Alesina & Summers (1993) suggest the historical experience of hyperinflation in Germany may have 
raised German public aversion to inflation and its interest in a more independent central bank committed to price stability.   
10 The Federal Reserve Reform Act of 1977 had earlier required the Federal Reserve to direct its policies toward achieving 
maximum employment and price stability and report progress to Congress (Federal Reserve System, 2022). 


6 
 
rise further. By the end of 1983, the annual inflation rate had been brought down to 4 per cent, 
and low inflation was sustained until 2021.  
The Volcker episode showed that monetary policy could achieve a significant reduction in 
inflation. However, the output and employment costs of this policy were accentuated by weak 
policy credibility.11 The system was still vulnerable to Friedman’s concern of dependence on 
the personality of central bank governors. The problem was similar to the consequences of the 
time-inconsistency of optimal plans highlighted by the seminal work of Kydland and Prescott 
(1977). To overcome this problem and the inflationary bias it created in the context of monetary 
policy, subsequent literature emphasised the importance of expectations, the credibility of 
monetary policy, and the benefits of enforced commitments (or rules) over discretion.12 To 
achieve a credible commitment to low inflation, Rogoff (1985) proposed delegating monetary 
policy to an independent central bank in order to insulate central bankers from political 
pressures that could otherwise induce elected politicians to renege on promises of low inflation.  
It is widely considered that it was not until New Zealand introduced in 1989 a formal 
arrangement combining operational independence and inflation targeting supported by a high 
degree of transparency and accountability, that the idea of CBI (and inflation targeting) took 
flight. This innovation was introduced in New Zealand as part of a wider set of public sector 
reforms and a search for a solution to persistent high inflation.13 A feature of the legislation 
was a contractual relationship between the central bank Governor and the Government that 
changed the incentives of the central bank in a manner consistent with Rogoff’s proposal.14 
Many features of New Zealand’s approach influenced central bank governance in other 
countries. By the late 1990s, a consensus was emerging that the primary aim of monetary policy 
should be to control inflation and CBI was an effective way to do this.15 
Other factors influenced the spread of central bank independence. Research revealing the 
adverse effects of persistent high inflation motivated the search for a solution to breaking high 
inflation.16 Public-sector debt ratios in many countries had become much lower in this period 
which meant that when central banks raised interest rates to reduce inflation, it would have 
been of less concern for governments.17 The potential for CBI to signal creditworthiness to 
foreign investors in an environment of more internationally integrated financial markets may 
have also been a motivation.18 The influence of particular interest groups such as the financial 
sector which was expanding during the 1990s, may therefore have been important. The 
expansion of democratic regimes during the 1980s and 1990s may have been important. It has 
                                                          
11 Goodfriend & King (2005). 
12 For example, Barro & Gordon (1983) and Backus & Driffill (1985) and earlier work by Milton Friedman, Robert Lucas and 
others in emphasising the critical role of expectations.   
13 Evans, et al. (1996), Grimes (1996). The CBI reforms were enacted by the Reserve Bank of New Zealand (RBNZ) Act 1989. 
14 The influence of the NZ legislation is mentioned by numerous commentators. Examples are Mishkin & Savastano (2001), 
Goodhart & Lastra (2018b), Loungani (2023). Walsh (1995) concluded the principal-agent approach implicit in the novel 
accountability aspects of New Zealand’s approach was designed to sustain a socially optimal commitment policy.  
15 Bernanke & Mishkin (1997). 
16 High inflation in the 1970s and 1980s prompted more research into the effects of inflation on economic growth and how 
those effects are manifest. See for example Grimes (1991) and Johnson (1993) and the extensive literature cited in these 
papers. 
17 Goodhart & Lastra (2018a). 
18 Maxfield (1997). 


7 
 
been suggested democracies are more predisposed to the decentralisation of policy decisions, 
and therefore more likely to allow central banks to pursue price stability objectives without 
political interference.19 The IMF was active promoting the virtues of CBI in its Article IV 
country reviews. A relatively benign global macroeconomic environment after the 1980s is 
also likely to have supported the spread of CBI and inflation targeting.  
4. What have been the benefits of central bank independence? 
The growth of independent central banks after 1990 was associated with a shift in focus of 
monetary policy toward inflation targeting.20 Initial interest therefore focussed on the marginal 
effects of CBI on inflation and, to a lesser extent, output volatility. The effectiveness of 
monetary policy also depends on the efficiency and stability of financial systems and the 
cooperation of fiscal authorities. Accordingly, CBI spurred interest in evaluating whether 
politicians circumvent the discipline of monetary policy independence via financial system 
regulations and fiscal policy. The research into the marginal effect of central bank 
independence has evolved considerably and benefitted from the availability of larger samples 
of countries, improved data on central bank independence, improved econometric estimation 
techniques and understanding of the importance of other factors that can influence the impact 
of central bank independence. The following is a flavour of the insights from this research.  
4.1. Central bank independence and inflation 
Evaluation of the marginal impact of CBI on inflation goes back to Bade and Parkin (1978), 
followed by several other studies in the 1990s.21 The broad conclusion was that CBI resulted 
in lower inflation, with variation by country coverage and choice of indices of independence. 
These studies focussed on developed economies and samples were relatively small. Subsequent 
research extended country coverage, tested components of de jure independence and de facto 
measures of independence, searched for possible coefficient estimation bias due to not 
adequately controlling for other influences on inflation, allowing for country specific effects, 
and improved econometric methods including dynamic panel estimation methods.22 This large 
volume of research was evaluated by Klomp and de Haan (2010a) using meta-analysis. 
Although they found results varied by time period, the size of inflation rates, and country 
coverage, their overall conclusion is that CBI reduces inflation.  
Significant effects of CBI reducing inflation were found in studies for Latin American 
countries, democratic developing countries, former communist countries, and in countries with 
initial high rates of inflation. Nevertheless, a common finding from the studies reviewed by 
Klomp and de Haan is that while the effect of CBI on inflation was found in small subsets of 
                                                          
19 Lim (2021)  
20 Bernanke et al. (2001, p4) defined inflation targeting as “a framework for monetary policy characterised by the public 
announcement of official quantitative targets (or target ranges) for the inflation rate over one-or-more time horizons, and by 
explicit acknowledgement that low, stable inflation is monetary policy’s primary long-run goal.” 
21 These include studies by Alesina (1988), Grilli, et al. (1991), Cukierman, et al. (1992), Alesina & Summers (1993), and in 
a similar way by Carlstrom & Fuerst (2009). 
22 Some of the variables included in these studies to account for other influences on inflation include the exchange rate regime, 
degree of international openness, fiscal policy, size of inflation rates, and characteristics of labour market conditions.  


8 
 
developing countries, the effect in developing countries was not always evident.23 Garriga and 
Rodriguez (2020) suggest these differing results may have been due to sample selection bias 
and estimation methods. They revisit this question using a sample of 118 non-OECD countries 
covering 1980 to 2013, using the CWN approach to measure the degree of CBI.24 They find 
that in most developing countries, a higher degree of CBI results in lower inflation. The effect 
is stronger in the presence of more democratic institutions, in the presence of a floating 
exchange rate, and when a central bank operates under an explicit inflation targeting mandate. 
The effect of CBI on price stability nevertheless persists after controlling for these effects. 
The spread of CBI facilitated greater use of monetary policy instruments to supplant the 
prevalent use of less effective nonmonetary devices to stem the persistent high inflation that 
characterised the decades prior to the 1990s.25 This is likely to be have been an important factor 
enabling CBI to achieve sustained lower inflation.  
4.2 Central bank independence and output volatility 
The decades following the initial surge of CBI were characterised by falling volatility of 
inflation and output growth, coined the “Great Moderation” by Bernanke (2004). Figure 2 plots 
at quarterly intervals, the combinations of standard deviations of average annual inflation rates 
and real output growth for OECD countries. It reveals that volatility of both inflation and output 
growth were generally higher during the late 1970s and the 1980s. During the subsequent two 
decades, when central bank independence was spreading globally, inflation and output 
volatility were on a declining trend. There are cycles about this trend. In the early 2000s, output 
growth volatility increased (possibly due to spill-over effects of the Asian Financial Crisis and 
the ‘Dotcom’ share market crash). Thereafter, inflation and output volatility continued to 
decline, at least until the Global Financial Crisis.  
 
 
                                                          
23 These various studies can be found in Jácome & Vázquez (2008), Bodea & Hicks (2015), Loungani & Sheets (1997), 
Acemoglu, et al. (2008), Landström (2011), and Klomp & de Haan (2010b) 
24 Although their conclusions are robust to alternative de facto measures of CBI.  
25 See discussions and research in De Long (1997), Romer & Romer (2002), Bernanke (2004), and Nelson (2005, 2022).  
 


9 
 
Figure 2: The “Great Moderation”:  
OECD inflation and output growth volatility from 1977 to 2008  
 
Notes: Author’s calculations using OECD data. Each data point is the final year of five-year moving average standard 
deviations for the average of OECD countries’ annual inflation and real GDP growth. Dotted line is an estimated linear trend. 
Several factors contributed to this development. These include China’s sustained high growth 
of low-cost manufacturing output exported to the rest of the world, demographic factors 
resulting in a rising proportion of the working age population, rising labour force participation 
rates, and technological improvements to supply-chain management and inventory control.26  
Changes in monetary policy associated with CBI have also been credited as contributing to the 
decline in macroeconomic volatility (Bernanke, 2004; Taylor, 2013). By strengthening 
credibility and changing inflation expectations, central bank independence and inflation 
targeting change the dynamics of inflation. This alters the trade-off between inflation and 
output volatility, and therefore macroeconomic volatility.27  
4.3 Central bank independence and financial stability 
The intersection between monetary and financial conditions means CBI could impact financial 
stability, though there is debate as to whether CBI fosters or weakens financial stability. 
Arnone, et al. (2009) and Bernanke (2010) have suggested CBI fosters financial stability. On 
the other hand, Atkin and Kern (2020) suggest increased CBI resulted in weakening of financial 
regulation in some countries, as governments sought to compensate for the loss of control of 
monetary policy and find other ways to expand credit for politically strategic areas.  
                                                          
26 A review of research on contributions to declining output volatility during the “Great Moderation” is in Buckle, et al. (2003).  
27 This point is articulated by Bernanke (2004) who couched his argument within the context of Taylor’s (1979) monetary 
policy efficiency frontier. The way improved central bank credibility can change inflation dynamics and improve the Taylor 
efficiency frontier is explained in Clarida, et al. (1999), Orphanides & Williams (2005a), and Buckle (2019) who also 
reviews evidence of the impact of CBI and inflation targeting on New Zealand’s inflation and output volatility.  


10 
 
There are various ways CBI and inflation targeting could influence financial stability. A central 
bank that credibly committed to low inflation may generate more predictable interest rates and 
lower long-term interest rates and therefore interest rates and asset prices will be more stable.28 
There are counter-arguments. An independent central bank that has established a credible low 
inflation policy may reduce the probability investors and financial institutions assign to 
economic downturns, which might encourage higher risk investment behaviour.29 The 
combination of CBI and inflation targeting raised concerns this could result in more abrupt 
interest rate changes that pose higher financial risks for financial institutions.30 Recent USA 
bank failures is illustrative of what can happen when policy interest rates are increased rapidly.  
The empirical research on the effect of CBI on financial stability is more recent, but there is an 
emerging theme which is that central independence can improve financial stability. Several 
studies indicate CBI is associated with improved banking stability.31 Others evaluate the impact 
of CBI on financial stability more broadly using time-series panel models that control for other 
potential influences. For instance, Klomp and de Haan (2009) cover 75 developed and 
developing countries from 1985 to 2005 and find that CBI reduces financial instability. 
Moreover, countries in which central banks have an explicit mandate for financial supervision 
have improved financial stability. Fouejieu (2017) evaluates developing countries using a 
composite macro-financial condition index covering the period 2001 to 2010.  The results 
suggest inflation targeting central banks are relatively more sensitive to financial risks.   
These studies covered years prior to the Global Financial Crisis (GFC). The GFC challenged 
the view that inflation targeting central banks will give sufficient consideration to financial 
stability. There are a few studies that take account of the GFC period. These also suggest that 
CBI contributes to lower financial instability. They show that the effect of CBI in moderating 
financial instability is more important in countries with high levels of democracy.32  
4.4 Central bank independence and fiscal policy 
Granting independence to a central bank involves politicians foregoing economic policy 
flexibility. The question that naturally arose when CBI was spreading was whether it would 
induce more fiscal discipline by governments, or whether the objectives of monetary policy 
would be compromised by fiscal dominance. If CBI was considered by politicians as part of a 
broader package of reforms to achieve sustained low inflation and fiscal discipline is deemed 
part of that broader package, greater fiscal disciple might be an outcome. If on the other hand 
politicians consider low inflation the sole preserve of the independent central bank thereby 
easing a constraint on fiscal policy, there may be less fiscal discipline. Alternatively, political 
parties that have inherited CBI legislation but consider repeal is not politically prudent, may 
                                                          
28 See Baltensperger (1993), Cukierman (1994), Schwartz (1995). 
29 See Borio & Lowe (2002). 
30 See Cukierman (1992) and Mishkin (1996), while Berger & Kirsmer (2013) explore the potential implications for financial 
stability of the different incentives of politically determined and politically independent monetary policy decisions.  
31 For example, García-Herrero & Lopez (2003) and Čihák (2010). 
32 See for example Doumpos, et al. (2015), Andries, et al. (2022) and Nguyen & Dang (2022). 


11 
 
try to use fiscal policy to circumvent the aims of CBI. These motives could result in “fiscal 
dominance” reducing the effectiveness of CBI.33   
Fiscal dominance can occur when there is conflict over stabilisation policy that results in a 
competitive game that frustrates the central bank’s ability to pursue its monetary policy goals.34 
It can also occur is when governments generate unsustainable fiscal deficits and public debt 
that influence expectations of the likelihood of future monetisation of public debt and higher 
inflation. Perceptions that fiscal policy and public debt levels are not sustainable can therefore 
compromise current and future monetary policy.35   
An early investigation into the relationship between CBI and government budget deficits by 
Parkin (1987) suggested countries with independent central banks had smaller deficits, 
although this was not conclusive. Subsequent studies using different indices of central bank 
independence and different samples of developed and developing countries spanning the years 
from 1950 to 1992 (years prior to the surge of CBI and low inflation) produce a mix of 
significant and insignificant effects of CBI on fiscal deficits.36 However, these studies may not 
adequately capture the full effects of CBI which became more widespread after the early 1990s.  
There are several studies that cover the years since the expansion of CBI. In general, these 
studies are more robust in controlling for other influences on fiscal outcomes and suggest 
budget deficits tend to be smaller when central banks are more independent, but there are 
important qualifications that have emerged from this research.37 These studies suggest the 
impact of CBI on fiscal policy is conditioned by domestic political and legal institutions. The 
influence of CBI on fiscal policy is more effective in democracies and in countries with robust 
legal systems, a free press, and constraints on the political executive, and less effective in 
autocratic regimes. The effect appears stronger for those countries that are part of a currency 
union and share a common central bank, than for countries that have a national central bank. A 
higher level of financial development also improves fiscal performance and reduces reliance 
on central bank financing. These studies find evidence of a political cycle effect within 
democracies. CBI is more likely to influence fiscal balances outside election years. 
4.5 Summary of effects of central bank independence on macroeconomic performance 
Broad conclusions of the marginal effects of central bank independence are provided in Table 
2. Judgement has had to be used to generate these conclusions. They are drawn from studies 
using different research methods, different country samples, a mix of stages of economic 
development, different political regimes, and using different measures of CBI and financial 
instability, and there is a mixture of conclusions from these studies.  
                                                          
33 The basis for considering monetary dominant and fiscal dominant regimes is developed by Leeper (1991) and discussed in 
the context of recent events by Leeper (2023). 
34 For example, Buckle & Stemp (1991). 
35 For example, Sargent & Wallace (1984). 
36 These papers and results are summarised by Strong & Yayi (2021, Table 1, p4). 
37 These conclusions and qualifications are drawn from studies by Bodea & Higashijima (2017, which includes post-1990 
years for 78 countries that include democracies, more autocratic regimes and dictatorships), Burdekin & Laney (2016, which 
covers Central and South American countries from 1990 to 2012), Strong & Yayi (2021, for 30 African countries from 1990 
to 2017). 


12 
 
The strongest conclusion is that CBI reduces inflation, while the weight of evidence suggests 
CBI also reduces financial instability and fiscal deficits. There are qualifications to these 
conclusions. The effects of CBI on inflation, financial stability and fiscal deficits tend to be 
stronger in democratic regimes, and the effect on fiscal deficits is enhanced in countries with 
independent legal and media institutions (and some evidence a currency union matters). The 
evidence points to a stronger effect of CBI where the objectives are specified in legal mandates 
and the central bank is subject to strong accountability requirements. These studies do not cover 
the Covid-19 pandemic era, when inflation and macroeconomic volatility increased markedly. 
Table 2: The marginal effects of central bank independence 
 
Macroeconomic 
condition 
The marginal effect 
of CBI 
Selection of qualifications 
Type of 
economy 
Other 
institutional 
factors 
Political 
cycle 
effect 
Do explicit 
mandates 
matter? 
Inflation 
Reduces. 
Developed  
and  
developing. 
Stronger effects 
in:  
Democracies, 
flexible exchange 
rates, more 
internationally 
open. 
Labour market 
institutions 
matter. 
na 
Yes. 
Inflation 
targeting also 
practiced in 
some countries 
without new 
legislation.  
Output 
volatility 
Reduces. 
Conclusion from 
theoretical models and 
evidence of CBI effect 
on inflation 
expectations. Limited 
direct empirical 
research. 
Developed. 
Limited 
evidence 
available for 
developing 
economies. 
na 
na 
Unclear. 
But inflation 
targeting 
regimes tend to 
reduce output 
volatility. 
Financial 
instability 
Reduces. 
Conclusion for periods 
before and after the 
GFC. There are contrary 
results and contested 
views. 
Developed and 
developing 
More effective in 
democracies 
na 
Yes.   
Those with IT 
or FS mandates 
more sensitive 
to financial 
risks. 
Fiscal deficits 
Reduces.     
There are qualifications. 
More conclusive in 
samples that include the 
post-1980s. 
More effective 
with 
independent 
legal and media 
institutions. 
Financial 
development 
important. 
More effective in 
democracies. 
Yes. 
The effect 
of CBI on 
fiscal 
deficits is 
weaker in 
election 
years. 
Fiscal 
frameworks are 
influential. 
Stronger effect 
for countries in 
a currency 
union. 
 
 


13 
 
5. Some contemporary issues for central bank independence 
In spite of these benefits, there are issues that could threaten or impact the characteristics of 
central bank independence. These include political threats to CBI, the scope of central bank 
mandates, funding arrangements, dissatisfaction with central bank responses to the Covid-19 
pandemic, and the relationship between monetary and fiscal policies. 
5.1  Threats from overt political pressures 
The status of independent central banks has come under threat from political movements that 
are discontent with the status quo. Goodhart and Lastra (2018a, p50) suggest this threat is 
particularly acute when democratically elected politicians try to remove the “checks and 
balances” generally applied in a democracy. During the 2017 and 2022 French Presidential 
campaigns, the candidate for the National Rally Party (Marine Le Pen) was advocating changes 
to the policy decision making processes and institutions that were interpreted as a threat to the 
independence of the Banque de France.38 Criticism over timing of response to the post-
pandemic inflation prompted an unusually explicit threat by Pierre Poilievre, leader of the 
Conservative Party of Canada and of the Parliamentary Official Opposition, to remove the 
Governor of the Central Bank of Canada if elected.39 During the 2016 USA Presidential 
campaign the Republican candidate (Donald Trump) publicly criticised the then Federal 
Reserve Chair. As President, he launched a series of public criticisms of the decisions of the 
Federal Reserve as he embarked on an expansionary fiscal programme.40  
The independence of central banks in these countries has to date survived these threats, but this 
is not the case in Turkey. The coalition Government formed after the 2002 elections and led by 
Prime Minister Erdoğan (and later President) started to lose support after the GFC. As the 
economic situation deteriorated and democratic processes were eroded, and as the costs of 
losing power increased, pressure came on the Central Bank of Turkey by the President and his 
Government to lower interest rates.41 Having repeatedly stated his belief that high interest rates 
cause inflation, the President dismissed two central bank governors. Under the new Governor 
Kavcioğlu, successive interest rate cuts were implemented. Annual inflation soared to 85.5 per 
cent by October 2022, and the value of the Turkish lira plummeted.42   
The events in Turkey illustrate how central bank monetary policy decisions can be vulnerable 
to political pressure. The ultimate outcome in Turkey is extreme. Nevertheless, even in 
                                                          
38 Goodhart & Lastra (2018a, p58). 
39 Rutter (2022). 
40 In 2018 he remarked that the Federal Reserve is “my biggest threat…Because the Fed is raising rates too fast. And it’s 
independent…” Cited from “Trump says Fed is his 'biggest threat' because it is raising rates too fast” (cnbc.com). 
41 Demiralp & Demiralp (2019) discuss and analyse the erosion of democratic processes and systematic pressure placed on the 
Central Bank of Turkey. They find that commentaries from the President and Cabinet Ministers advocating a lower policy 
interest rate had a significant influence on the Bank of Turkey’s policy reaction function.  
42 Based on official statistics. By April 2023 the rate had reduced to 43.68 per cent. In the early 2000s, under CBI, annual 
inflation in Turkey fell from between 60 and 105 per cent to below 10 per cent. Evidently two factors are helping prevent a 
more severe currency crisis following the interest rate reductions and soaring inflation: an influx of funds from Russian 
depositors unable to deposit in other countries, and the government is seeking large transfers from Arab nations (Hardie, 
2022). 


14 
 
countries where there is overt political support for central bank independence, there can be 
insidious developments that have implications for the nature of central bank independence. 
5.2  Deteriorating macroeconomic performance and central bank reputations 
Favourable macroeconomic conditions may have helped build a constituency of support for 
CBI and inflation targeting in the early decades, but those conditions have been less favourable 
since the GFC. While the GFC temporarily increased macroeconomic volatility in many 
countries, inflation was contained. However, macroeconomic volatility increased even more 
abruptly during the pandemic era. This is illustrated by Figure 3 which extends Figure 2. Output 
volatility surged in 2020, and a surge of inflation volatility soon followed. Macroeconomic 
volatility reached levels not previously experienced in the era of central bank independence.  
The Covid-19 pandemic posed unprecedented challenges for governments and central banks. 
In a review of the Australian Government’s policy responses, Borland (2023, p66) suggests the 
defining characteristic of the pandemic is “huge and ongoing uncertainty”: There was 
uncertainty over the epidemiological features of the virus, its impact on peoples’ health, how 
society would respond to government health mandates, the frequency and duration of those 
mandates, how the financial system would react, and the effectiveness of unique fiscal 
measures introduced to buttress economies. Initial forecasts for economies were dire.43  
Figure 3: Macroeconomic volatility from the “Great Moderation” to Pandemic, OECD 
  
  
Notes: Author’s calculations using OECD data. Each data point is the final year of five-year moving average standard 
deviation for the average of OECD countries’ annual inflation and real GDP growth.   
                                                          
43 For example, the Secretary to the Australian Treasury remarked in 2020 that in forecasting the effects of the pandemic, falls 
in Australian GDP of 20 per cent were being “seriously contemplated.” (Kennedy, 2020). Another example of the degree of 
uncertainty was the reaction of equity markets. The percentage falls in the S&P500 index on 12 and 16 March 2020 were 
similar to the falls on 28 October and 8 November 1929 (Hawkesby, 2020, p7). 


15 
 
Central banks were faced with unique circumstances and enacted unprecedented policy 
responses. There are variations in the particular features of monetary policy instruments used 
but overall, they were aimed to lower interest rates and keep them lower, stabilise financial 
markets and support the flow of credit.44 Fiscal measures to support employment and household 
incomes were effective and labour markets proved more adaptable than expected, helping to 
support household incomes.45 Asset prices surged, further supporting aggregate demand. The 
uncertainties of the pandemic were compounded by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in February 
2022 further disrupting supply-chains causing higher energy and food prices globally. As a 
result of an unexpectedly strong rebound of aggregate demand, enduring disruptions to supply-
chains and commodity price rises, inflation rose quickly to rates not experienced for 30 years 
in many countries. 
Central banks have been widely criticised for their responses to these events.46 Ex post 
assessments of performance during unusual periods like this are important for accountability 
and insights to guide future policy.47 There have been some attempts to evaluate central bank 
decisions, but they have been partial only. It is not sufficient to assess monetary policy 
decisions solely on the basis of how policy interest rates compare with estimates of “neutral” 
policy rates as some critics have done. Nor is it sufficient to simply identify demand-induced 
and supply-induced contributions to inflation to assess the impact of monetary policy and fiscal 
policy.48 A robust assessment requires taking account of central bank mandates and the trade-
offs required to sustain price stability over the short and medium terms, the information 
available at the time decisions were made, including knowledge of the scope and effects of 
government fiscal and health responses, as well as the efficacy of the policy responses.  
The perception of the performance of central banks during this period will have a bearing on 
the tolerance for central bank independence. If central banks are to retain public confidence in 
their independent status, it is important they respond to criticism and promote research that 
identifies behavioural responses to monetary policy during the pandemic. This work should 
evaluate the design and scope of policy initiatives including the size of policy rate cuts, the 
duration and specification of forward guidance, the design and scope of quantitative easing and 
other measures introduced to support the funding and liquidity of financial institutions, and the 
timing of policy reversals. Insights from this research can help central banks adapt their 
                                                          
44 The unique economic circumstances and considerable uncertainties faced by central banks during the outbreak of Covid-19 
and the policy responses and thinking behind those responses are discussed in various central bank speeches and papers 
such as for example Orr (2020) and Debelle (2020b) for small open economies, and for the USA see Clarida, et al. (2021). 
45 Although the comparison of US and UK policies by Tenreyro (2021) illustrates there were significant difference among 
countries in the characteristics of the fiscal measures and the resultant employment outcomes.   
46 For example, Rogoff (2022) has criticised the timing of the US Federal Reserve Board’s increase in interest rates and 
curtailing of quantitative easing. Wheeler & Wilkinson (2022) claim that central banks became complacent about their 
ability to maintain low inflation and are critical of the delays reversing accommodative monetary policies. Borio (2023) 
suggests central banks initially underestimated the strength and persistence of inflationary pressures.  
47 An example of the benefits of ex post reviews is the evaluation of Australian fiscal policy during the Covid-19 pandemic is 
available in Borland (2023).  
48 Shapiro (2020 and 2022) for example, identifies demand and supply shocks to inflation by classifying demand-induced 
components of inflation as those where an unexpected change in price moves in the same direction as the unexpected change 
in quantity in a given month; supply-induced components are identified as those where unexpected changes in price and 
quantity move in opposite directions. The New Zealand Treasury (2023) and Reserve Bank of Australia (2023) have 
replicated this approach using New Zealand and Australian data respectively. Some critics have used this type of 
decomposition to judge the performance of fiscal and monetary policies during the pandemic era. 


16 
 
decision processes to be better prepared for future events that threaten inflation and 
macroeconomic stability. This is particularly so for complex events like the pandemic, that 
impact the supply-side of economies (production and labour markets.)49 Some central banks 
have started this process and have acknowledged mistakes in timing, magnitude and duration 
of their policy responses during the pandemic.50  
5.3 Implications of state-dependency of inflation dynamics for policy strategy  
One of the criticisms of central banks during the pandemic is they were slow to react to 
emerging signs of inflation after the pandemic and many expected inflation impulses from 
supply-chain disruptions would be temporary (or transient). One reason suggested for this is 
that central banks’ views of inflation dynamics were conditioned by the post-GFC years.51 This 
earlier period was dominated by persistent low inflation, frequent occurrence of inflation 
falling below target bands and fear of disinflation.52 Instead of acting to pre-empt inflation, 
some central banks signalled during the early stages of the pandemic they would wait until 
inflation had clearly materialized before taking action.53  
Research in the 1980s and 1990s produced insights suggesting inflation dynamics may be 
‘state-dependent’. For example, research revealed asymmetric pricing behaviour that was 
systematically related to inflation. One reasons for this is that if it is costly to change price, 
firms will delay changes until the private benefits outweigh the private costs. As inflation rises, 
the net benefit to firms of raising prices increases.54 The consequence is that firms raise prices 
more frequently as inflation rises, thereby changing the dynamics of inflation.   
The more recent idea of ‘rational inattention’ proposed by Sims (2003) is another reason 
inflation dynamics could be state-dependent. The idea of is that people cannot process all 
available information, but they can choose which exact pieces of information to attend to. In 
the context of price-setting and the formation of inflation expectations, it could be rational to 
pay more attention to inflation when it is high than when it is low. This implies inflation 
expectations and therefore wage and price setting behaviour could be more responsive to 
                                                          
49 This type of challenge is not new. Central banks struggled to understand the reasons for persistent low inflation and 
undershooting of inflation targets during the decade following the GFC.  
50 Examples are Reserve Bank of New Zealand, 2022; Kashkari, 2023. The recent review of the Reserve Bank of Australia 
(Australian Government, 2023) assessed the monetary policy framework, decision-making processes, use of macroeconomic 
models, and forecasting methods and has made sweeping recommendations. 
51 For example, Brunnermeier (2023).  
52 The persistence of very low inflation and the challenges this posed for inflation targeting central banks is discussed in Tarullo 
(2017), Constancio (2017), and Spencer (2017). This period prompted suggestions that inflation was a concern of the past 
and inflation targeting and CBI was no longer relevant, a suggestion that has been refuted by several, including Draghi 
(2018).  
53 Most notably the Federal Reserve Board (FRB) and the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA). The FRB approved a new policy 
framework on 27 August 2020 with the Statement on Longer-Run Goals and Monetary Policy Strategy. This included five 
elements including one stating “The Committee expects to delay liftoff from the ELB until PCE inflation has risen to 2 
percent on an annual basis and other complimentary conditions, consistent with achieving this goal on a sustained basis and 
to be discussed later, are met.” The statement includes other elements suggesting monetary policy would remain 
accommodative for some time (Clarida, 2022). The RBA initially provided state-dependent forward guidance in March 
2020, stating that “The Board will not increase the cash rate target until progress is being made towards full employment 
and it is confident that inflation will be sustainably within the 2–3 per cent target band.” The RBA added a time-dependent 
component in October 2020 and November 2020, and reiterated this in February 2021 by indicating a time horizon of 3 
years over which the cash rate would be unlikely to change (Australian Government, 2023, pp 41-42).  
54 Some of the theoretical and empirical literature is contained in Sheshinski & Weiss (1993). See also Ball & Mankiw (1994). 
An example of empirical evidence that the frequency of price rises increases with inflation is in Buckle & Carlson (2000).  


17 
 
inflation as it rises.55 An implication for monetary policy is that while it may be desirable in 
some circumstances to tolerate moderate deviations from inflation targets, pre-emptive 
monetary policy becomes more important as the risk of transition to high-inflation increases.56  
A further body of emerging research examining the pandemic era of inflation in the USA 
suggests it may be important to pay particular attention to the initial source of inflation in order 
to understand the dynamics of inflation. Inflation pressures can arise from product or labour 
markets, and the ultimate nature of the inflation dynamics can depend on where the original 
source of inflation pressure arose, the duration of that pressure, how product and labour markets 
interact, and how expectations are formed.57   
The fact inflation dynamics, including expectations, can be state-dependent is likely to be 
relevant to the way monetary policy forward guidance instruments should be applied and the 
selection of the appropriate monetary policy strategy. When unique events like the Covid-19 
pandemic occur, using long-duration time-dependent forward guidance could be problematic. 
This type of policy strategy could ultimately undermine central bank credibility if the dynamics 
of inflation prove to be different to what the central bank assumed. This is another issue central 
banks should evaluate when assessing their responses to the pandemic. 
5.4 The scope of central bank monetary policy mandates 
The expanding scope of central bank responsibilities in recent years has raised concern they 
have evolved to the point where there are too many objectives and conflicts of interest. Central 
bank monetary policy mandates are appropriately determined by governments, but as more 
objectives are included in mandates and more conditions are attached to those objectives, more 
trade-offs are involved.58 This can be particularly problematic if a central bank is expected to 
achieve a specific inflation objective but also contribute to less well-defined objectives. The 
recent review of the Reserve Bank of Australia highlighted risks created by broad central bank 
mandates. The review of monetary policy from 2016 to 2019 concluded that the vagueness of 
including “economic prosperity and welfare” in its mandate meant the Board could draw on 
many reasons outside the domain of monetary policy, for not lowering interest rates. This 
caused conflict with the Bank’s inflation and employment goals and the review recommended 
reducing the scope of the mandate.59  
Some possible implications of broad central bank mandates have been raised by Tucker (2018a, 
2018b). His concern is that decisions over trade-offs are based on moral judgements and are 
inherently political decisions. As mandates expand, a central bank will be drawn into a wider 
net of inherently political decisions that could threaten central bank independence. Without 
                                                          
55 Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2023a) shows the sensitivity of inflation expectations to current inflation has been increasing. 
56 Borio, et al. (2023). 
57 For example, Bernanke & Blanchard (2023). 
58 This concern has also been raised in the context of the growing tendency for central banks to undertake a financial regulatory 
and supervisory role. Lastra & Wood (1999) expressed concern that regulatory supervision independence would give bank 
supervisors to some extent “the coercive power of the state against private citizens.” Quintyn & Taylor (2002) consider this 
is a power that has no equivalent with independent monetary policy.  
59 Australian Government (2023). 


18 
 
clear objectives that can be measured and monitored in a transparent way, Tucker suggests an 
independent agency’s legitimacy would be precarious.  
A critical issue is the specification of the primary objectives of monetary policy. These vary 
among central banks.60 For many central banks the sole or dominant primary objective is 
inflation. Some central banks explicitly specify employment stabilisation as a secondary 
objective conditional on not compromising their primary objective of price stability.61 A few 
central banks have dual primary objectives: an employment related objective coupled with 
price stability.62 
Efforts to resolve the optimal specification of monetary policy objectives using stylised models 
suggest that it may be welfare enhancing to have at least some weighting on resource utilisation 
objectives (employment, unemployment rate, or the output gap) in addition to inflation. 
However, conclusions are mixed: some papers conclude that any weight on employment 
contributes very little to welfare; some find that under certain conditions it is optimal to put 
some weight on a resource utilisation objective.63 This research highlights the importance of 
the type of shocks and preferences for stabilising inflation. In response to demand shocks for 
example, some models show that monetary policy can stabilise the welfare-relevant resource 
utilisation gap by focussing on the inflation objective, with only mild improvements to welfare 
if the central bank additionally targets resource utilisation.64 It can also be important to 
differentiate between the types of supply shocks.65 
Other considerations are important. One is the way expectations are formed. Theoretical model 
evaluations of optimal specifications often assume agents form model consistent expectations 
and implicitly assume agents believe inflation will converge to the target rate. If this condition 
does not hold, and expectations are formed adaptively, policies that put weight on optimising 
a measure of resource utilisation run a risk that higher inflation will persist longer and 
undermine a central bank’s credibility to achieve low inflation.66 This in turn affects the trade-
off between inflation and resource utilisation objectives.  
Another issue is optimal policy assignment. Even if monetary policy can mitigate to some 
degree the adverse effects of supply shocks on resource utilisation, it may not be the optimal 
policy assignment. Regulatory policies or targeted fiscal measures, may be more efficient. The 
                                                          
60 See Wadsworth (2017), Archer (2009). 
61 For example, Bank of England, Bank of Canada, Sveriges Riksbank, Norges Bank, and the European Central Bank. 
62 Notably the US Federal Reserve and Reserve Bank of Australia, whose legislation pre-dates formal inflation targeting. The 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand originally had a sole primary objective of price stability. This changed in December 2018 
when legislation introduced in addition to price stability, the objective of supporting maximum sustainable employment.  
63 For a more extensive discussion of these issues see Rotemberg & Woodford (1997), Clarida, et al. (1999), Blanchard & 
Galí, (2007), Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2023b), Jacob & Ӧzbilgin (2021). 
64 See for instance, Clarida, et al. (1999), Blanchard & Galí, (2007), Jacob & Ӧzbilgin (2021). Typically, these papers consider 
the implications for representative households and firms and not potential differences between different types of firms and 
households. In principle, a demand shock generating this “divine coincidence” property may not be “divine” for all sectors. 
But monetary policy instruments are typically not designed to differentiate between sectors and hence it is often more 
efficient to deal with adverse effects of demand shocks for some sectors using other (fiscal or labour) policies.  
65 For example, Jacob & Ӧzbilgin (2021) find that in the presence of significant cost-push shocks to price and wage inflation, 
welfare is enhanced when the central bank focusses solely on stabilising inflation. 
66 Orphanides & Williams (2005a) evaluate related issues.  


19 
 
use of various forms of fiscal measures deployed by governments to mitigate the impact of the 
Covid-19 pandemic on employment and household incomes is an illustration.  
A further issue is measurement accuracy. Insights from organisational theory suggest the 
determination of weights assigned to objectives should be based on measurement accuracy: 
more accurately measured objectives should be weighted more heavily.67 This is consistent 
with research showing that the chances of policy mistakes due to poorly measured objectives 
are reduced if greater weight is placed on more accurately measured objectives.68 The rate of 
inflation is generally able to be measured more accurately than employment or output at the 
time monetary policy decisions are made. This implies that in a mandate that includes inflation 
and resource utilisation objectives, the inflation objective should be weighted more heavily, or 
a lexicographic ordering would be appropriate, requiring the central bank to achieve its 
inflation objective first, and pursue its other objective(s) subject to achieving this.69   
Adding objectives to central bank mandates that are not best dealt with by monetary policy 
risks undermining the credibility of a central bank and diluting the case for independence. 
These considerations together with measurement issues, imply central bank mandates should 
put greater weight on price stability than on resource utilisation objectives. Although optimal 
monetary policy objectives may be shock dependent, central banks cannot shift from one 
monetary framework to another without risking credibility. This implies it would be 
appropriate to choose a framework or ordering of objectives for all regimes.70 The importance 
of maintaining low inflation and central bank credibility in order to maximise the contribution 
of monetary policy to well-being, together with uncertainty over measurement of the maximum 
level of employment, are reasons the Canadian Government retained low and stable inflation 
as the primary objective of the Bank of Canada.71  
5.5 Monetary policy mandates and ‘secondary objectives’ 
It is common to find mandates where primary objectives are subject to secondary objectives. 
These are intended to impose conditions on how a central bank applies monetary policy 
instruments, or to provide a signal to the public of the intentions of monetary policy.  
For example, consider a secondary condition that requires a central bank to adopt a medium-
term perspective toward the achievement of inflation targets. This provides legitimacy for a 
central bank to adopt a flexible approach to inflation targeting and to “look through” events 
expected to have a temporary impact on inflation. Similarly, conditions pertaining to the 
volatility of interest rates and exchange rates could be viewed as encouraging a medium-term 
approach to targeting objectives. On the other hand, restrictions on variables such as interest 
rates and exchange rates that are important in the transmission of monetary policy, have the 
                                                          
67 Coleman & Dasgupta (2023). Also relevant to the weighting scheme is the extent to which the behaviour of the objectives 
is correlated. The degree of correlation will depend on the nature of the shocks.   
68 Orphanides & Williams (2005b). 
69 A lexicographic ordering is applied by the Bank of England. Similarly, price stability is the primary objective of monetary 
policy for the Bank of Canada, Norges Bank and the European Central Bank, and consideration of employment is 
conditioned by the ability to satisfy the primary objective. 
70 Rajan (2023).   
71 Government of Canada (2021). 


20 
 
potential to limit the discretion over the scope of the use of policy instruments in pursuit of the 
primary objectives. They may also pose a risk that the public expects the central bank to have 
responsibility for the behaviour of economic variables it is not equipped to influence with any 
accuracy or in a sustained way. It is also common for mandates to require central banks to 
consider the implications of monetary policy for financial stability. Although this makes 
explicit what monetary policy committees should consider during their policy deliberations, 
there could be a risk the public interprets this as requiring monetary policy committees to have 
much broader responsibilities.72 
There are some secondary conditions that pose more serious risks for central bank credibility. 
For example, some central banks (e.g., Bank of England and the European Central Bank) have 
explicit secondary objectives incorporating an element of environmental responsibility. These 
are not objectives that monetary policy instruments are designed to influence effectively. They 
may risk raising public expectations about the role of monetary policy and dilute the case for 
central bank independence. Central bank monetary policy committees should be tasked with 
focussing on what is critical to achieving their primary objective(s) and managing the trade-
offs appropriate to the primary objectives and for which it has suitable policy instruments.    
5.6  Operational independence and alternative monetary policy instruments 
Following a long period of declining interest rates, the use of policy interest rates during the 
Covid-19 pandemic was perceived to be constrained by their effective lower bound. There are 
several policy instruments available when policy rates are close to their effective lower 
bound.73 Moderately negative interest rate policy (NIRP) was widely considered, particularly 
in light of the experience using NIRP in a few countries.74 There were however, concerns over 
institutional (and sometimes legal) constraints and uncertainty over how financial systems 
would cope with negative rates. Central banks therefore chose to use quantitative intervention 
measures, supported by forward guidance, to reduce interest rates, influence yield curves, and 
provide liquidity to the financial sector, to try to achieve their mandates.75 This increased the 
size of their balance sheets, as illustrated by Figure 4.  
The measures taken during the pandemic built on and went beyond those employed in the GFC, 
including non-conventional liquidity support to financial firms, as well as large-scale purchases 
                                                          
72 This concern has been raised by Goodhart & Lastra (2018b) in the context of the growing tendency for central banks to 
undertake financial regulatory and supervisory roles in addition to the traditional monetary policy role. 
73 Alternative policy instruments are discussed by Lilley & Rogoff (2019) and include raising inflation targets, counter-cyclical 
fiscal policy, “helicopter money”, negative interest rate policy (NIRP), and forward guidance on interest rates. 
74 Negative interest rates were used from 2012 in Europe, Denmark, Sweden, Switzerland and Japan. Reviews by The World 
Bank (Arteta, et al., 2016) and IMF (Brandão-Marques, et al., 2021) conclude NIRP in these countries supported demand 
and influenced exchange rates in ways similar to conventional interest rate cuts. Prior concern about the consequences for 
bank profitability, excessive risk taking, and financial instability did not eventuate materially, although they acknowledge 
these effects could become more evident if rates were substantially negative or used for longer periods. These reviews 
stressed the effects of NIRP and extent they can be deepened are likely to depend on the structure of financial systems. 
Banks and banking systems more reliant on retail-oriented deposit funding for instance, could be more vulnerable to negative 
interest rates. 
75 Covid-19 initially triggered a rise in demand for liquidity. In addition to their monetary policy decisions, central banks with 
financial stability responsibilities bought bonds on secondary markets to improve liquidity and mitigate risks to financial 
stability. For example, see Hawkesby (2020). 


21 
 
of government securities under quantitative easing.76 The expansion of central bank assets was 
larger in advanced economies where quantitative easing programs caused balance sheet 
expansion relative to emerging market and low-income countries, where financial sector 
support was more important.77 Central banks typically funded these purchases of government 
bonds by increasing interest-bearing liabilities, in particular deposits (reserves) held by 
financial institutions and often remunerated based on the policy interest rate.78 While this 
process will increase base-money, the principal influence is via a change in interest rates.79 
Bond purchases on secondary markets amounts to transferring risk from private investors and 
financial institutions onto central bank balance sheets, and therefore also the consolidated 
central government balance sheet. This process can therefore increase the risk to central bank 
equity and therefore to operational independence and credibility.80 The risks to the central bank 
will depend on political tolerance for equity losses, market perception of their impact, on a 
central bank’s capital structure, and on loss compensation arrangements with Government. 
Figure 4: Central Bank balance sheets, 2000 to 2021: 
Total assets as percentage of GDP for 27 advanced economies 
 
Notes: Data for Figure 3 was provided by the authors of Bell, et al. (2023) and is a recreation of Graph 1A, p1 in their paper. 
                                                          
76 Hooley, et al. (2023, p7), who also report that only a few central banks provided direct support to the non-financial sector, 
and for those that did, the size of support was relatively small in most cases. 
77 Bullock (2022) discusses reasons for choosing quantitative easing during the pandemic, including a summary of the 
macroeconomic effects and issues relevant to assessing the impact on the Australian Government’s fiscal position. See also 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2022).   
78 Debelle (2020a) and Hawkesby (2020) discuss in detail how the RBNZ and RBA balance sheets changed during the 
pandemic, and how deposits of financial institutions at the central banks are remunerated. 
79 See for example Silk (2022), Broadbent (2023). 
80 The financial risks considered here are those that could potentially influence the choice of monetary policy instrument. They 
do not relate to a central bank’s operational budget. The fiscal risks referred to are limited to the direct effects on the central 
bank and therefore consolidated government balance sheet. There can be other “quasi-fiscal” risks arising from arising from 
the effect of quantitative easing on the market for public debt and the efficiency government bond programmes (see Hooley, 
et al. 2023) 


22 
 
The financial risk to central bank equity arises from the possibility bond purchases may 
ultimately result in a central bank incurring net interest income losses. A central bank’s 
holdings of bonds involve fixed interest earnings. If, at a later date, market and policy interest 
rates rise, interest paid on the stock liabilities on its balance sheet created to finance quantitative 
easing will also rise, resulting in reduced net interest earnings or losses for the central bank.  
The market value of central bank assets also declines with rising bond yields. This also reduces 
profits of central banks that sell bonds at the lower market value, or that continue to hold bonds 
and recognise their decline in the market value when calculating net profits. Some central banks 
(Bank of England, Bank of Canada, RBA and RBNZ) value their bond holdings based on 
market values and recognise the decline in value as bond yields rise.81 The impact of net interest 
rate and market valuation losses on central bank equity will depend on the size and duration of 
bond holdings and size of the interest rate differential. They also depend on income recognition, 
rules governing distribution of central bank net income and interest rate risk transfer 
agreements with the fiscal authority. These conventions and rules vary among central banks.82 
While the primary purpose of monetary policy is the efficient pursuit of the central bank’s 
mandate rather than maximising profits from bond trading, risks associated with quantitative 
easing and bond holdings can have fiscal consequences.83 Therefore, large or sustained 
operating losses and negative equity can be politically sensitive and may influence public 
confidence in central bank operations. There may also be financial market confidence effects 
and perceptions that income and equity losses affect the scope of central bank monetary policy 
decisions and tolerance for risk (e.g., associated with quantitative easing).84  
When there is uncertainty about how central bank losses will be dealt with, misperceptions can 
arise and erode central bank credibility.85 Accordingly, some central banks are compensated 
for losses by indemnity arrangements with the fiscal authority.86 Some central banks view 
indemnities as irrelevant from the perspective of the overall public sector balance sheet and 
consider they could even reduce policy effectiveness if dependence on indemnities negotiated 
with government weakens actual or even perceptions of CBI. Some central banks therefore 
hold financial buffers or additional capital to finance potential net interest losses.87 Some rely 
                                                          
81 Many central banks (including the Federal Reserve, European Central Bank, and Bank of Japan) value them at the amortized 
value and do not recognise unrealised profits or losses because they anticipate holding them to maturity (Hooley, et al., 
2023). 
82 Bell, et al. (2023, p4) note that in advanced economies, historically the net income of central banks has been a modest source 
of government revenue. But this can vary over time. When policy rates were continuously low following the GFC from 
2010 to 2019, central bank income and corresponding transfers to government were relatively large. However, during the 
pandemic period, net interest losses for several central banks have led to smaller transfers to the fiscal authority or none at 
all, and in some cases probably for years to come (See Chart 1D, p1). 
83 Unlike commercial businesses, central banks are not at risk of insolvency because they are typically protected from court-
ordered bankruptcy, and are underwritten by government. Moreover, central banks have the ability to create “base money” 
to finance operations. There are limits to the scope to generate their own funding despite a monopoly over base money 
creation, because there is a limit to the demand for liquidity, and because the extent of the recourse to seigniorage required 
to safeguard a central bank’s solvency might be of a scale that could undermine monetary policy objectives (Buiter, 2008; 
Reis, 2013). 
84 These and other risks are reviewed and discussed by Nordström & Vredin (2022). 
85 Bell, et al. (2023). 
86 For example, the Bank of England is fully indemnified by UK Treasury via its subsidiary the Asset Purchase Facility. The 
RBNZ and Bank of Canada have indemnity agreements for specific operations without a subsidiary. At present these are 
negotiated on a case-by-case basis which does not necessarily imply that indemnity will be provided in every situation. 
87 Archer & Moser-Boehm (2013). 


23 
 
on their ability to operate with negative equity to manage losses should they arise and have 
been able to continue to operate effectively during extended periods of negative equity.88  
There are trade-offs associated with these different approaches. Provision by government of 
sufficient capital to cover a broad range of contingencies to reduce the likelihood a central bank 
will have to rely on negative equity, and risk adverse effects on credibility, provides operational 
independence up to the limit of the capital. Tolerance for negative equity arising from policy 
actions required to achieve the monetary policy mandate is nevertheless an important 
component. Indemnity agreements may help protect operational credibility. These make 
explicit the costs to the fiscal authority which enhances transparency. Reliance on negotiating 
an indemnity agreement during a monetary crisis risks limiting the independence of a central 
bank’s choice and scope to use policy instruments. Therefore, where indemnities are 
considered necessary, it is probably preferable they are pre-negotiated and have broad coverage 
across instruments so as not to constrain a central bank’s choice of instrument.  
Because of the fiscal risks, governments may want to impose a degree of constraint on the 
extent of funding to cover the potential financial costs associated with quantitative easing. This 
could be in the form of limiting the amount of capital allocated or that can be accumulated, the 
tolerance for negative equity, or via the way indemnity agreements are specified. Nevertheless, 
there is an uneasy trade-off involved protecting the government’s fiscal position on the one 
hand, and potentially impinging on the operational independence of central banks on the other 
hand. This trade-off arises from constraints on the use of conventional interest rate policy in a 
low interest environment and the effective lower bound of policy rates.  
Quantitative easing as a monetary policy instrument poses a range of reputational risks for 
central banks and should ideally only be undertaken in the event traditional interest rate 
instruments are compromised, and if monetary policy is the appropriate policy instrument. As 
with decisions over policy interest rates, the use of alternative monetary policy instruments 
should be accompanied by strong accountability requirements to ensure robust decision-
making. These requirements include publication of principles to guide the use of these 
instruments.89 A careful assessment of the expected benefits as well as the fiscal costs is also 
important because while there are potential fiscal costs to quantitative easing, there are also 
potential fiscal benefits. These benefits include lower costs of public debt and, to the extent the 
measures support aggregate economic activity, they could increase government net taxes. 
Although fiscal costs and benefits have offsetting effects in consolidated government balance 
sheets, only the fiscal costs of interest rate losses land on central bank balance sheets.  
Quantitative easing is used to reduce interest rates, and therefore it might be argued there is a 
‘coincidence of desires’ between governing politicians and central bankers, and little need to 
be concerned with independence. However, there can still be conflicts of interest over the 
                                                          
88 See Archer & Moser-Boehm (2013), Bell, et al. (2023). The RBA for example, does not rely on indemnities. Recent RBA 
losses (including unrealised mark-to-market valuation losses) have been partially funded by drawing on reserve funds 
accumulated from previous retained profits and by moving into negative equity. The RBA is able to continue to operate via 
its ability to create base money, and has indicated to Government it expects future profits will be retained until its capital is 
restored (Bullock, 2022). 
89 An example is Kengmana (2021). 


24 
 
extent of interest rate reductions and influences on yield curves. These would be more acute 
when governments are increasing spending and borrowing. There may be conflicts over the 
duration of monetary stimulus, and particularly the timing vis-a-vis general elections. There 
could be conflicts of interest over the form of monetary stimulus. Quantitative easing involving 
the purchase of private assets (e.g., equities) have direct resource allocation implications, can 
involve a potential subsidy if purchased at prices above market value, and have direct wealth 
distributional effects. This type of credit easing would involve central bankers making 
inherently political trade-offs and are more appropriately fiscal decisions.  
5.7  Fiscal and monetary policy coordination and risks of fiscal dominance 
The conventional wisdom that emerged as CBI spread globally and inflation declined, was that 
macroeconomic stabilisation and inflation targeting should be the responsibility of monetary 
policy while fiscal policy was considered more appropriate for structural economic priorities.90 
It was recognised there could be circumstances where fiscal policy might be more effective, 
such as when monetary policy was compromised by a “liquidity trap” situation or when interest 
rates are at their effective lower bound.91 Nevertheless, the early decades of central bank 
independence were characterised by “monetary dominance” of stabilisation policy.  
The features of the pandemic, notably the health impact on labour supply, meant fiscal policy 
was more efficient at supporting employment and the incomes of vulnerable households and 
businesses.92 Monetary policy had a role to play maintaining financial stability and supporting 
aggregate demand. However, there was a sense of having to respond quickly and have “all 
hands to the pump”.93 The pandemic warranted a degree of policy coordination for which 
central banks and fiscal authorities were not adequately prepared. This raises the question 
whether there should be more coordination of fiscal and monetary policy in some 
circumstances.94 What are those circumstances? What are the risks to central bank operational 
independence? How can those risks be mitigated? A central bank cannot dictate what the fiscal 
response to events should be, although it can explain its policy options and what its response 
would be in various circumstances, consistent with its legal mandate.   
 
 
                                                          
90 There were several arguments against the active use of fiscal policy for macroeconomic stabilisation, including potential 
offsetting private behaviour, implementation lags generating pro-cyclical effects and accentuating cycles, incentives of 
politicians and time-inconsistent discretionary fiscal policy. These are perennial issues (Alesina, 2000; Barker, et al., 2008; 
Brook, 2013; De Haan & Gootjes, 2023).  
91 Krugman (2005), De Long & Tyson (2013). 
92 In the United States for example, the federal government provided large and highly concentrated support in the form of 
“stimulus checks” sent directly to households (Brunnermeier, 2023). The fiscal support programme implemented in 
Australia is discussed in detail in Boland (2023). 
93 The fact there was a combination of fiscal and monetary responses provoked suggestions that a form of “fiscal dominance” 
was at play. For example, Lingle (2021) described central bank responses to the GFC and the Covid-19 pandemic as 
indicating they were becoming a “handmaiden to profligate fiscal policy.” In contrast, Haldane’s (2020, p17) interpretation 
of the circumstances in the UK is that the combination of fiscal and monetary responses did not imply “one policy driving 
the other, much less of monetary financing of government deficits”. 
94 This point has also been made by the review of the Reserve Bank of Australia (Australian Government, 2023) which suggests 
there should be increased joint work between Treasury and RBA on the relative roles of fiscal and monetary policy. 
 


25 
 
These questions need resolving. How they are resolved could have important implications for 
central bank operational autonomy. While the empirical evidence reviewed in Section 4.4 
indicates central bank independence has, in general, lead to smaller fiscal deficits, the exception 
tends to hold during election years. Despite central bank independence, fiscal policy has tended 
to be more expansionary during election years. This suggests the intensity of political interests 
could vary over the political cycle and impede efficient coordination. This was a factor that 
motivated transferring responsibility for monetary policy to independent central banks.   
The incentives for governments to put pressure on central banks to moderate interest rates and 
reduce the cost of servicing public debt have risen in recent years. Government debt ratios have 
been rising over the last two decades. Figure 5 illustrates gross general government debt as a 
per cent of nominal GDP per year for the total OECD and for a selection of OECD countries, 
from 1995 to 2022. As mentioned in Section 3, the public debt environment during the first 
two decades of central bank independence was conducive to enabling “monetary dominance”. 
Debt levels were not so pressing to induce political pressure on central banks to lower rates 
and support lower service costs of public debt. This changed during the GFC and the years that 
followed, and during the pandemic era. There are countries with public debt ratio trends that 
are exceptions to that for the whole of the OECD but overall, incentives for politicians to 
pressure central banks to adopt more accommodating interest rate policies have increased. 
Figure 5: Gross general government debt ratios: OECD countries, 1995 to 2022 
 
 
Notes: Data from OECD (2023) General government debt (indicator) doi: 10.1787/a0528cc2-en (Accessed on 25 May 2023). 
The data are gross debt of general government as a percentage of GDP. Debt is the sum of the following liability categories 
(as applicable): currency and deposits; debt securities, loans; insurance, pensions and standardised guarantee schemes, and 
other accounts payable.  


26 
 
Moreover, despite some debt reduction in 2022, the prospect is for debt ratios to rise further in 
the near term. The OECD (2023) expects debt levels of developed economies to increase 
slightly in 2023 as many countries aim to protect households and businesses from rising prices 
and as debt servicing costs increase. The current geopolitical environment is adding further 
uncertainty over future government funding needs. The OECD reports that developing 
economies also have historically high levels of debt and a challenging funding environment. 
The combination of high inflation, high nominal interest rates and high public debt levels was 
a lethal combination for monetary policy to contend with during the 1970s and 1980s. Similar 
circumstances could arise if central banks struggle to contain the post-pandemic inflation or 
central bank independence comes under political pressure. 
There are important reasons to consider improvements to the assignment of fiscal and monetary 
policies in response to destabilising events. However, higher public debt levels increase the 
risk of “fiscal dominance” and higher inflation highlighted by Sargent and Wallace (1984) and 
reiterated by Leeper (2023). This risk can come through pressures on central banks to reduce 
interest rates and public debt servicing costs or via pressure to monetise debt.  
6. Conclusion 
Central bank independence spread globally after the 1980s and has become a critical foundation 
for credible monetary policy and sustained low inflation. Other benefits accruing from CBI, 
include improved financial stability and lower fiscal deficits outside election years. There are 
qualifications to these conclusions. The effects of CBI can vary by type of political 
environment, the economic characteristics of countries, and the presence of other economic 
policy frameworks such as fiscal frameworks and currency regimes.  
Despite these benefits, challenges to central bank independence have emerged. The main 
characteristics and legislated limits to central bank independence include objectives (mandates) 
and conditions pertaining to objectives, and accountability and transparency requirements. The 
most critical aspect of central bank independence is discretion over the choice and operation of 
monetary policy instruments in pursuit of the legislated objectives. This paper suggests there 
are intersections between legislated objectives and operational independence that could have 
implications for central bank independence and the political acceptability of CBI. These 
intersections involve expanding central bank mandates, conditions attached to the pursuit of 
primary objectives of monetary policy, and funding arrangements that could influence central 
bank independence over the choice and scope of alternative monetary policy instruments. 
Although there have been overt political threats to central bank independence, perhaps the more 
important challenge is how central banks respond to the criticisms that emerged from the 
extraordinarily difficult circumstances created by the Covid-19 pandemic, the Russian invasion 
of Ukraine, and the surge of inflation that followed. There are important lessons from this 
experience including the choice and application of policy instruments, the scope for improving 
fiscal and monetary policy coordination while protecting central bank operational 
independence, and insights into the dynamics of inflation. How central banks respond to this 


27 
 
experience and the insights will influence the acceptability of central bank independence and 
the determination of monetary policy. 
 
References 
Acemoglu, D., Johnson, S., Querubin, P., & Robinson, J. A. (2008) When does reform work? The case of central bank 
independence. Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, Spring: 351-429. 
Alesina, A. (1988) Macroeconomics and Politics. NBER Macroeconomics Annual, 3: 13–52. 
Alesina, A. (2000) The political economy of the budget surplus in the US. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 14: 3-19. 
Alesina, A., & Summers, L. H. (1993) Central bank independence and macroeconomic performance: Some comparative 
evidence. Journal of Money Credit and Banking, 25(2): 151-162. 
Andrieș, A. M., Podpiera, A. M., & Sprincean, N. (2022) Central bank Independence and systemic risk. International Journal 
of Central Banking, 18(1): 81–130  
Archer, D (2009) Roles and objectives of modern central banks. Chapter 2 in Issues in the Governance of Central Banks, Bank 
for International Settlements, pp 17-55.  
Archer, D., & Moser-Boehm, P. (2013) Central bank finances. Bank of International Settlements Papers, 71, April. 
Arnone, M., Laurens, B. J., & Segalotto, J-F. (2006) The measurement of central bank autonomy: survey of models, indicators 
and empirical evidence. IMF Working Papers, 06/227. 
Arnone, M., Laurens, B. J., Segalotto, J-F., & Sommer, N. (2009) Central bank autonomy: Lesson from global trends. IMF 
Staff Papers, 56: 263-296. 
Arteta, C., Kose, M. A., Stocker, M., & Taskin, T. (2016) Negative Interest Rate Policies: Sources and Implications. 
Washington, World Bank Policy Research Paper, August.  
Australian Government (2023) An RBA fit for the future. Commonwealth of Australia, March.  
Backus, D., & Driffill, J. (1985) Rational expectations and policy credibility following a policy change. The Review of 
Economic Studies, 52: 211-221. 
Bade, R., & Parkin, M. (1978) Central Bank Laws and Monetary Policies: A Preliminary Investigation. In Porter, M. (Ed.), 
The Australian Monetary System in the 1970s, Melbourne, Monash University. 
Ball, L., & Mankiw, N. G. (1994) Asymmetric price adjustment and economic fluctuations. Economic Journal 104: 247–261. 
Baltensperger, E. (1993) Central Bank policy and lending of last resort. In Bruni, F. (Ed.), Prudential regulation, supervision 
and monetary policy, Proceedings of a conference organised by the Paolo Baffi Center at Bocconi University, Milan, February.  
Barker, F., Buckle, R. A., & St Clair, R. (2008), Roles of fiscal policy in New Zealand. Treasury Working Paper 08/01, June, 
2008, pp. 42. https://treasury.govt.nz/publications/wp/roles-fiscal-policy-new-zealand-wp-08-02 
Barro, R. J., & Gordon, D. (1983) Rules, discretion and reputation in a model of monetary policy. Journal of Monetary 
Economics, 12: 101-121. 
Bell, S., Chui, M., Gomes, T., Moser-Boehm, P., & Tejada, A. P. (2023) Why are central banks reporting losses? Does it 
matter? Bank of International Settlements Bulletin, No 8, 7 February. 
Berger, W., & Kirsmer, F. (2013) Central bank independence and financial stability: A tale of perfect harmony? European 
Journal of Political Economy, 31: 109-118. 
Bernanke, B. S. (2004) The Great Moderation. Presentation at the meetings of the Eastern Economic Association, Washington, 
DC, February 20. 
Bernanke, B. S. (2010) Central bank independence, transparency, and accountability. Speech at the Institute for Monetary 
and Economic Studies International Conference, Bank of Japan, Tokyo. 
Bernanke, B. S. (2017) Monetary policy in a new era. Paper prepared for a conference on Rethinking Macroeconomic Policy, 
Peterson Institute, October, 48. 
Bernanke, B. S., & Blanchard, O. (2023) What caused the U.S. pandemic-era inflation? Paper for a conference – “The Fed: 
Lessons learned from the past three years”. Hutchins Centre on Fiscal & Monetary policy at the Brookings Institution.  
Bernanke, B. S., Laubach, T., Mishkin, F. S., & A. S. Posen, A. S. (2001) Inflation Targeting: Lessons from the International 
Experience. Princeton: Princeton University Press. 
Bernanke, B. S., & F. Mishkin, F. S. (1997) Inflation Targeting: A New Framework for Monetary Policy? Journal of Economic 
Perspectives 11(2): 97–116.  
Blanchard, O., & Galí, J. (2007) Real wages and the New Keynesian model. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking, 39(1): 
35-65. 


28 
 
Bodea, C., & Hicks, R. (2015) Price stability and central bank independence: Discipline, credibility, and democratic 
institutions. International Organisation, 69: 35-61. 
Bodea, C., & Higashijima, M. (2017) Central bank independence and fiscal policy: Can the central bank restrain deficit 
spending? British Journal of Political Science, 47(1): 47-70. 
Borio, C. (2023) Monetary policy under test. International Monetary Fund Finance and Development, March. 
Borio, C., Lombardi, M., & Zakrajšek, E. (2023) The two-regime of inflation. Bank for International Settlements, Paper No. 
133. 
Borio, C., & Lowe, P. (2002) Asset Prices, Financial and Monetary Stability: Exploring the Nexus. Bank for International 
Settlements, Paper No. 114. 
Borland, J. (2023) Policy forum: Fiscal policy for COVID-19: An assessment. The Australian Economic Review, 56(1): 61-
69.  
Brandão-Marques, L., Casiraghi, M., Gelos, G., Kamber, G., & Meeks, R. (2021) Negative interest rates: Taking stock of the 
experience so far. International Monetary Fund. Monetary and Capital Markets Department (Series), 21/03, Washington, 
International Monetary Fund. 
Broadbent, B. (2023) Monetary policy: Prices versus quantities. Speech to the National Institute of Economic and Social 
Research, London, 25 April. 
Brook, A-M. (2013) Making fiscal policy more stabilising in the next upturn: Challenges and options. New Zealand Economic 
Papers, 47(1): 71-94. 
Brunnermeier, M. K. (2023) Rethinking monetary policy in a changing world. International Monetary Fund Finance and 
Development, March: 1-6. 
Buckle, R. A. (2019) New Zealand’s Thirty-Year Experience with Inflation Targeting: The Origins, Evolution and Impact of 
a Monetary Policy Innovation. History of Economics Review, 73(1): 47-84.  
Buckle, R. A., & Carlson, J. (2000) Inflation and asymmetric price adjustment. The Review of Economics and Statistics, 82(1): 
157–160.    
Buckle, R. A., Haugh, D., & Thomson, P. (2003) Calm after the storm? Supply-side contributions to New Zealand’s volatility 
decline. New Zealand Economic Papers, 37(2): 217-243.  
Buckle, R. A., & Stemp, P. J. (1991) Reserve bank autonomy and the credibility of monetary policy: A game‐theoretic 
approach. New Zealand Economic Papers, 25(1): 51-85. 
Buiter, W. H. (2008) Can central banks go broke? Centre for Economic Policy Research Discussion Paper DP6287, 12 June.  
Bullock, M. (2022) Review of the Bond Purchase Program. Speech at Bloomberg, Sydney, 21 September. 
Burdekin, R. C. K., & Laney, L. O. (2016) Fiscal policy and the central bank constraint una vez más: New Latin American 
evidence. Public Choice, 167: 277-290. 
Carlstrom, C. T., & Fuerst, T. S. (2009) Central bank independence and inflation: A note. Economic Inquiry, 47(1): 182-186.  
Čihák, M. (2007) Central bank independence and financial stability. IMF Mimeo.  
Clarida, R. H. (2022) The Federal Reserve’s new framework: Context and consequences. Federal Reserve Board, Finance and 
Economics Discussion Series:2022-001. 
Clarida, R. H., Duygan-Bump, B., and Scotti, C. (2021) The COVID-19 crisis and the Federal Reserve’s policy response. 
Finance and Economics Discussion Series 2021-035. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. 
Clarida, R.H., Galí, J., & Gertler, M. (1999) The Science of Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective. Journal of 
Economic Literature, 37(4): 1661–1707.  
Coleman, A., & Dasgupta, K. (2023) Designing a remit for multitasking central banks: Insights from principal-agent 
literature. Paper presented to the 2023 Annual Conference of the New Zealand Association of Economists, Auckland, June.  
Crowe, C., & Meade, E. E. (2007) The evolution of central bank governance around the world. The Journal of Economic 
Perspectives, 21(4): 69-90. 
Cukierman, A. (1992) Central Bank strategy, credibility and independence. Cambridge, The MIT Press, 1992. 
Cukierman, A. (1994) Commitment through delegation, political influence and central bank independence. In J. A. H. de 
Beaufort Wijnholds, S. C. W. Eijffinger & L. H. Hoogduin (Eds), A framework for monetary stability, Dordrecht, Kluwer 
Academic Publishers, 55-74. 
Cukierman, A. Webb, S. B., & Neyapti, B. (1992) Measuring the independence of central banks and its effect on policy 
outcome. World Bank Economic Review, 6(3): 353-398.  
Debelle, G. (2020a) The Reserve Bank's Policy Actions and Balance Sheet. Speech to the Economic Society of Australia, 30 
June. 
Debelle, G. (2020b) Monetary policy in 2020. Online presentation to Australian Business Economists Webinar, 24 November.  
De Haan, J., Bodea, C., Hicks, R., & Eijffinger, S. C. W. (2018) Central Bank independence before and after the crisis. 
Comparative Economic Studies, 60:183–202. 


29 
 
De Haan, J., and Gootjes, B. (2023) What makes discretionary counter-cyclical fiscal policy so difficult? An analysis of 32 
OECD countries. CESifo Economic Studies, 69(1):1-20. 
De Long, B. J. (1997) America’s peacetime inflation: The 1970s. In Romer, C., & Romer, D. (Eds), Reducing inflation: 
Motivation and strategy, Chicago, University of Chicago Press for NBER.  
De Long, B. J., and Tyson, L. D. (2013) Discretionary fiscal policy as a stabilisation tool: What do we think now that we did 
not think in 2007? Mimeo, U.C. Berkeley. https://delong.typepad.com/20130531-delong-tyson-1.4.pdf 
Demiralp., & Demiralp, S. (2019) Erosion of central bank independence in Turkey. Turkish Studies 20(1): 49-68.  
Doumpos, M., Gaganis, C., & Pasiouras, F. (2015) Central bank independence, financial supervision structure and bank 
soundness: An empirical analysis around the crisis. Journal of Banking and Finance, 61(1): S69-S83. 
Draghi, M. (2018) Central bank independence. First Lamfalussy Lecture, Banque Nationale de Belgique, Brussels, 26 October.  
Dreher, A., Sturm, J-E., and de Haan, J. (2010) When is a central banker replaced? Evidence based on a new dataset. Journal 
of Macroeconomics, 32: 766-781. 
Dreher, A., Sturm, J-E., & de Haan, J. (2008) Does high inflation cause central bankers to lose their job? Evidence based on a 
new dataset. European Journal of Political Economy, 24: 778-787. 
Eijffinger, S. C. W., & de Haan, J. (1996) The political economy of central-bank independence. Princeton University Special 
Papers in International Economics, 19, May.  
Evans, L., Grimes, A., Wilkinson, B., & Teece, D. (1996) Economic Reform in New Zealand 1984–95: The Pursuit of 
Efficiency. Journal of Economic Literature, 34: 1856–1902. 
Federal Reserve System (2022) Overview: The History of the Federal Reserve. Available from: Overview: The History of the 
Federal Reserve | Federal Reserve History 
Ftiti, Z., Aguir, A., & Smida, M. (2017) Time-inconsistency and expansionary business cycle theories: what does matter for 
the central bank independence-inflation relationship? Economic Modelling, 67: 215-227. 
Fouejieu, A. (2017) Inflation targeting and financial stability in emerging markets. Economic Modelling, 60: 51-70. 
Friedman, M. (1962) Should there be an independent monetary authority? In L. B. Yeagar, (Ed), In search of a monetary 
constitution, Cambridge, Massachusetts, Harvard University Press, Chapter VIII: 219-243. 
Fry, M., Julius, D., Mahadeva, L., Roger, S., & Sterne, G. (2000) Key issues in the choice of monetary policy framework. In 
L. Mahadeva & G. Sterne, (Eds), Monetary policy frameworks in a global context, London, Routledge, 1-216. 
García-Herrero, A., & Del Rio Lopez, P. (2003). Financial Stability and the Design of Monetary Policy. Documentos de trabajo 
Del Banco de España, (15), 1-62. 
Garriga, A. C. (2016) Central bank independence in the world: A new dataset. International Interactions: Empirical and 
Theoretical Research in International Relations, 42(5): 849-868. 
Garriga, A. C., & Rodriguez, C. M. (2020) More effective than we thought: Central Bank independence and inflation in 
developing economies. Economic Modelling, 85: 87-105.  
Goodfriend, M. (2012) The elusive promise of independent central banking. Monetary and Economic Studies, Bank of Japan, 
30 November: 39-54.  
Goodfriend, M. (2007) How the world achieved consensus on monetary policy during a transition to rational expectations. 
Journal of Economic Perspectives, 21: 47-68. 
Goodfriend, M., & King, R. G. (2005) The Incredible Volcker Disinflation. Journal of Monetary Economics, 52(5): 981-1015.  
Goodhart, C., & Lastra, R. (2018a) Populism and central bank independence. Open Economies Review, 29: 49-68.  
Goodhart, C., & Lastra, R. (2018b) Potential threats to central bank independence. In Eijffinger, S., & Masciandaro, D. (Eds), 
Hawks and doves: Deeds and words. London, CEPR Press, Chapter 2: 15-23.  
Government of Canada (2021) Joint statement of the Government of Canada and the Bank of Canada on the renewal of the 
Monetary Policy Framework. Government of Canada and Bank of Canada, 13 December.  
Grilli, V., Masciandaro, D., & Tabellini, G. (1991) Political and monetary institutions and public finance policies in the 
industrial economies. Economic Policy, 13: 341-392. 
Grimes, A. (1991) The Effects of Inflation on Growth: Some International Evidence. Weltwirtschaftliches Archiv, 127 (4): 
631-644 
Grimes, A. 1996. Monetary Policy. In Silverstone, B., Bollard, A., & Lattimore, R. (Eds) A Study of Economic Reform: The 
Case of New Zealand, Contributions to Economic Analysis No. 236. Amsterdam: North-Holland: 247–278.  
Haldane, A. (2020) What has central bank independence ever done for us? Speech to University College London Economists’ 
Society Economics Conference, London, 28 November. 
Hardie, D. (2022) Turkish central bank cuts rates drastically despite soaring inflation. Central Banking. 14 November.  
Hawkesby, C. (2020) Covid-19 and the Reserve Bank’s balance sheet. Presentation to the 2020 KangaNews New Zealand 
Capital Markets Forum, Wellington, 20 August. 


30 
 
Hooley, J., Khan, A., Lattie, C., Mak, I., Salazar, N., Sayegh, A., and Stella, P. (2023) Quasi-fiscal implications of central 
bank crisis interventions. International Monetary Fund Working Paper WP/23/114, June.  
Jacob, P., & Ӧzbilgin, M. (2021) Welfare gains in a small open economy with a dual mandate for monetary policy. CAMA 
Working Paper 89/2021, Canberra, Australian National University, October.  
Jácome, L. I., & Vázquez, F. (2008) Is there a link between legal central bank independence and inflation? Evidence from 
Latin America and the Caribbean. European Journal of Political Economy, 24: 788-801. 
Johnson, S. (1993) The costs of inflation revisited. Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 56 (1): 3-31. 
Kashkari, N. (2023) Why we missed on inflation, and implications for monetary policy going forward. Federal Reserve Bank 
of Minneapolis, 4 January.  
Kengmana, B. (2021) RAMPed up: RBNZ’s additional monetary toolkit. Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 84(1): 1-31. 
Kennedy, S. (2020) Policy and the evolution of uncertainty. Speech to Australia Business Economists, 5 November.  
King, M. (2023). Remarks. International symposium on central bank independence. Sveriges Riksbank (2023).  
Klomp, J., & de Haan, J. (2009) Central bank independence and financial stability. Journal of Financial Stability, 5: 321-338. 
Klomp, J., & de Haan, J. (2010a) Inflation and central bank independence: A meta-regression analysis. Journal of Economic 
Surveys, 24(4): 593-621. 
Klomp, J., & de Haan, J. (2010b) Central bank independence and inflation revisited. Public Choice, 144: 445-457. 
Krugman, P. (2005) Is Fiscal Policy poised for a comeback? Oxford Review of Economic Policy, 21(4): 515-523. 
Kydland, F. E., & Prescott, E. C. (1977) Rules rather than discretion: The inconsistency of optimal plans. Journal of Political 
Economy, 85: 473-491. 
Landström, M. (2011) Do central bank independence reforms matter for inflation performance? International Journal for 
Banking, Accounting and Finance, 3: 320-335. 
Lastra, R. M., & Wood, G. (1999) Constitutional approach to central bank independence. Central Banking, X (3): 34-39. 
Leeper, E. M. (1991) Equilibria under ‘Active’ and ‘Passive’ Monetary and Fiscal Policies. Journal of Monetary Economics, 
27 (1): 129–47. 
Leeper, E. M. (2023) Fiscal dominance: How worried should we be? George Mason University Mercantus Center, Policy 
Brief, March: 1-16. 
Lilley, A., & Rogoff, K. (2019) The Case for Implementing Effective Negative Interest Rate Policy. Paper presented at the 
ECB Conference on Monetary Policy: bridging science and practice, Frankfurt. 8 October. 
Lim, J. J. (2021) The limits of central bank independence for inflation performance. Public Choice, 186: 309-335. 
Lin, S., & Ye, H. (2009) Does inflation targeting make a difference in developing countries? Journal of Development 
Economics, 89: 118-123. 
Lingle, C. (2021) Illusions of central bank independence. American Institute for Economic Research. 11 August  
Loungani, P. (1997) Lars Svensson: Central banking revolutionary. International Monetary Fund Finance & Development, 
March: 39-41. 
Loungani, P., & Sheets, N. (1997) Central bank independence, inflation, and growth in transition economies. Journal of Money, 
Credit and Banking, 29: 381-399. 
Maxfield, S. (1997) Gatekeepers of growth: The international political economy of central banking in developing countries. 
Princeton University Press, Princeton, New Jersey.  
Mishkin, F. (1996) Understanding financial crises: A developing country perspective. NBER Working Paper 5600.  
Mishkin, F. S., & Savastano, M. (2001) Monetary Policy Strategies for Latin America. Journal of Development Economics, 
66(2): 415–444.  
Nelson, E. (2005) Monetary policy neglect and the Great Inflation in Canada, Australia and New Zealand. International 
Journal of Central Banking, 1(1),133-179. 
Nelson, E. (2022) How did it happen? The Great Inflation of the 1970s and lessons for today. Finance and Economics 
Discussion Series 2022-37. Washington: Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,  
Nguyen, D. N., & Dang, T. T. (2022) The relationship between central bank independence and systemic fragility: global 
evidence. Cogent Economics & Finance, 10(1): 1-27. 
Nordstrom, A., & Vredin, A. (2022) Does central bank equity matter for monetary policy?  Sveriges Riksbank Staff Memo, 
December. 
OECD (2023) OECD sovereign borrowing outlook 2023. OECD, Paris, May.  
Orphanides, A., & Williams, J. C. (2005a) Inflation scares and forecast-based monetary policy. Review of Economic Dynamics, 
8(2): 498-527.  
Orphanides, A., & Williams, J. C. (2005b) Imperfect knowledge, inflation expectations, and monetary policy. In Bernanke, 
B., & Woodford, M. (Eds), The inflation targeting debate. Chicago, University of Chicago Press, Chp 5: 201-245.  


31 
 
Orr, A. (2020) Monetary policy challenges for a small open economy during Covid-19. Sir Leslie Melville Lecture, Australian 
National University, Canberra, 2 December.  
Parkin, M. (1987) Domestic monetary institutions and deficits. In J. Buchanan, C. Rowley, & R. Tollinson, Deficits, Oxford, 
Basil Blackwell Publishing: 310-337.  
Parkin, M. (2013) Central Bank Laws and Monetary Policy Outcomes: A Three Decade Perspective. Paper for the session 
“Central Bank Independence: Reality or Myth?”, Meetings of the American Economic Association, San Diego: January 4. 
Quintyn, M., & Taylor, M. W. (2002) Regulatory and supervisory independence and financial stability. IMF Working Paper 
WP/02/46, March.  
Rajan, R. (2023). For central banks, less is more. International Monetary Fund Finance & Development: March.  
Reis, R. (2013). The mystique surrounding the central bank's balance sheet, applied to the European crisis. National Bureau 
of Economic Research Working Paper 18730. 
Reserve Bank of Australia (2022) Annual Report. Reserve Bank of Australia.  
Reserve Bank of Australia (2023) Supply and demand drivers of inflation in Australia. Reserve Bank of Australia, Statement 
on Monetary Policy, February.  
Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2022) Review and assessment of the formulation and implementation of monetary policy 
(RAFIMP). Reserve Bank of New Zealand, 10 November. 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2023a) Monetary Policy Statement May 2023. Reserve Bank of New Zealand, 24 May.   
Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2023b) Supporting New Zealand’s economic stability, Toitū te Ōhanga. Reserve Bank of New 
Zealand, 27 April.   
Rogoff, K. S. (1985) The optimal degree of commitment to an intermediate monetary target. Quarterly Journal of Economics, 
100: 1169-1189. 
Rogoff, K. S. (2022) The age of inflation: Easy money, hard choices. Foreign Affairs, November/December.  
Romer, C., & Romer, D. (2002) The evolution of economic understanding and post-war stabilization policy. Rethinking 
stabilization policy, Jackson Hole Economic Policy Symposium, sponsored by Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City: 11-78.  
Rotemberg, J., & Woodford, M. (1997) An optimization-based econometric framework for the evaluation of monetary policy. 
Chapter 7, in Bernanke, B. & Rotemberg, J. (Eds), NBER Macroeconomics Annual 1997, 12: 297-361.  
Rutter, C. (2022) Canadian politicians row over central bank independence. Public Finance Focus, 13 May.  
Sargent, T.J., & Wallace, N. (1984) Some unpleasant monetarist arithmetic. In B. Griffiths, B. & Wood, G.E. (Eds), 
Monetarism in the United Kingdom, London, MacMillan, 15-41. 
Schwartz, A. (1995) Systemic risk and the macro economy. In Kaufman, G. (Ed), Banking, financial markets and systemic 
risk, Research in Financial Services, Private and Public Policy. JAI Press. 
Shapiro, A. H. (2022) How much do supply and demand drive inflation. Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Economic 
Letter, 21 June: 1-6. 
Shapiro, A. H. (2022) A simple framework to monitor inflation. Federal Reserve Bank of San Francisco Working Paper 2020-
29: Pp 38. 
Sheshinski, E., & Weiss, Y. (Eds) (1993) Optimal pricing, inflation, and the cost of price adjustment. Cambridge, MIT Press. 
Silk, K. (2022) New Zealand’s monetary policy implementation framework. Speech delivered to KangaNews New Zealand 
Debt Capital Market Summit, 7 September.  
Sims, C. A. (2003) Implications of rational inattention. Journal of Monetary Economics, 50(3): 665–690. 
Strong, C., & Yayi, C. (2021) Central bank independence, fiscal deficits and currency union: Lessons from Africa. Journal of 
Macroeconomics, 68: 1-20. 
Taylor, J. B. (2013) The effectiveness of central bank independence vs rules. Business Economics, 48(3): 155-162. 
Taylor, J. B. (1979) Estimation and Control of a Macroeconomic Model with Rational Expectations. Econometrica, 47(5): 
1267–1286.  
Tenreyro, S. (2021) Responses to the Covid-19 pandemic: UK and US experiences. Speech to the Federal Reserve Bank of 
San Francisco Macroeconomics and Monetary Policy Spring Conference, 26 March. 
The Economist (2022) The insidious threats to central bank independence. December 15th. 
The Treasury (2023) Decomposing inflation into supply and demand drivers. New Zealand Treasury Fortnightly Economic 
Update, March: 7-9.  
Tucker, P. (2018a) Unelected power: The quest for legitimacy in central banking & the regulatory state. Princeton, Princeton 
University Press. 
Tucker, P. (2018b) Unelected power: The quest for legitimacy in central banking & the regulatory state. Presentation and 
responses to remarks at a New City Agenda seminar, London, 12 June. 
Wadsworth, A. (2017) An international comparison of inflation-targeting frameworks. Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 
80 (8): 4-34. 


32 
 
Walsh, C. E. (1995) Is New Zealand's Reserve Bank Act of 1989 an Optimal Central Bank Contract? Journal of Money, Credit 
and Banking, 27(4): 1179-1191. 
Walsh, C. E. (2009) Central Bank Independence. In S. E. Durlauf & L. E. Blume (Eds) Monetary Economics. The New 
Palgrave Economics Edition, London, Palgrave Macmillan, Chp 3, 21-26. 
Wheeler, G., & Wilkinson, B. (2022) How central bank mistakes after 2019 led to inflation. Central Banking, 33(1).
