BANK: RBNZ
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Remarks on the Reserve Bank's Enforcement Framework
DATE: 12/06/2023
SPEAKER: Director of Enforcement and Resolution Kerry
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/speeches/2023/speech-on-the-reserve-banks-enforcement-framework-may-2023.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Ref #20381607 v1.4 
 
 
 
 
Remarks on the 
Reserve Bank’s 
Enforcement 
Framework 
A speech delivered at MinterEllisonRuddWatts, 
Auckland, on 18 May 2023 
By Director of Enforcement and Resolution Kerry 
Beaumont, Senior Legal Counsel - Enforcement 
Francesca Greig, and Manager of Enforcement Gareth 
Bostock 
UNCLASSIFIED 
 


UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
1  
Remarks on the Reserve Bank’s Enforcement Framework  
UNCLASSIFIED  
Ref #20381607 v1.4 
Introduction (Kerry Beaumont) 
“I have no intention of ever having to look at the RBNZ’s Enforcement Framework”. 
Ouch. 
That is what the General Counsel of a New Zealand bank said to me after I suggested that 
our Enforcement Framework would provide an insight on how we would deal with a breach.  
The conversation quickly moved on. So, I did not need to respond to the point in the 
meeting. 
However, I did reflect.  
Both from the perspective of my current role and from the perspective of a private practice 
lawyer (my previous life). And you know what. I thought their comment was fair enough. 
There are very few members of society who decide breach the law. I doubt anyone in this 
room, or any of your clients, arrived at work today and decided not to comply with the social 
licence that you, or your employers have been given to conduct business in New Zealand. We 
know that huge amounts of mahi is put into policies, procedures, frameworks and controls to 
try and make sure that the rules and regulations are complied with. 
However, things do happen. We work in a complex, increasing regulated and interconnected 
world. And sometimes, the rules - are simply not met. 
As kaitiaki (guardian) of the financial system, our supervision and enforcement activities 
provide confidence to New Zealanders (and people dealing with New Zealand) that our 
institutions are financial sound and that regulatory standards are being met across the 
financial sector.   
In other words, our enforcement function supports regulatory discipline and in so doing 
provides incentives for self– and market-discipline to operate effectively. 
So, if you are going to take away just one point from are time together today, could I suggest 
it be this one.  
Where non-compliance is identified our legislation allows the Reserve Bank to investigate 
and take enforcement action where appropriate. But that is not the end of the story. The 
RBNZ has an Enforcement Framework1. It is on our website. This is our policy that applies to 
how we exercise our enforcement discretion. Very briefly:  
 
Principles and Criteria Guidelines describe the fundamental considerations that we 
will work through and weigh when deciding on the appropriate enforcement 
response.  Our key principles are proportionate, risk based and transparent. 
 
Investigation Guidelines describe our approach to a formal enforcement 
investigation.   
____________ 
1 https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/regulation-and-supervision/cross-sector-oversight/enforcement#Our-Enforcement-Framework  


UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
2  
Remarks on the Reserve Bank’s Enforcement Framework  
UNCLASSIFIED  
Ref #20381607 v1.4 
 
Enforcement Guidelines describe our escalating regulatory response model. 
Therefore, if something does happen - for example you, or your client, identifies that, say, 
there has been a breach of the AML rules2  - take a look at the framework and our 
Relationship Charter3 and take it from there. 
So, with that said, those who wanted one point to report back to your boss – you have now 
got it.  You can sit back and relax, or you can listen to a bit more. 
I am very lucky to be joined by my wonderful colleagues today, Francesca Greig, Senior Legal 
Counsel and Gareth Bostock, Manager of Enforcement.   
We are going to split our talk into three parts. 
 
First, I am going to provide a bit more colour on where the RBNZ is today, and how 
our enforcement function fits into this bigger picture. 
 
Francesca is then going to fill us in on what we are charged with enforcing. 
 
Gareth is then going to take us through our Enforcement Framework in a little more 
detail. He will also talk briefly to our recent enforcement actions. 
We hope this will take about 40 minutes, we can then take a few questions at the end. 
Before we launch in any further though, I thought I would just clear up my title. As you may 
have noticed, I am the director of both Enforcement and Resolution.   
Based on my scientific research (i.e., CVs of people who have applied for jobs in our 
resolution function), sometimes resolution is interpreted as being short for “dispute 
resolution”.   
This is not the case. Resolution, in terms of my job description, covers dealing with regulated 
entities that are in financial distress. Resolution is where the regulator steps in to deal with a 
non-viable regulated entity when it is necessary to do so for financial stability reasons. There 
have been some recent examples off shore – Silicon Valley Bank, Signature Bank, Credit 
Suisse and First Capital Bank.   
That said, we are confident that the banks we are responsible for supervising have sound 
liquidity and funding positions4. We have set up a dedicated resolution function, not because 
of concerns within the system, but as part of intensifying our supervision activities and 
looking ahead in preparation for our role as resolution authority under the Deposit Takers 
Bill5. This will ensure that our function is modern and strong in accordance with best 
international practice. 
____________ 
2 https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/regulation-and-supervision/anti-money-laundering-and-countering-terrorism-financing/the-anti-money-laundering-and-countering-financing-of-
terrorism-act  
3 https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/regulation-and-supervision/cross-sector-oversight/our-relationship-charter-with-regulated-entities  
4 https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/hub/news/2023/03/statement-from-deputy-governor-christian-hawkesby-regarding-bank-financial-strength  
5 https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/hub/publications/financial-stability-report/2023/may-2023/fsr-may-23-box-c  


UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
3  
Remarks on the Reserve Bank’s Enforcement Framework  
UNCLASSIFIED  
Ref #20381607 v1.4 
Here is a slide that shows Enforcement against Resolution. This can be found in our 
Statement of Prudential Policy6 on our website.   
 
If you are interested in reading more about our assessment of the state of financial stability in 
New Zealand, you might want to take a look at our most recent Financial Stability Report7 
published earlier this month (May 2023).   
 
 
____________ 
6 https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/regulation-and-supervision/cross-sector-oversight/prudential-policy  
7 https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/hub/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/financial-stability-reports/2023/may-2023/fsr-may-23.pdf  


UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
4  
Remarks on the Reserve Bank’s Enforcement Framework  
UNCLASSIFIED  
Ref #20381607 v1.4 
The Reserve Bank in 2023 and the place of enforcement  
As an institution, Te Pūtea Matua, the Reserve Bank is going through the most significant 
changes since the 1980s. The reforms are known as “The Review”8. 
 
 
 
Phase 1 of the Review dealt with our approach to monetary policy. They came into force on 1 
April 2019 and provided us with a dual mandate – price stability and contributing to 
maximum sustainable employment – and established our Monetary Policy Committee (MPC), 
replacing the single decision-maker model. This is no doubt the most high profile part of our 
collective mahi at the moment. However, Gareth, Francesca and I are not the right people for 
insights on what the MPC might do next on the OCR, or house prices. So, we will leave Phase 
1 there. 
We are now in Phase 2 of the Review. 
This has involved RBNZ and the Treasury reviewing our institutional and financial stability 
framework, almost from a ‘clean slate’. In broad terms, the objective has been to build a 
framework that meets international best practice and at the same time is fit for purpose for 
Aotearoa New Zealand. The findings from the 2016/17 International Money Fund, Financial 
Sector Assessment9 also fed into the Review. 
This is what I want to talk to you further about, as this context helps to demonstrate the 
purpose and place of our enforcement function. 
So, I will first start with the institutional reforms which came into place on 1 July under the 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 202110.   
 
The 2021 Act provides that our new overarching purpose is to ‘promote the prosperity and 
wellbeing of New Zealanders and contribute to a sustainable and productive economy’.  
 
____________ 
8 https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/have-your-say/2022/monetary-policy-committee-remit-review  
9 https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/regulation-and-supervision/cross-sector-oversight/financial-sector-assessment-programme  
10 https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/about-us/responsibility-and-accountability/our-legislation/reserve-bank-of-new-zealand-act-2021  


UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
5  
Remarks on the Reserve Bank’s Enforcement Framework  
UNCLASSIFIED  
Ref #20381607 v1.4 
The Act also gives us a new overarching financial policy objective of ‘protecting and 
promoting the stability of New Zealand’s financial system’. This recognises our role in 
mitigating risks to the financial system, and provides direction for sector-specific regulation. 
It also recognises the role in stabilising the financial system during times of stress. 
 
We now have a new Board, and modernised leadership structure – as outlined on our 
website.   
We also now work under a Financial Policy Remit11, Statement of Prudential Policy12, 
Statement of Intent13 and Statement of Expectations14 – all of which, together with our 
legislation provide the foundational roots for our role as modern katiaki of the financial 
system.   
The Council of Financial Regulators15 (known as ‘CoFR’) was also formed under the 2021 Act.  
CoFR is a key forum to facilitate regulatory co-ordination. If you have not done so already, 
please have a look at their website. In particular, the Regulatory Initiatives Calendar, which I 
believe is a step in the right direction in terms of co-ordination of regulatory initiatives.   
Our Relationship Charter and Enforcement Framework have been designed to work in 
harmony with these modernised foundations. 
Very briefly:  
 
Our Statement of Intent sets out our strategic objectives and how we intend to 
achieve them. With regards to enforcement, this document provides that we are 
intensifying our supervisory and enforcement activities. In doing so, we are promoting 
financial soundness and increasing confidence that our regulatory standards will be 
met by participants in New Zealand’s financial sector. 
 
Our Statement of Performance Expectations sets out specific targets that we aim to 
achieve in the year ahead, and how our performance against those targets will be 
measured and reported on.  
 
 
The Financial Policy Remit is issued by the Minister of Finance from time to time. The 
current Remit guides us to seek a strong, efficient, innovative and inclusive financial 
system. 
 
 
Our Statement of Prudential Policy outlines that we will be proactive, evidence-led and 
risk-based, proportionate, collaborative and outcomes-focussed.   
 
 
Our Relationship Charter holds us to account to have clear, consistent and timely 
communication and to work together with the industry to prioritise our shared mahi. 
The Deposit Takers Bill (‘DTB’), currently before Parliament, will complete these reforms. The 
Bill, once enacted and in force, will replace the existing prudential regulatory regime 
____________ 
11 https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/about-us/responsibility-and-accountability/our-financial-policy-remit  
12 https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/regulation-and-supervision/cross-sector-oversight/prudential-policy  
13 https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/hub/publications/corporate-publications/statements-of-intent/statement-of-intent-2022  
14 https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/hub/publications/corporate-publications/statement-of-performance-expectations/statement-of-performance-expectations-2022-to-2023  
15 https://www.cofr.govt.nz/  


UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
6  
Remarks on the Reserve Bank’s Enforcement Framework  
UNCLASSIFIED  
Ref #20381607 v1.4 
contained in the Banking (Prudential Supervision) Act 1989 and the Non-bank Deposit Takers 
Act 2013.  
The integration of these previously separate regimes will create a single, consistent 
framework for the regulation and supervision of financial institutions that essentially engage 
in the same activity – the business of taking ‘deposits’ from the public, and lending to 
individuals, households and businesses. This will be a major change for financial institutions 
in New Zealand and for the Reserve Bank as prudential regulator. For enforcement, we will 
have new tools that are designed to provide a range of options that will further facilitate a 
proportionate, risk-based, and transparent approach to enforcement.   
Assuming the Bill is passed in its current form, there is a lot to work through as we move 
towards operationalising the new regime. In particular, later this year, we will be consulting 
on a proportionality framework, which will deal with how we will take into account the 
proportionality principle in the Bill when developing prudential standards. You will see that 
the Enforcement Framework already contains “proportionality” as a principle, and we will 
adjust and calibrate for cohesion with our work on DTB implementation (and other law 
reform progresses).   
This slide shows the current timing for the introduction of the DTB (or ‘DTA’ as we sometimes 
refer to it – noting, of course, the Bill has not yet passed into law). 
 
So, with that whirlwind journey through our 2021 Act and the current prudential reform 
(noting that, in the time available, I have not mentioned the Insurance (Prudential 
Supervision) Act, the Financial Market Infrastructures Act or the Anti-Money Laundering and 
Countering Financing of Terrorism Act), I will now hand over to Francesca. 
What we are charged with enforcing (Francesca Greig) 
Kerry has given you a rundown of where we’ve come from and where we’re going as a 
function – namely why we do what we do. I’m going to speak a little about what it is that we 
do. Gareth, will then outline how we do what we do.  
So firstly, our remit. Who do we regulate? You might know this because you’re regulated or 
you represent an entity that is regulated – but the scope of our reach is quite wide.  


UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
7  
Remarks on the Reserve Bank’s Enforcement Framework  
UNCLASSIFIED  
Ref #20381607 v1.4 
Who we regulate  
New Zealand has an informal “twin peaks” model of regulating the financial services sector. 
The Reserve Bank and Financial Markets Authority (FMA) work hard to collaborate to jointly 
supervise the sector - each bearing responsibility for it, but tasked with separate functions. 
The FMA’s remit is primarily conduct regulation and the Reserve Bank’s remit is largely 
prudential. 
 
 
Prudential supervision  
We prudentially regulate four key sectors.  
 
Looking at these briefly in turn: 
 
1. Registered Banks – there are 27 registered banks, four of which are the NZ subsidiaries of 
the four large Australian owned banks, and together they’re responsible for 85% of bank 
lending.  
2. Licensed Non-Bank Deposit Takers or “NBDTs” – these are entities that are not registered 
banks but that offer certain debt securities to the public and carry on the business of 
borrowing and lending money, or providing financial services, or both. There are presently 
15 licensed NBDTs operating in New Zealand and we maintain a register of these on our 
website.  
3. Licensed Insurers – there are 89 insurers licensed to carry on insurance business in New 
Zealand, just over half of which are foreign owned. Again, we keep a public register of 
licensed insurers and their current financial strength ratings on our website; and finally 
4. Financial Market Infrastructures or “FMIs”. FMIs are multilateral systems or arrangements 
that provide clearing, settlement or recording services relating to transactions within the 
financial system.  There are presently five designated settlement systems and, again, these 
are listed on our website.   


UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
8  
Remarks on the Reserve Bank’s Enforcement Framework  
UNCLASSIFIED  
Ref #20381607 v1.4 
Further to these, we monitor the regulatory perimeter and keep tabs on any entities holding 
themselves out to be registered or licensed. There are offences under each of the Acts 
governing the four buckets I’ve just described for any entity that represents (or rather 
misrepresents) that it is registered, licensed or otherwise regulated when it is not. 
AML/CFT supervision  
Under the AML/CFT Act, the Reserve Bank is the AML/CFT Supervisor of registered banks, life 
insurers, NBDTs, as well as designated business group members who would otherwise 
ordinarily be supervised by either the FMA or DIA. There are 70 reporting entities RBNZ 
supervises for AML/CFT compliance. In the life of our Enforcement function to date, amidst all 
manner of referrals we’re charged to receive, AML/CFT Supervision is by far our most 
frequent flyer!   
The laws we administer  
Dotted around the slide you’ll see the core Acts where we are the regulator. Together with 
their corresponding regulations and standards, they prescribe the regulatory framework 
within which entities must operate and they confer on us certain powers to enforce against 
non-compliance. 
Our toolkit – current suite of powers  
Ok. So, you work for a regulated entity – you’ve spotted a potential compliance issue – and 
you’ve picked up the phone or emailed your Reserve Bank supervisor to self-disclose the 
issue (of course)…You’ve been working closely with your supervisor to confine and remediate 
the issue and you may be aware the issue has the potential to justify an enforcement 
response. Ultimately now, you’ve been notified that the matter has been referred to 
enforcement for investigation.  
 
What do we do? What can we do?  
 


UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
9  
Remarks on the Reserve Bank’s Enforcement Framework  
UNCLASSIFIED  
Ref #20381607 v1.4 
Information Gathering  
First and foremost, we gather information. We want to find out as much as we can about the 
circumstances, risk profile, root cause and downstream impacts of the potential breach. 
1. Supervision: We start with internal sources. Our first port of call (and generally the source 
of the referral) is always the relevant supervision team. Our departments work very closely 
together.  Enforcement may use relevant information provided to our supervision 
functions in the course of the supervisory relationship.  We also use publicly available 
information and we can engage with other regulators.  
2. Regulated entities: We’ll then reach out to you. There are a number of ways regulated 
entities can provide information to the Bank:  
i. 
You can do so voluntarily; or 
ii. 
On a compelled basis by report or by statutory notice. This is certainly some entities’ 
preference.  
 
3. Reports: If not already done as part of our supervisory processes, we may require reports 
on any corporate, financial, prudential or operational matters. These reports put the onus 
on the investigated party to analyse information and address issues we raise – this can 
actually help to expedite the investigation as you’re often best placed to assess your own 
data and provide commentary. 
 
4. Formal notices: We can issue formal notices under all of our legislation requiring 
information to be provided to us on a compelled basis. The recipient’s obligations do 
depend on which Act the notice is issued under but, for the most part, it is an offence not 
to comply with a formal notice, or to fail to provide a report when required, and that can 
carry fairly weighty penalties. With that in mind, we’re often very happy to share 
information requests in draft and to discuss the scope and timeframes to ensure it’s 
something you can actually respond to before we formally issue. 
 
5. Search warrants: In certain circumstances, it is necessary to collect evidence by search 
warrant and this is possible in both AML/CFT and prudential matters. 
 
6. Interviews: Finally, we might invite an investigated party or its representatives to attend a 
formal interview with us to discuss the non-compliance. In prudential matters, these 
interviews are, at present, voluntary.  
 
Information gathering comes in different forms and may come in several waves from us 
depending on the nature and extent of an entity’s response. 
Formal Enforcement Responses  
Once we’ve got the information we need, we’ll analyse this by reference to our Enforcement 
Framework, which Gareth will talk you through, and ultimately reach a recommendation as to 
the appropriate outcome. There are a number of tools we can engage to respond to non-
compliance. 
So what can you expect? Let’s work up the ladder.  


UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
10  Remarks on the Reserve Bank’s Enforcement Framework  
UNCLASSIFIED  
Ref #20381607 v1.4 
1. No enforcement response: referrals are made to us if a matter has the potential to justify 
an enforcement response, so it’s of course possible there won’t be one. There may 
however be a supervisory response, such as board engagement, issuing directions, 
increased reporting or oversight of remediation.  
 
2. Infringement notices / fees: Infringement notices are a new power that the Reserve Bank 
has under the RBNZ Act 2021 to address infringement offences (being failure to respond 
to s262 information request notices or failure to comply with a notice to test and report 
on bank note handling machines). Infringement notices will also feature in the DTA.  
They’re designed to provide a targeted, timely and cost-efficient enforcement outcome 
for the more minor and unambiguous offences.  
 
3. We may issue (a) public or private formal warnings; (b) statutory warnings under the 
AML/CFT Act, such as those issued to Westpac Banking Corporation, NZ Branch in 2021 
and BNZ in 2022, (c) changes of licensing conditions, or (d) removal of directors. We may 
also not take formal enforcement action, but issue a media statement, for example 
regarding closure of an investigation into non-compliance, as was done in respect of 
ANZ last month.    
 
4. Enforceable undertakings: In AML/CFT matters, we can accept enforceable undertakings – 
commitments from entities that are enforceable in court. 
 
5. Court-response: And finally, where the non-compliance is serious, repetitive, systemic, or 
causes serious harm to the financial system, a court response may be the only 
appropriate response to achieve our purpose and objectives. Our higher-level 
enforcement responses include civil action for pecuniary penalties or injunctive relief in 
AML/CFT matters, or prosecution of offences under AML/CFT and prudential Acts.  A 
recent example being the civil pecuniary penalty proceedings brought against TSB Bank 
in 202116. 
Our toolkit – the expansion pack – powers and outcomes under the DTA   
We have a broad mandate to protect the integrity of, and maintain public confidence in, the 
financial system, but we haven’t to date been armed with a full toolkit that some of our 
counterparts, at home and abroad, are equipped with. The toolkit has been lacking the full 
range of graduated options, certainly in the prudential space, with a somewhat 
disproportionate focus on criminal penalties.  
Kerry spoke about the Review of the 1989 Act, the second phase of which involves replacing 
the prudential regime in that Act and the NBDT Act with the Deposit Takers Act – the DTA.   
A key driver of the legislative review has been ensuring the Reserve Bank has all the 
necessary modern tools to supervise and enforce compliance, and to resolve failing 
institutions. Doing so acknowledges that enforcement actions sit naturally along a continuum 
as we fulfil the role of midwife, cop, judge and undertaker in one for our supervised 
population.  
____________ 
16 https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/hub/news/2021/05/reserve-bank-files-high-court-action-against-tsb-bank  


UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
11  Remarks on the Reserve Bank’s Enforcement Framework  
UNCLASSIFIED  
Ref #20381607 v1.4 
Now I preface my next comments, about anticipated changes under the DTA, by noting that 
of course, when I say DTA, it remains a Bill and the Bill has not yet passed so the summary 
that follows is based on the bill as reported back by the Finance and Expenditure Committee.  
There will be a lot of changes for us all under the DTA, so I’ll just highlight a few changes that 
relate to what I’ve been speaking about today from an enforcement perspective.  
 
In terms of information gathering powers, note the addition of two things:  
1. On-site inspection in the prudential context. This tool will primarily be used in the course 
of routine supervision, but it may feed into our approach to information gathering. 
During the on-site, the Reserve Bank can require employees, directors and agents of 
deposit takers to answer questions and provide information. It will be an offence to 
refuse to comply or otherwise obstruct the inspection.  
 
2. Questioning under oath: Similarly, we’ll have the power under the DTA to appoint an 
investigator who will be able to compel the provision of information including the 
questioning of any director, employee, or any other person, under oath or affirmation.  
 
In terms of enforcement responses, we’ll see at least three key changes: 
1. Infringement notices to respond to the introduction of infringement offences for a broad 
range of prudential failings. Infringement notices are an efficient and proportionate 
means of incentivising compliance with relatively minor prudential requirements.  
 
2. We’ll be able to accept enforceable undertakings in new contexts. We’ve had these for 
AML, but this will be a new feature in the prudential space. As the undertaking is agreed 
with the entity, it has the potential to result in much more tailored, proportionate and 
efficient outcomes than could be achieved by a direction or court action. 
 


UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
12  Remarks on the Reserve Bank’s Enforcement Framework  
UNCLASSIFIED  
Ref #20381607 v1.4 
3. Finally we’ll see civil pecuniary penalties for prudential non-compliance which 
demonstrates a rebalancing away from the current emphasis on criminal penalties.  This 
is a more proportionate response for breaches that are neither reckless nor deliberate, 
but pecuniary penalties will nevertheless still be reserved for significant breaches of 
regulatory requirements. 
I’ll pass over to Gareth to discuss our Enforcement Framework.  
Regulatory Response Model (Gareth Bostock)  
We apply an escalated regulatory response model which shows how we escalate our 
response to the nature of the breach.    
 
This is not a sequential model of intervention and the tools listed in the model are only 
examples. We choose the most appropriate tool or combination of tools from anywhere 
within the model to suit the circumstances. There may be overlaps or tools that run in 
parallel. 
We have the ability to use a proportionate approach to escalate and intensify our actions as 
appropriate.  
Most issues will be handled in the course of normal Supervision. If a problem is not 
addressed, there may be heightened supervision.   
But if non-compliance persists or involves serious non-compliance referral to enforcement 
will be necessary for an investigation to be carried out.  
The findings of the investigation will determine what response is needed, so all responses in 
the model (refer slide) will still be available. In order to determine an appropriate 
enforcement response an enforcement framework is an essential tool. 


UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
13  Remarks on the Reserve Bank’s Enforcement Framework  
UNCLASSIFIED  
Ref #20381607 v1.4 
We will prioritise the investigation of matters that pose a risk to us fulfilling our financial 
stability objective and/or achieving the specific purposes and objectives of our legislation. 
Enforcement Framework  
I am going to refer you to these documents on our website, hoping I get a different response 
than Kerry did. Nonetheless, this overview will be a useful starter.  
 
The Enforcement Framework is public so you know what our approach to investigation and 
enforcement will be.   
I am going to ask and answer an important question.  What is an investigation? An 
investigation is an in depth inquiry into events to establish the facts of a matter, with 
evidence collected in a forensic way.  It is not a search for facts to prove a breach.  It is wider 
than that.  We want the truth!  
So, when Enforcement opens an investigation please don’t think we are just out to get you - 
we’ll be out to get you after a breach has been established…..of course I am joking…or am I? 
[joke] 
The Enforcement Framework comprises of three parts as shown on our slide: 
 
Enforcement Principles and Criteria  
 
Enforcement Guidelines  
 
Investigation Guidelines 
 
We consulted with the industry on the Principles and Criteria and also used the submissions 
when developing the guidelines.   


UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
14  Remarks on the Reserve Bank’s Enforcement Framework  
UNCLASSIFIED  
Ref #20381607 v1.4 
Enforcement Principles and Criteria: 
The Enforcement Principles and Criteria describe the fundamental considerations for the 
enforcement framework that we will work through and weigh when deciding on the 
appropriate enforcement response.  
 
They also provide us with a lens through which we evaluate enforcement matters.  This allows 
us to provide consistency about the way we select matters for investigation, carry out 
investigations, and ultimately take decisions relating to enforcement matters. 
 
Our three enforcement principles are:  
1. We will adopt a risk-based approach.  This involves an assessment of key factors such as 
the nature of the regulated entity and the seriousness and significance of the non-
compliance or issue involved.   We will look broadly at the circumstances of the non-
compliance. 
2. We will be proportionate.  This involves an assessment of the burden and cost of an 
enforcement response.  Accordingly, an enforcement response will be scaled to: the 
significance of the non-compliance;  the level of harm or potential harm involved, and the 
expected benefits from that enforcement response. 
3. We will be transparent which has two important factors, transparency of process and 
transparency of outcome. 
 
Our four enforcement criteria go into more detail about how these principles will be 
applied. These are considerations of the following factors: 
1. Seriousness of conduct which considers the prevalence of non-compliance; the period of 
non-compliance and repetition in the firm or the sector; the magnitude and impact of 
non-compliance, and executive or operational knowledge within the entity. 
2. Responsiveness which includes assessing the entity’s co-operation with RBNZ;  the entity’s 
relevant compliance history; and the entity’s conduct in proactively resolving the non-
compliance. 
3. Public trust and confidence in which we consider whether an enforcement response would 
promote public confidence in the law or in the financial system, including whether an 
enforcement response is consistent and fair.   We assess whether the enforcement 
response will provide a deterrence value and whether an enforcement response will 
promote the maintenance of the law.  
4. Efficacy is where we analyse the strength of evidence and any available credible defence.  
We also look to see whether the proposed action will support other regulatory bodies 
objectives, and any relevant potential outcomes of proposed action. 
The Enforcement Principles and Criteria are necessarily drafted at a high level as they are 
intended to apply to all of the areas for which we are responsible. 


UNCLASSIFIED 
 
 
15  Remarks on the Reserve Bank’s Enforcement Framework  
UNCLASSIFIED  
Ref #20381607 v1.4 
Enforcement Guidelines 
The Enforcement Guidelines describe in more detail how we apply our escalating regulatory 
response model and further detail on how we apply the Principles and Criteria when selecting 
the appropriate enforcement response.  
An example of this escalating response in practice is TSB Bank Ltd.  
RBNZ brought civil proceedings against TSB Bank Ltd in which the High Court ordered TSB to 
pay a pecuniary penalty of $3.5 million for various acknowledged breaches of the AML/CFT 
Act. These proceedings were an escalated regulatory response to continued non-compliance 
by TSB and followed a formal warning we previously issued in 2016 for failures relating to its 
review and maintenance of its AML/CFT risk assessment. 
Investigation Guidelines 
The Investigation Guidelines describe our approach to investigations and how we apply the 
principles and criteria throughout the lifecycle of an investigation. They also describe our use 
of information gathering powers under our legislation. 
Conclusion 
That is a run through of the Reserve Bank’s Enforcement Framework.   
Taken together, we are confident that these will inform anyone who is the subject of an 
investigation of what to expect during the investigation process.   
Questions?
