BANK: RBNZ
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: The path back to low inflation in New Zealand
DATE: 23/03/2023
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/speeches/2023/inflation-speech.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Ref #20216109 v1.3 
 
 
 
 
The Path Back  
to Low Inflation  
in New Zealand 
 
Delivery: 1.15pm, 23 March 2023 
 
Venue: Intercontinental Hotel, Wellington  
 


 
2  
The Path Back to Low Inflation in New Zealand 
  
 
Introduction 
Thank you for inviting me to speak today. It’s a pleasure to be here, especially in person.  
I’m going to talk about why we are currently suffering a serious bout of inflation and what the 
Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) at the Reserve Bank of New Zealand is doing about it. This is 
important not only for the Reserve Bank, but for all New Zealanders because inflation impacts all 
of us.  
According to the latest data – which is for the December quarter last year – annual consumer price 
inflation was 7.2%, which is around the highest it has been since the late 1980s (Figure 1).  
High inflation creates economic costs and distortions.1 For example, unexpected inflation makes it 
more difficult for people to see relative price changes in the economy, increasing the likelihood of 
poor decisions being made. People devote more time and effort to minimising inflation risks, 
rather than more productive endeavours.  
Even when expected, inflation still hurts. For example, when interest rates increase to compensate 
for the declining value of money, lenders pay tax on the additional interest and borrowers may 
have to cut other spending to pay higher interest bills.  
Overall, inflation leads to misallocated resources and lower living standards. Less wealthy and less 
financially sophisticated people are more likely to lose out.  
Keeping inflation low and stable, as was generally the case in the three decades prior to the 
COVID-19 pandemic, is the best contribution monetary policy can make to promoting economic 
wellbeing and prosperity. This is enshrined in the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act (2021) and why 
maintaining price stability is a fundamental part of the MPC’s Remit.2  
We remain deeply committed in our work of bringing inflation down and keeping it low and stable 
in future. Quite simply, that’s our job.  
I want to leave you with four key messages from this speech: 
 
Inflation is high and widespread because strong demand outstripped supply. Businesses 
passed on higher costs and workers sought higher pay to compensate for higher prices. Fiscal 
and monetary responses to the pandemic supported demand while health measures and 
other shocks reduced the supply of labour and products.  
 
We are worse off because of the pandemic, the war and floods. Monetary policy cannot 
do anything about the loss of real income stemming from these events.  
 
Monetary policy is lowering inflation by lifting interest rates to ensure persistence in 
inflation above our inflation target is squeezed out of the economy. We are incredibly 
determined to get inflation and inflation expectations back to target.  
 
Returning inflation to target could be made more difficult if businesses and workers try to 
push up their real profit margins and real wages to make up for the inflationary impact of the 
____________ 
1  See, for example, Samantha Johnson (1993) “The costs of inflation revisited”, Reserve Bank Bulletin, Vol 56, No 1. Pp 3-31. 
2  Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 2021 (legislation.govt.nz/act/public/2021/0031/latest/LMS286978.html) and Reserve Bank of New Zealand (Replacement of Remit for Monetary 
Policy Committee) Order 2021 Reserve Bank of New Zealand (Replacement of Remit for Monetary Policy Committee) Order 2021 (LI 2021/29) Contents – New Zealand Legislation.  


 
3  
The Path Back to Low Inflation in New Zealand 
  
 
pandemic, the war, and the storms. In this case, Monetary Policy would need to be more 
contractionary for longer, resulting in a deeper recession.  
Figure 1: Annual CPI inflation in New Zealand  
 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: Shaded bar represents the inflation target range since the introduction of inflation targeting in 1989. From 2012, a 
focus on the 2 per cent target midpoint was added (blue line).  
How Did We Get High Inflation? 
Reduced Ability to Produce Goods and Services 
The COVID-19 pandemic and war and related events reduced the ability of the global economy to 
produce goods and services. Global supply chains were severely disrupted, especially for us living 
here in the South Pacific – the last bus stop on the planet. This really was a severe “black swan 
event” for global logistics.  
Labour shortages have also been incredibly intense globally and in New Zealand. As COVID-19 
spread, a large share of the global workforce was sick or isolating and couldn't work. For example, 
in March 2022, the number of people off work in New Zealand for a week or more because of 
sickness was up almost 70% compared with a year earlier.3  
It is not just the health impacts of COVID-19 that led to worker shortages. In some countries, the 
pandemic caused people to reassess their priorities and, in many cases, to stop working for a time 
or retire early.  
We didn’t see so much of this in New Zealand, where participation in the labour market remained 
incredibly strong and is currently at record highs. But when our border closed in the early days of 
the pandemic, international arrivals and departures collapsed to near zero. Net migration then 
____________ 
3  “More people away from work due to sickness” – Stats NZ (stats.govt.nz/news/more-people-away-from-work-due-to-sickness/). 


 
4  
The Path Back to Low Inflation in New Zealand 
  
 
turned negative through 2020 and 2021 as permanent or long term departures increased while 
arrivals stayed low. This was in stark contrast to previous years of very large migration inflows.  
Our labour market tightened. Over mid-2020, suggestive of structural change in the economy, 
unemployment and job vacancies both increased (Figure 2). But from the end of 2020, 
unemployment fell and job vacancies increased further as workers became increasingly difficult to 
find. The share of people moving between jobs also increased strongly, as competition for workers 
increased (Figure 3).  
As borders re-opened, younger New Zealanders have been leaving, further reducing the domestic 
pool of workers. The labour market has remained incredibly tight, with high vacancy rates and low 
unemployment.  
The recent summer flooding in Auckland and Cyclone Gabrielle have also reduced supply in some 
industries. 
You will have no doubt experienced the results of supply chain disruptions and worker shortages 
over recent years: for example, shops being closed because of staff illness; long waits for online 
purchases as international and domestic supply chains came under pressure; high food price 
inflation, and high petrol prices when the war in Ukraine impacted energy markets.  
Figure 2: Unemployment and the job vacancy rate  
 
Source: Stats NZ, Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE), RBNZ estimates.  
Note: The vacancy rate is defined as the number of job vacancies as a share of the labour force. Colours reflect different 
periods in recent history. Pink: COVID-19 (2020-2022); Black: post-GFC (2009Q3-2019); Orange: GFC (2008-2009Q2); 
blue: pre-GFC (1990-2007). 


 
5  
The Path Back to Low Inflation in New Zealand 
  
 
Figure 3: Job-to-job transitions 
 
Source: Stats NZ, Stats NZ IDI, RBNZ estimates.  
Note: WAP stands for ‘working-age population’. Private sector job-to-job transitions exclude transitions in the Education 
and Training and Public Administration and Safety industries. Job-to-job transitions data points for December 2017 and 
March 2018 have been removed due to data quality concerns. 
Resilient Demand and Spending 
While the supply of goods and services was restricted, spending and demand in the economy 
remained strong. Quite simply, demand outstripped our ability to supply. 
For us in New Zealand, this partly reflected the effectiveness of our health response to COVID-19. 
While lockdowns were tough going – especially for people living in Auckland – economic life for 
many New Zealanders was surprisingly ‘normal’ for many months during the global pandemic.  
At the same time, Government support to the economy increased over 2020. New packages, such 
as the Wage Subsidy Scheme, were designed and rolled out at pace. Interest rates were pushed 
lower, with the Official Cash Rate (OCR) dropped to its ‘effective lower bound’ and additional 
monetary policy tools put in place.  
For the most part, people remained in work, which supported income growth. There were also 
large build-ups of cash balances and savings, given limited spending opportunities during 
lockdowns. This also supported household spending and demand in the economy as restrictions 
were gradually eased.  
Demand has been resilient overall, but there have been big swings in what people have been 
spending their money on, given changing consumer preferences and economic realities. Perhaps 
most obviously, as borders around the world closed, a precipitous drop in visitor arrivals hit 
tourism spending hard.  
More generally, spending requiring face-to-face contact – mostly in service industries such as 
cafes, bars, and shops – fell sharply as the pandemic hit. On the flip side, spending on goods that 
could be bought online and delivered surged. The online economy grew strongly over this period.  


 
6  
The Path Back to Low Inflation in New Zealand 
  
 
Construction also boomed as resilient incomes, low unemployment, and low interest rates 
increased demand for housing. People spending more time at home – either working from home 
or locked down – also increased housing demand.  
With constraints on housing supply, stronger demand contributed to a 44% increase in house 
prices from early 2020 to late 2021.4 Unusually, given we were in the middle of a global pandemic, 
household wealth increased, adding to spending pressures via a wealth effect. That is, people tend 
to spend more when their wealth increases.  
More recently, as health restrictions were progressively removed, demand for services has 
increased strongly, particularly in hospitality and tourism. Demand for used cars and other 
products destroyed in the cyclone has also spiked.  
So, over the last few years, the story has been one of resilient demand but with big swings and 
changes in its composition.  
Resilient Demand at a Time of Disrupted and Limited Supply Causes Inflation 
Resilient demand plus supply-side issues equals inflation. To start with, bottlenecks led to sharp 
price increases for specific products. Perhaps the most obvious example was when supply 
restrictions caused by the war in Ukraine sent global energy and food prices sharply higher.  
As a small open economy, it was impossible for New Zealand to avoid inflationary pressures 
caused by global events. Almost half of headline inflation in New Zealand over the pandemic 
originated offshore (Figure 4).  
Keeping headline inflation in the 1-3% target over this time would have required monetary policy 
to be highly contractionary to reduce home-grown (non-tradable) inflation, in order to offset 
imported inflationary pressure. 
Excess demand dynamics also played out in some domestic markets. For instance, construction 
and housing-related costs are less influenced by global events but have risen sharply over the past 
two years because of difficulties finding materials (such as Gib plasterboard) and workers. 
Inflation in the tourism industry is another example. Tourism is on the front line of labour 
shortages and still rebuilding capacity lost during the early years of the pandemic. With higher 
demand driven by a rapid rebound in international visitors, prices charged by many tourism-
related businesses have increased sharply. 
 
 
____________ 
4  Housing (Still) Matters – The Big Picture rbnz.govt.nz/hub/publications/speech/2022/speech2022-06-30 


 
7  
The Path Back to Low Inflation in New Zealand 
  
 
Big swings in the composition of demand may also be inflationary. Recent work from the Bank of 
England finds that prices don’t fall much in industries hit with weaker demand but increase quickly 
in industries facing into stronger demand.5 This asymmetric response might explain why overall 
inflation did not fall in 2020 but increased strongly as demand started rebounding.  
Figure 4: Tradable inflation as a share of headline inflation 
 
Source: Stats NZ 
Inflation Becomes Widespread and Persistent 
In 2021, inflation increased mainly because of a relatively small number of large price increases, 
suggesting excess demand for a few specific products (Figure 5). In 2022, small price increases 
across a large number of products contributed to inflation, suggesting widespread inflation 
pressures in the economy. 
Inflation can become widespread in a number of ways. Price increases may spread through the 
economy as businesses try to pass on higher input costs and workers try to maintain the spending 
power of their incomes by seeking higher pay. 
With a very tight labour market and weak competition in some parts of our economy, the scope 
for price increases to become embedded in cost-price dynamics and trigger second-round 
inflationary effects is high. These second-round effects create ongoing inflation, even after the 
original stimulus – a relative price shock for specific products like petrol or plasterboard – has died 
away.  
Inflation can also spread through the economy because it is easier for firms to increase prices 
when other firms are doing likewise. Customers may think it more reasonable that firms increase 
their prices when there is inflation in the economy.  
Inflation can become persistent if people expect it to stay high in future. If people make decisions 
today based on the expectation of higher prices in future, then inflation will persist. Inflation 
____________ 
5  Bunn, P., Anayi, L. S., Bloom, N., Mizen, P., Thwaites, G., & Yotzov, I. (2022). Firming up price inflation (No. w30505). National Bureau of Economic Research. 


 
8  
The Path Back to Low Inflation in New Zealand 
  
 
expectations can become self-fulfilling in that once inflation starts, the belief that it will continue 
can sustain it.  
Figure 5: The distribution of price changes 
 
Source: RBNZ calculations using Statistics New Zealand CPI level 3 class data, INFOS CPI013AA, containing price indices 
for 109 categories (e.g. Bread and cereals; Women’s clothing; Postal services).  
Note: The graphs show the distribution of annual price increases each year, calculated as the fraction of items which 
have a price increase in 2 percentage point intervals eg 0 - 2%, 2 - 4%. The fractions are calculated using 
contemporaneous CPI weights. For example, between 2001 and 2020, 31% of categories had price increases between 2 
and 4%, on average; this fraction fell to 28% in 2021 and 14% in 2022. The graph shows that in 2021 there was only a 
small reduction in the number of categories having price increases of 4% or less, but a large increase in the number of 
categories having very large price increases, particularly price increases above 30%. In contrast, in 2022 there was a 
rightward shift of the whole distribution, with a large reduction in the number of categories with less than 4% price 
increases, and a large increase in the number price increases between 4 and 12%. 
How to Tame Inflation 
What Monetary Policy Can’t Do 
Before outlining how MPC is working to lower inflation, I want to briefly touch on what monetary 
policy can’t do. Monetary policy can’t do anything about income lost because of the pandemic, 
the war in Ukraine, and recent natural disasters.  
These losses reflect a reduced ability to produce goods and services. While monetary policy can 
and must respond to inflationary pressures caused by excess demand, it cannot do much to 
improve the ability of our economy to produce output. For example, the Reserve Bank can do 
nothing to make up for a shortage of kumara or onions or apples caused by flooding.  
Instead, improving productivity is the best way to lift incomes sustainably. By alleviating supply 
constraints, better productivity would also reduce long-run inflationary pressures at minimal 
economic cost. More productive businesses can hold or even cut prices while paying workers more 
and remaining competitive. 


 
9  
The Path Back to Low Inflation in New Zealand 
  
 
True, lifting productivity has not been easy in New Zealand, which is why New Zealanders work 
more hours than most in the developed world but earn relatively low incomes.  
One reason for our poor productivity is that competition may be weak in some New Zealand 
markets, making it easier for businesses to pass on cost increases to their customers.  
Improving competition is about regulatory changes that lower barriers to entry and discourage 
anti-competitive behaviours. It is excellent to see the Commerce Commission now doing Market 
Studies and having better regulatory tools at its disposal to pursue abuse of dominance cases.  
There are also things people can do to enhance the power of competition and keep price 
pressures in check. Shop around for that good deal. Wait for the sales. Use price comparison 
websites. And go to the effort of changing banks or utility providers if it means getting a better 
deal. 
How MPC is Working to Lower Inflation 
While higher productivity and more competitive markets are essential for lifting our economic 
performance and blunting inflationary pressures over the long run, the responsibility for reducing 
current inflation back into the 1-3% target band sits firmly with MPC.  
With inflation above 7% and far outside the target range, MPC has been increasing the OCR to 
bring demand back into balance with the supply capacity of our economy.  
Ideally, and with the benefit of hindsight, monetary policy should have started tightening earlier in 
2021. This, along with many other lessons learned, was recognised by the Reserve Bank in our 
recent review of monetary policy over the past five years.6  
In any case, at 4.75%, the OCR has increased by 450 basis points in only 18 months. In nominal 
terms, this is the most rapid increase in its history and the highest it has been since before the 
2008 Global Financial Crisis.  
Higher Interest Rates Soften Demand and Lower Inflation 
In short, monetary policy shifts demand in the economy through time. Higher interest rates reduce 
demand by encouraging people to spend less and save more while lower interest rates have the 
opposite effect. Higher interest rates push economic activity into the future whereas lower interest 
rates pull activity into the present.  
 
 
____________ 
6  In retrospect: Monetary policy in New Zealand 2017 to 2022 – rbnz.govt.nz/hub/publications/monetary-policy-statement/rafimp.   


 
10  The Path Back to Low Inflation in New Zealand 
  
 
So, as we work to rein in inflation, mortgage-holders and businesses looking for finance are seeing 
their interest rates increasing. People with savings are seeing the nominal return on their savings 
increase. However, the after-tax real return on savings may still be negative, given high inflation, 
sluggish increases in terms deposit rates, and tax settings.  
But over time, higher interest rates will encourage saving and restrict spending by households with 
mortgages. They will also hold back hiring decisions, and may lead to lower cash flow and lower 
asset prices, as we have already seen with house prices. Less helpfully, higher interest rates may 
also restrict business investment.  
All that will help lower aggregate demand in the economy. In turn, this will mean less excess 
demand in product and labour markets, which will mean lower inflation and employment moving 
back towards its maximum sustainable level. 
As in many countries around the world, we expect this monetary policy tightening to cause the 
New Zealand economy to enter a mild recession later this year as demand slows.  
Expectations Really Matter 
The effectiveness of higher interest rates in bringing balance to the economy and lowering 
inflation depends on how realistic and pragmatic New Zealanders are in accepting that we are 
worse off than we otherwise would be given global events of the past few years and recent storms.  
As Governor Adrian Orr puts it, the people of planet earth are poorer because of the pandemic 
and war. The recent floods in Auckland and the cyclone along the East Coast have also reduced 
wealth and prosperity in New Zealand. In practice, this means accepting the fact of higher prices 
for some producer inputs and consumption goods, meaning lower real wages and profits than 
otherwise.  
If businesses and workers try to push their real profit margins and real wages to where they would 
have been if not for the pandemic, the war, and storms, then the more likely it is that high 
inflationary pressures persist into the future. 
Resisting the squeeze on real incomes and spending power would mean MPC has to increase 
interest rates further or hold them up for longer, and the deeper any recession would need to be 
to get inflation back within the target band.  
As I outlined earlier, monetary policy cannot do anything about the loss of real income stemming 
from global events and natural disasters. What we can and are doing is lifting interest rates to 
ensure any self-sustaining persistence in inflation above the inflation target is squeezed out of the 
economy by constraining demand relative to supply as necessary. 
By the same token, if businesses and households make decisions today based on the expectation 
of rising prices in future, then inflationary pressures will persist. Higher interest rates for longer and 
a deeper recession would again be necessary to bring inflation back to target.  
Conversely, if people expect inflation to be within the 1-3% target in future and act accordingly, the 
less work we have to do with higher interest rates that weaken demand.  


 
11  The Path Back to Low Inflation in New Zealand 
  
 
Taming inflation means ensuring that short-term inflation expectations do not just reflect current 
high inflation and that medium-term inflation expectations do not drift so that long-term 
expectations remain anchored to the inflation target (Figure 6).  
The path back from persistent to low inflation always involves some output losses and lower 
incomes overall. The size of those losses depends on how realistic we all are in adjusting to new 
economic realities and in expecting inflation to fall back to target, consistent with MPC’s Remit. 
Figure 6: Inflation expectations 
 
Source: RBNZ Survey of Expectations (Business). 
Monetary Policymaking in a World of Change 
If that didn’t already sound complicated, let me layer on some of the complexities and 
uncertainties MPC faces when making interest rate decisions. (And can I stress that decisions on 
the OCR are reached through consensus by the seven members of MPC.) 
First, the global economy is highly volatile, fragile, and uncertain. Economic growth rates have 
been slowing, partly in response to higher interest rates, and international organisations paint a 
gloomy future for the global economy.  
Globalisation is changing, with big implications for small economies such as ours. The global 
trading system is fracturing along political lines and geopolitical tensions are rife. The transition to 
net zero carbon emissions will lead to further changes in the global balance of power and trade 
relations.  
This presents MPC with a very volatile and challenging international environment to navigate over 
the current cycle. It also raises big questions about the type of economy we will face once inflation 
is back within the target band.  


 
12  The Path Back to Low Inflation in New Zealand 
  
 
On the domestic front, our hearts go out to people impacted by the recent storms and floods in 
the North Island. The material and financial losses are clearly substantial.  
With no spare capacity in the economy, diverting resources into cyclone-affected areas for the 
rebuild will mean reducing activity in other parts of the country. There are a number of ways this 
rebalancing could occur, each with different implications for interest rate.  
If the rebuild generates inflationary pressure, interest rates would increase, reducing demand and 
freeing up resources for the rebuild. Alternatively, diverting Government resources from projects 
elsewhere in the country or funding the rebuild via increased government revenues would free up 
resources without the need for higher interest rates.  
Another uncertainty growing increasingly pertinent as we near the interest rate peak is knowing 
when monetary policy has done enough to get inflation comfortably back to target.  
The effects of the 450 basis point increase in the OCR over the last 18 months are still percolating 
through the economy. For instance, over the coming year, 50% of mortgages will roll off low fixed-
term rates onto much higher rates. The ‘average’ mortgage rate will move from 4.5% to over 6%.  
We assume this will affect consumer spending in a similar way to interest rate increases in previous 
cycles. But the rapid speed of rate increases creates additional uncertainty about how the effects of 
the tightening will play out. 
It is also unclear whether inflation expectations are falling fast enough to mean current and 
projected OCR settings are consistent with positive real interest rates, and thus likely to be 
disinflationary. In part, this comes down to how convinced people are that MPC will do what’s 
necessary to get inflation down.  
On balance, our measures of neutral interest rates – the interest rate that is neither stimulatory nor 
contractionary – indicate the OCR is now comfortably above neutral and having the desired 
contractionary effect. Consistent with this, and as discussed in detail in the February Monetary 
Policy Statement, there are welcome signs demand in the economy is slowing.  
Achieving the Remit 
Monetary policy is not just about returning inflation to target and keeping it there. The Reserve 
Bank of New Zealand Act (2021) instructs us to also support maximum sustainable employment. 
Currently, with inflation well above target and employment clearly above its maximum sustainable 
level, achieving this dual mandate requires contractionary monetary policy to slow domestic 
spending and employment and to lower inflation. 
However, in a stagflation environment of low growth, rising unemployment and high inflation, the 
optimal path for interest rates becomes less clear. Would MPC raise interest rates to control 
inflation or lower rates to encourage growth and jobs?  
In this situation, history and economic theory suggest a policy response aimed at a more drawn-
out return of inflation to target and a smaller decline in employment.  
But if inflation expectations move higher, the optimal response is to put greater weight on 
returning inflation to target. This would support maximum sustainable employment in the medium 


 
13  The Path Back to Low Inflation in New Zealand 
  
 
term by reducing the need for an extended period of contractionary monetary policy to get even 
higher inflation expectations back to target.  
Our Monetary Policy Remit also instructs us to have regard to the efficiency and soundness of the 
financial system and to avoid unnecessary instability in output, interest rates, and the exchange 
rate. We also have to discount transitory inflationary events and assess the impact of MPC 
decisions on the Government’s policy on house prices.  
In practice, this means we have a medium term focus for our price stability objective. The flexibility 
that allows us is important in that it ensures we can maintain price stability over time without 
causing unnecessary damage to the economy.  
We are currently reviewing our Remit and will give advice to the Minister of Finance in April.  
Conclusion 
The title of this speech is how to get back to low inflation in New Zealand. In a narrow sense, this is 
about getting monetary policy right so inflation returns to target. This means firms, workers and 
taxpayers accepting the distributional consequences of recent global and domestic shocks and 
lowering their inflation expectations accordingly.  
We are well placed to cope with this adjustment. The economy has grown strongly over the 
pandemic and unemployment and headline CPI are both in the lower third of OCED economies, 
while core inflation is about middle of the pack. Household balance sheets are in good shape in 
aggregate and the banking system is very well capitalised, meaning there is no conflict between 
monetary policy and financial stability.  
In a broader sense, getting monetary policy right in a complex and volatile environment means 
building a deep understanding of the evolving economic context in which monetary policy 
operates. This requires an ambitious economic research agenda, including the use of new and 
improved data for monitoring and understanding the economy.  
It also requires strong collaboration across the public sector and with the domestic and 
international academic community. For example, we must work with the Treasury to understand 
the future role of fiscal policy instruments in managing economic shocks.  
In the broadest sense, getting back to low inflation is about improving the ability of the  
New Zealand economy to thrive in a rapidly evolving global environment. But that’s a conversation 
for another day.
