BANK: RBNZ
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Deposit taker regulation and financial stability – emerging currents
DATE: 18/12/2025
SPEAKER: emerging currents
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/speeches/2025/deposit-taker-regulation-and-financial-stability---emerging-currents.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Deposit taker 
regulation and 
financial stability 
– emerging 
currents 
 
Conference paper for a speech delivered to the 
Financial Markets and Credit Law Conference in 
Auckland 
On 20 October 2025 
By Ross Pennington, Principal Legal Counsel 
 


 
Conference paper – financial markets & the DTA 
1 
 Introduction 
The passing of the Deposit Takers Act 2023 (DTA) was only the beginning of a reset for our 
prudential regulatory system, which will take place as banking standards and supporting 
frameworks are implemented over the coming years.  This process is being undertaken at the 
same time as unprecedented market developments that include the rise of fintech, stablecoin, AI-
assisted business models, and the critical mass forming in our institutional capital markets.  
This paper contains a brief survey of some key features of the new regulatory world and influences 
that will shape it: 
• 
The new statutory objectives that will shape the formulation of the new prudential regime 
and its operation once it comes into full effect, including the body of standards that will 
replace the existing banking prudential requirements. 
• 
The accountability regime that will underpin the prudential obligations formed under that 
rule set, including directors’ liabilities and due diligence duties. 
• 
Emerging market trends that will contribute to reshaping our financial system as this 
process takes place. 
• 
Core elements of the crisis management and resolution regime that will be built alongside 
the standards to mitigate or manage the consequences of the failure of a deposit taker. 
The purpose of this paper is to draw out some core principles and features that will help advisers 
to navigate the prudential landscape and contribute to its development. 
Recoding the objectives of financial policy  
A feature of the new DTA is to build substantially on the statutory purposes in the Banking 
(Prudential Supervision) Act 1989 (BPSA), providing a comprehensive and coherent set of purposes 
and principles to underlie financial policy and prudential practice.  This has particular significance in 
the process to establish a new body of standards to achieve the articulated dimensions of financial 
stability and in enabling engagement and debate to take place under a common understanding of 
goals.   
With the specificity of the purposes comes an element of complexity as they are reconciled and 
applied, an exercise that is inherently circumstance-specific.  Accordingly, the comments below will 
seek to draw out some key elements to provide a context in which the purposes and principles can 
be understood. 
Structure of the statutory objectives 
The statutory objectives fall into four categories: 
• 
The main purpose in section 3(1), supplemented and clarified by the additional purposes in 
section 3(2). 


 
Conference paper – financial markets & the DTA 
2 
• 
Purposes applying to specific components of the regime, most notably the purpose for the 
Depositor Compensation Scheme (DCS) in section 190 and for the crisis management and 
resolution regime in section 259. 
• 
The principles in section 4. 
• 
A financial policy remit that is issued by the Minister of Finance under section 49 of the 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 2021 (RBNZ Act). 
These perform complementary roles in directing the considerations that underlie financial policy. 
The legal effect of the statutory purposes 
Purposes are a statement of the “why” of operative provisions and need to be integrated on that 
basis with how the Reserve Bank gives effect to its mandate and carries out its powers and 
functions.1 
Purposes have substantive legal effect in shaping decision-making – they do not create standalone 
substantive legal rights, but they have a direct bearing on the meaning and dimensions of the 
relevant function, power or duty.  The scope of the prudential discretion and the considerations 
that should guide it are to be drawn primarily from interpretation of the substantive powers in light 
of the purposes attaching to them.  Since the promulgation of new standards is a function of the 
Reserve Bank, for example, the purposes provide a guiding framework for that exercise. 
While the principles to some extent can be understood and applied as standalone considerations, 
it is important to emphasise that the purposes are to be understood in the way they interact with 
operative provisions – they should be construed and applied on an integrated basis.2   
The legal effect of principles 
The principles in section 4 similarly guide and limit the Reserve Bank’s decision-making under the 
DTA as matters that the Reserve Bank must “take into account” in the performance or exercise of 
its functions, powers and duties to achieve the DTA’s purposes. 
The legal nature of principles is that they operate as “mandatory considerations”.  The Reserve 
Bank must ensure that each relevant principle is considered but the level of influence each 
principle has to a particular decision is determined by the Reserve Bank.  The principles can never 
supplant the purposes.  However, there is no hierarchy among the principles themselves (for 
example nothing is to be drawn from the order in which they appear). 
As noted above, the purposes attach to operative provisions, affecting their substantive 
interpretation.  The principles perform a somewhat different role, acting as a light to cast on the 
Reserve Bank’s proposed approach to its functions, powers and duties when making decisions.  A 
function is to be formulated and performed for a specified prudential end determined in 
____________ 
1  LDAC “Legislation guidelines: designing purpose provisions and statements of principle” (2021 edition). 
2  This reflects the fundamental principle enshrined in section 10 of the Legislation Act 2019 that the meaning of 
legislation must be ascertained from its text and in the light of its purpose and its context. 


 
Conference paper – financial markets & the DTA 
3 
accordance with the purposes – how should that be done in a way that is proportional, least cost, 
promotes competition, and so on? 
The legal effect of the Financial Policy Remit 
The aim of a financial policy remit is to enable the objectives to be specified in more detail and to 
add further considerations.3  They cannot supplant statutory purposes. 
Section 203 of the RBNZ Act requires the Minister to issue a financial policy remit which may 
specify or provide for matters that the Minister considers are desirable for the Reserve Bank to 
have regard to in relation to 1 or more of the following (s 204):  
• 
achieving the financial stability objective;  
• 
acting in a way that furthers the objectives or purposes of the prudential legislation; and  
• 
performing the Reserve Bank’s function under section 10(1)(b) (which relates to acting as a 
prudential regulator and supervisor under the prudential legislation).   
Under section 49, the Board of the Reserve Bank must have regard to the remit when the board is:  
• 
setting the prudential strategic intentions in the Statement of Intent; 
• 
making significant policy decisions about how to achieve those prudential strategic 
intentions, or  
• 
monitoring and reporting on the Reserve Bank’s performance in achieving those prudential 
strategic intentions.  
The remit explicitly applies to formulating and issuing standards (s 49 RBNZ Act). 
As with the principles, matters in a remit are mandatory considerations in the specified aspects of 
the Board’s decision-making, but the weight to be given to them is at the Board’s discretion.4   
The current financial policy remit, issued in 2024,5 sets out a number of points of emphasis in 
prudential policy, particularly on competition and innovation. 
Main purpose  
The existing BPSA (under a prior amendment), the RBNZ Act, and the DTA are united in their 
expression of the main purpose to “promote the prosperity and well-being of New Zealanders, and 
contribute to a sustainable and productive economy”.  In the BPSA and DTA, a key hinge arises 
from the preposition “by”, which attaches this ambitious objective to specific functions: 
• 
BPSA:  Providing for the Reserve Bank to be responsible for registering and undertaking 
prudential supervision of banks and the other functions and powers specified in the Act.  
The purposes are elaborated in section 68, under which the prudential function must be 
____________ 
3  Consultation Paper 2b (June 2019), pg 18.  An example of the former is the emphasis given to competition in the 2024 
FPR.  An example of an additional consideration is the remit concerning innovation. 
4  Section 204(2) RBNZ Act. 
5  Refer https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/about/financial-policy-remit/financial-policy-remit-
december-2024.pdf  


 
Conference paper – financial markets & the DTA 
4 
exercised for the purposes of promoting the maintenance of a sound and efficient financial 
system or avoiding significant damage to the financial system that could result from the 
failure of a registered bank. 
• 
DTA:  Protecting and promoting the stability of the financial system.  
Accordingly, financial stability lies at the heart of the new regime.  Because this is a multi-
dimensional concept, section 3 goes on to provide that: 
(2)  To that end, this Act has the following additional purposes:  
(a)  to promote the safety and soundness of each deposit taker:  
(b)  to promote public confidence in the financial system:  
(c)  to the extent not inconsistent with subsection (1) and paragraphs (a), (b), and (d), to support 
New Zealanders having reasonable access to financial products and services provided by the 
deposit-taking sector:  
(d)  to avoid or mitigate the adverse effects of the following risks: (i) risks to the stability of the 
financial system: (ii) risks from the financial system that may damage the broader economy. 
In addition to moving to the internationally recognised prudential foundation of financial stability, 
the DTA has a notable shift from the BPSA by expanding the remit beyond system stability to 
include a focus on the safety and soundness of particular deposit takers.  The centrality of 
confidence to financial stability is also evident in the institution of the DCS, the purpose of which is 
financial stability (s 190(1)), and by its repetition in the crisis management purpose in section 
259(1)(a)(ii) – there expanded beyond “public” confidence, and in the regulation-making powers in 
sections 454 and 459.  In addition to the Reserve Bank’s stewardship role, this purpose underpins 
the increased emphasis in the DTA on communication to ensure that the public understands the 
rationale for its decisions.6 
Hierarchies and interactions 
Various hierarchies are expressly or impliedly7 integrated into the purpose provisions, which will 
shape the way they are integrated into functions, purposes and duties.  Section 3 itself is an explicit 
hierarchy provision, first, in that it puts financial stability (“by”) into the service of productivity, 
prosperity and well-being and, second, because it acts as the overall “why” of all other purposes, 
indicating the high-level outcome or ‘end’ that financial stability is intended to achieve.  The 
relationship between the purposes and principles also reflects an explicit hierarchy; section 4 
provides that “In achieving the purposes of the DTA” the Reserve Bank must take into account the 
enumerated principles. 
The words “to that end” in section 3(2) highlight that the additional purposes are intended to 
contribute to the main purpose.  In practice, the additional purposes (and those in sections 190 
and 259) will primarily shape decision-making, by giving more precise definition of the role of 
____________ 
6 Examples include the Statement of Approach to Resolution, the Statement of Funding Approach, and the information 
required to be given to the public about the DCS scheme. 
7  Examples of the former include ss 3(2)(c) and 259(d).  An example of the latter is the comparative elevation of the 
s 259 purposes in the event a deposit taker has gone into resolution under Part 7. 


 
Conference paper – financial markets & the DTA 
5 
financial stability in promoting productivity, prosperity and well-being.  The structure indicates that 
it is important to consider both the application of an individual purpose and how it work with 
others as an overall package to contribute to financial stability and New Zealand’s prosperity. 
Relationship to the Standards project 
The most substantial work programme to implement the DTA is the formulation and promulgation 
of the new set of Standards that will form the kernel of the prudential framework. 
Under the incumbent law, the rules that perform the role intended for the Standards – known as 
the banking prudential requirements (BPRs) – have their statutory basis in section 74 of the BPSA, 
under the power to impose license conditions, and they are formed against the backdrop of the 
statutory purposes briefly noted above. 
A major change brought about by the DTA is that the Standards take effect as secondary 
legislation and are prepared under similar rigours and conventions as applied by the Parliamentary 
Counsel Office.  They also are governed by the purposes and principles of the DTA and the 
financial policy remit.8  In this regard, the principles assume a more prominent role than they 
might have in other circumstances. 
There are thirteen separate Standards that are being prepared, that were divided into ‘core’ and 
‘non-core’ for the purposes of the initial consultation, and are being drafted and introduced in 
tranches.  While they are not formally organised into groupings, for the purposes of understanding 
the big picture of how they operate to contribute to financial stability, they could be envisaged in 
the following cohorts.  
 
Due diligence guidance is included not because it is a standard – it is mandatory guidance (s 97) – 
but because it contributes along with the standards to assuring compliance with the prudential 
obligations and clarify the responsibilities of directors and senior managers for it.  The bail-in 
standard is shaded because its inclusion depends on decisions to be taken about whether 
‘haircuts’ of equity or debt claims in resolution will be by way of structural bail-in (in which claims 
____________ 
8  For the latter, refer section 49(1)(d) and 49(2) of the RBNZ Act 2021. 


 
Conference paper – financial markets & the DTA 
6 
are retained in or transferred to a ‘bad bank’) or whether write-off or conversion may occur under 
statutory instruments.  
To align with the establishment of the DCS, a DCS Transitional Standard was issued on 15 May 
2025 with accompanying guidance.9  Exposure Drafts of remaining Standards will be released 
progressively for consultation from the first quarter of 2026, following on from the policy 
consultation on the standards. 
Accountability for prudential obligations 
A key change in the DTA from the 1989 law is to attach to prudential compliance a full 
accountability and enforcement regime, responding to shortcomings identified by the IMF FSAP 
and aligning the powers of the Reserve Bank as supervisor with those of the Financial Markets 
Authority (FMA) as conduct regulator of the financial system more generally.   
Central to the accountability and liability regime are the “prudential obligations”, which encompass 
any obligation imposed under the DTA or regulations, Standards, license conditions, directions, 
and (for some purposes) the AML Laws.10  Matching this is a full range of supervisory and 
enforcement tools that enable a targeted and graduated response to compliance concerns. 
Enforcement framework 
The supervisory powers and enforcement framework in Parts 4 and 5 of the DTA yield a broad 
toolkit to respond to contravention.  While the DTA is a complex Act, as a reasonable 
generalisation the structure of the Act for accountability and liability is: 
• 
The deposit taker is responsible for prudential obligations. 
• 
Directors are responsible for designing and implementing systems to promote that 
compliance (the ‘due diligence duty’). 
For each, there is a flexible toolkit that can enable graduated and, if necessary, escalating 
responses:  
  
____________ 
9  Refer the Deposit Takers (Depositor Compensation Scheme Transitional Provisions) Standard 2025 (the Transitional 
Standard) and Guidance dated 16 May 2025.  Relevant matters are also provided for in the Deposit Takers Regulations 
2025. 
10  The AML laws are excluded under ss 93 and 94. 


 
Conference paper – financial markets & the DTA 
7 
The duties to uphold the prudential obligations are not merely passive: 
• 
Monitoring and reporting:  A deposit taker must monitor its compliance with its prudential 
obligations and report any contravention (ss 115 and 116).  
• 
Governance and risk management:  Standards require governance systems that promote 
compliance, allocate among directors and senior managers11 responsibility for them, and 
create active risk management processes (ss 78 and 85). 
• 
Due diligence duty:  Every director, or for branches NZ CEO, must exercise due diligence 
to ensure that the deposit taker complies with its prudential obligations (ss 93-96).   
Regulatory toolkit for remediation and enforcement 
The 1989 legislation had a limited framework for the formulation of financial policy and for its 
supervision and enforcement.  In the DTA, these have undergone a fundamental overhaul, both 
bottom-up – in the comprehensive supervision framework in Part 4 of the DTA – and top-down, in 
the purposes and principles that specify how functions, duties and powers are to be exercised.  
This is rounded out by the enforcement powers in Part 5, which provide an adaptable and 
graduated toolkit in line with international best practice.12 
Components of the framework include: 
• 
Licensing and conditions:  An applicant’s ability to comply with prudential obligations 
(including sound governance and business structure) are a mandatory consideration in 
license consideration (s 117).  The Reserve Bank is empowered to apply conditions to any 
license and may require that directors certify compliance with prudential obligations and 
laws (s 24). 
• 
Standards:  A broad range of standards may be issued to regulate or promote prudential 
matters, which are prepared and take effect as secondary legislation (ss 74-92). 
• 
Information, inspection and investigation:  The Reserve Bank may require information from 
any person if it considers it necessary or desirable for the purposes of performing or 
exercising its functions, powers, or duties (s 99); conduct on-site inspections to assess the 
adequacy of policies, processes, controls, or other arrangements for complying with 
prudential obligations (ss 111, 112); or appoint an investigator – who has wide powers, 
including of search and interview – if it has reasonable cause to suspect that a prudential 
obligation has been or is likely to be contravened and it considers it necessary or desirable 
for the purposes of performing or exercising its functions, powers, or duties (ss 126, 127). 
• 
Undertakings:  The Reserve Bank may accept a written undertaking from a deposit taker or 
other person about a matter in relation to which the Reserve Bank is performing or 
exercising any of its functions, powers, or duties under the DTA.  If accepted, it becomes 
____________ 
11  Defined for locally incorporated deposit takers as the CEO, CFO, and direct reports to the CEO.  For branches, it is the 
NZ CEO and NZ CFO. 
12  Refer Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BIS) Core Principles for Effective Banking Supervision (April 2024 ed) – 
https://www.bis.org/bcbs/publ/d573.pdf  


 
Conference paper – financial markets & the DTA 
8 
enforceable and it is an offence to contravene it.  This can include paying compensation to 
any person, taking remedial action, or paying an amount to the Reserve Bank in lieu of a 
pecuniary penalty (ss 148-154). 
• 
Remedial notices and plans:  If it has reasonable grounds to believe a prudential obligation 
has been or is likely to be contravened, the Reserve Bank may require the deposit taker to 
address, remedy or mitigate the contravention, including a remedial plan setting out 
required steps (s 119). 
• 
Warnings:  If the Reserve Bank has reasonable cause to suspect that a prudential obligation 
has been or is likely to be contravened, it may issue a warning and require it to be 
published by the deposit taker (s 133). 
• 
Directions:  The Reserve Bank may give a direction if a deposit taker has or is likely to 
contravene a prudential obligation in a material respect, as one of the escalated responses 
within Part 7 of the DTA (s 265).  The circumstances for this include that the deposit taker 
has contravened, may have contravened, or is likely to contravene any other prudential 
obligation in a material respect.  The scope of directions is broad (s 267). 
• 
Resolution:  Persistent or serious contravention of prudential obligations is a ground for 
resolution under Part 7 of the DTA (s 280). 
Directors’ responsibilities and accountabilities 
The general scheme of the DTA is that responsibility for compliance with prudential obligations is 
of the deposit taker, and the responsibility of directors is to exercise due diligence to ensure that 
the deposit taker complies with its prudential obligations.  This duty is one of the four channels of 
for attributing personal liability to directors: 
• 
Due diligence duty:  Directors must “exercise due diligence to ensure that the deposit taker 
complies with its prudential obligations”, including specific requirements to design and 
oversee systems to ensure compliance and carefully circumscribed rights of reliance and 
delegation (ss 93-96). 
• 
Direct liability:  While certain civil or criminal offences apply only to the deposit taker, 
others apply to “any person” and so can ground direct action for contravention.   
• 
Accessory liability:  Sections 157(1)(b) and 157(2) provide for accessory liability for those 
“involved in a contravention” of standards (and not other prudential obligations), which 
apply when a person has aided, abetted, counselled, or procured the contravention, 
induced or conspired, or been in any way, directly or indirectly, knowingly concerned in, or 
party to, the contravention.   
• 
Vicarious liability:  For information and disclosure contraventions under section 175, 
directors are deemed to be responsible unless a defence is available to them, similar to the 


 
Conference paper – financial markets & the DTA 
9 
position applying to regulated disclosure breaches in section 534 of the Financial Markets 
Conduct Act 2013 (FMCA).13   
These provisions are applied to directors on an individual basis – the responsibilities of the board 
as a collective are addressed in the governance standard (s 78).  
Due diligence duty 
A significant change in the DTA is to create a positive duty on directors (and, for branches, their 
NZ CEO) to exercise due diligence to ensure that the deposit taker complies with its prudential 
obligations.  It is designed to ensure that those responsible for the management of the deposit 
taker activate systems and processes to ensure compliance and also, reflecting the ethos behind 
the FMCA, to encourage sound procedures and provide benefits for doing so, even if something 
goes wrong.  The converse is also true – failure to design and implement adequate systems is itself 
a contravention, even if underlying prudential obligations at that time are fulfilled. 
Under section 93(1), every director must exercise due diligence to ensure that the deposit taker 
complies with its prudential obligations.14  This has comprehensive scope, including applying to all 
standards. The standard of care is specified in section 93(2) – the director must exercise the care, 
diligence, and skill that a reasonable director would exercise in the same circumstances, taking into 
account the size and nature of the business15 and the position of the director the nature of their 
responsibilities undertaken.  Breach can ground civil liability under section 157(1)(d). 
Sections 95 and 96 of the DTA provide important direction on the parameters and expectations of 
the due diligence duty.  The first provides that “due diligence” includes taking reasonable steps to 
ensure that the deposit taker: 
• 
requires its employees and agents to follow procedures, or has implemented automated 
procedures, designed to ensure compliance with the prudential obligations; 
• 
has in place methods for systematically identifying deficiencies in the effectiveness of the 
procedures for compliance; and 
• 
promptly remedies any deficiencies discovered. 
Section 96 provides that, when performing due diligence duties, directors may rely on reports, 
statements, and financial data and other information prepared or supplied, and on professional or 
expert advice given, by: 
• 
an employee whom they believe on reasonable grounds to be reliable and competent in 
relation to the matters concerned; 
____________ 
13 Specifically, section 176 of the DTA provides that if a deposit taker is convicted of an offence against section 175, every 
director is guilty of the offence if it is proved that the act took place with the director’s authority, permission, or 
consent and the director knew, or could reasonably be expected to have known, that the offence was to be or was 
being committed and failed to take all reasonable steps to prevent or stop it. 
14  There is a corresponding duty in section 94 of the DTA for NZ CEOs of branches that are not locally incorporated. 
15  This is a recurrent phrase in the DTA which complements the proportionality principle in section 4(a)(i). 


 
Conference paper – financial markets & the DTA 
10 
• 
a professional adviser or expert in relation to matters which A believes on reasonable 
grounds to be within the person’s professional or expert competence; and 
• 
in the case of a director, any other director or committee of directors upon which A did 
not serve in relation to matters within the other director’s or committee’s designated 
authority. 
The director must act in good faith, make proper inquiry where the need for inquiry is indicated by 
the circumstances, and have no knowledge that such reliance is unwarranted. 
Under section 97, the Reserve Bank is required to prepare and publish guidance about the due 
diligence duties, which may include guidance about the respective roles and responsibilities of 
directors and senior managers.  In this respect and more broadly, the Governance Standard will 
also provide direction on the expectations as the enabling provision, section 78, contemplates that 
the standard may regulate or deal with the governance of a deposit taker, including the 
responsibilities of the governing body, of committees of that body, and of its management. 
Civil liability 
Deposit takers, directors, and in certain cases other persons, can be subject to civil and criminal 
liability for contraventions of prudential obligations or for more specific breaches.  These generally 
apply a due diligence defence where no specific fault element is contained in the relevant 
provision.  There is also a range of contraventions for which infringement notices may be issued. 
The core civil liability provision is section 157 of the DTA, which provides that the Reserve Bank 
may apply to the court for an order for a person to pay a pecuniary penalty if the person has: 
• 
contravened an applicable standard (subject to the defence in s 160); 
• 
been involved in the contravention of an applicable standard (accessory liability); 
• 
contravened a condition of its license (also subject to the defence in s 160); or 
• 
contravened the due diligence duty under s 93 or (for branches) 94. 
The first and third of these should normally apply to the deposit taker, as the person obliged 
under standards and license conditions.  The fourth applies to directors or, for branches, their NZ 
CEO. 
Defences for civil liability 
Section 160 of the DTA applies to civil proceedings under section 157 for breach of standards and 
license conditions.  The elements of this defence are: 
• 
Reliance:  Contravention was due to reasonable reliance on information provided by 
another person, other than a director, an employee, or an agent of A. 
• 
Cause outside control:  Contravention was due to the conduct of another person, other 
than a director, an employee, or an agent of A or an accident or some other cause beyond 
the control of A and A’s directors, employees, and agents and A took reasonable 
precautions and exercised due diligence to avoid the contravention. 


 
Conference paper – financial markets & the DTA 
11 
It does not apply to breaches of the due diligence duty since the elements of that contain their 
own ‘defences’ (for example, reliance on information provided by others or, more broadly, 
meeting the relevant standard of care). 
Where directors or others are pursued for involvement in a contravention, a defence is under 
section 161, which provides that if a person (B) has contravened a Standard and another person (C) 
is involved in a contravention, it is a defence if C proves that: 
• 
its involvement in B’s contravention was due to reasonable reliance on information 
supplied by another person, other than a director, an employee, or an agent of C; or 
• 
C took all reasonable steps to ensure that B complied with the applicable standard. 
Under section 159 of the DTA, a court in determining whether to order a pecuniary penalty or 
setting its level, must have regard to specified factors, including the extent to which the conduct 
undermines the purposes of the Act, loss or damage caused, whether steps have been taken to 
avoid or mitigate adverse effects, whether the conduct was intentional or reckless, and any 
previous similar conduct.  Statutory factors also apply under section 154 to a court in deciding 
whether to enforce an undertaking – the nature and extent of the contravention or of loss or 
damage resulting, and whether it was intentional, inadvertent, or caused by negligence. 
The tenor of these provisions is consistent with the principle underlying the due diligence duty, to 
encourage systems and behaviour that give attention to, and support compliance with, the deposit 
taker’s prudential obligations. 
Offences  
Offences are attached to breaches of specific provisions of the DTA, applying as follows: 
• 
Deposit taker:  approval of directors (ss 27-30); non-disclosure of where there are fit and 
proper concerns (s 33); credit ratings (ss 60, 65); failure to publish report or obtain audit 
(ss 104, 106); monitor compliance & report contraventions (s 117); remedial plans (s 125); 
refusal of on-site investigation by overseas supervisor (s 143); and contravening an 
undertaking (s 152). 
• 
Particular persons:  employee, director or agent fails to supply information in an on-site 
inspection (s 114); directors’ vicarious liability for offences under s 175 (s 176); issuer of 
financial product – DCS advertising (s 258); valuer – NCWO misuse of information and 
record retention (s 390, 402); covered bond issuer – covered bond programme registration, 
corrective actions (ss 406, 418), financial services provider – restricted words (s 426); Reserve 
Bank board/staff unauthorised disclosure (ss 444, 447). 
• 
Any person:  carrying on business as a DT without a license or holding out (ss 11, 14); major 
changes approval (ss 44, 51); failure to supply information (s 100); investigations (ss 129, 
132, 137); false information/misrepresentation (s 175); contravening banning order (s 180); 
disclosure of directions (s 273); resolution-related (ss 345, 346, 388, 390, 402); restricted 
words (ss 435, 437). 
Section 185 provides a defence to the offences if the defendant (A) proves that:  


 
Conference paper – financial markets & the DTA 
12 
• 
the contravention to which the offence relates was due to the conduct of another person, 
other than a director, employee, or agent of A or an accident or some other cause beyond 
the control of A and A’s directors, employees, and agents; and  
• 
A took reasonable precautions and exercised due diligence to avoid the contravention. 
This defence is broadly similar to that available for civil actions under s 160.  It covers all the 
offences listed above, other than: 
• 
those subject to a specific fault or mens rea element (knowledge, intent, recklessness) – 
ss 11, 14, 44, 125, 132, 175, 346, 390, 444, 447 and  
• 
breach of an undertaking or banning order (ss 152 and 180). 
The DTA also provides for infringement offences, in which lower level administrative fines apply to 
a limited range of transgressions – notification of senior appointments (s 30); fit and proper 
requirements (ss 31, 33, 36); notification of significant influence transactions or amalgamations (ss 
40, 43), credit ratings (ss 64, 66-69); and publishing DCS deposit list (s 193). 
Approach to enforcement 
The Reserve Bank has published a range of guidance on its regulatory response model, including: 
• 
Enforcement Principles and Criteria Guidelines (18 May 2022).  These apply enforcement 
principles that that guide investigation and enforcement strategy – risk-based, 
proportionate, and transparent – and enforcement criteria informing appropriate 
responses – seriousness of conduct, responsiveness, public trust and confidence, and 
efficacy. 
• 
Enforcement Framework (16 January 2023).  This highlights the broader regulatory 
response model, which provides for graduated interventions in a range from normal 
supervision, heightened supervision, targeted responses, and court responses. 
• 
Investigation Guidelines (26 January 2023).  These describe the approach to investigations, 
how the Reserve Bank applies the Enforcement Principles and Criteria throughout the 
lifecycle of an investigation, and the use of information gathering powers under prudential 
legislation when used as part of an investigation.16 
These sit alongside the Statement of Prudential Policy, which covers principles considered in 
making decisions across prudential policy, supervision, enforcement, and resolution.17 
____________ 
16  Refer https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/regulation-and-supervision/cross-sector-oversight/enforcement  
17  Refer https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/regulation-and-supervision/statements-of-
approaches/sopp-2022.pdf  


 
Conference paper – financial markets & the DTA 
13 
Financial innovation, financial stability 
At the same time as the prudential regulatory framework is undergoing its most fundamental 
transformation in a generation, significant developments are taking place in the banking, payments 
and broader financial system. 
Unification of regulated deposit-taking 
A feature of the DTA is to unite the separate categories of regulated deposit takers – registered 
banks and non-bank deposit takers (NBDTs) – as licensed deposit takers.  This makes the regulated 
deposit taking base larger and more diverse, incorporating finance companies, credit unions and 
building societies into the core prudential framework and providing protection to their depositors 
under the DCS. 
The DTA also has themes of promoting diversity and competition in the regulated financial sector 
and the 2024 Financial Policy Remit also gives emphasis to innovation and dynamism.  In this 
regard, three principles under section 4(a) are significant in shaping policy about the nature and 
extent of the application of the prudential regime: 
• 
Proportionality:  Taking a proportionate approach to regulation and supervision. 
• 
Like treatment:  Consistency in the treatment of similar institutions. 
• 
Diversity:  The deposit-taking sector comprising a diversity of institutions to provide access 
to financial products and services to a diverse range of New Zealanders.   
In addition, principle 4(b) – the need to maintain competition within the deposit-taking sector – 
and principle 4(c) – the need to avoid unnecessary compliance costs – contribute to policy 
formation, and adapting regulation to the size and nature of the deposit taker’s business is a 
recurrent factor in the DTA.18 
Proportionality broadly involves matching prudential requirements to the risk to be addressed.19  
The ‘like treatment’ principle has a degree of tension with proportionality, in balancing the need to 
have a rational and neutral framework and in tailoring rules to the different types and scale of 
deposit takers.  The Reserve Bank has published a Proportionality Framework to indicate its 
approach to balancing these principles to promote a financial system that is diverse, innovative 
and inclusive and to support consistency and coherence when developing standards under the 
DTA.20   
____________ 
18  Refer section 17(1)(a) and (c) – licensing; section 24(1)(d) (license conditions); section 72(1)(a) – exemption from credit 
rating requirements; section 77 – proportionality framework; and sections 93 and 94 – due diligence duties. 
19  BIS defines proportionality in the following way: “Proportionality in financial system regulation and supervision may 
ensure that the applicable rules and supervision practices are consistent with banks’ systemic importance and risk 
profile, and are appropriate for the broader characteristics of a particular financial system”. 
20  As required by s 73 of the DTA.  Refer https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/regulation-and-
supervision/dta-and-dcs/the-proportionality-framework-under-the-dta.pdf  


 
Conference paper – financial markets & the DTA 
14 
Wholesale-funded NBLIs 
As under the current regime, the regulatory perimeter remains separated not just by activity (the 
combination of borrowing and lending) but by the source of funding – entities that receive their 
funding in wholesale markets rather than from retail deposits are not required to be licensed.21  
This category of wholesale-funded non-bank lending institutions (NBLIs) is not prudentially 
regulated but is recognised in the prudential regime in the form of “non-deposit-taking lenders”, 
to which lending standards and macroprudential rules may be extended under sections 82(2) and 
84 of the DTA. 
New technologies and business models 
The period that the 1989 laws were in force involved unprecedented developments in financial 
policy, prompted first by the Basel Accords and later by the challenges exposed by the GFC.  
These took place against the backdrop of a comparatively stable business model, dominated by 
large banks operating under a vertically integrated, full-service architecture.  Here, banks built their 
savings, payments, credit and other functions from an integrated platform comprising: 
• 
Balance sheet and regulatory status (e.g. bank/NBDT/deposit taker license). 
• 
Infrastructure for operations, credit decisions, risk management, and compliance. 
• 
Customer interface, traditionally physical (branches) but increasingly supplemented, or 
even replaced, by electronic (including App-based) modes. 
Digital technology is increasingly enabling a different approach to this value chain, in which 
functions may be decomposed into separate building blocks, challenging prudential structures 
premised definitionally and functionally on an integrated model.  New tools such as AI, cloud 
computing, smart contracts, distributed ledger technologies and APIs are generating opportunities 
both to incumbents to and new entrants to enhance their service offerings and reduce their cost to 
serve.   
While some of these changes are incremental rather than disruptive, we are also seeing a surge of 
new models, including digital banks, fintechs and platforms – some focusing solely on financial 
services and others integrating banking with broader communication and consumer offerings – 
with providers range from startups to big tech firms.  At a product level, the advent of 
tokenisation, crypto assets and stablecoins are enabling new asset classes, primary and secondary 
market platforms, and transaction processes (including peer-to-peer payments). 
These developments provide opportunities for increased competition, innovation and efficiency, 
while enhanced data functionality enables services tailored to individual preferences or which 
embed finance within wider consumer models.   
____________ 
21  The current perimeter is established in section 5 of the NDBT Act 2013, which requires registration where an entity 
undertakes both lending and borrowing, in the latter case under a “regulated offer” of debt securities, which includes 
retail deposits.  This remains the case under Schedule 2 to the DTA, which drops the category of “financial services” (a 
term of contested meaning in the various contexts in which it is used) from the perimeter determination. 


 
Conference paper – financial markets & the DTA 
15 
There is a kaleidoscope of products and business models and thousands of market participants 
worldwide, but it is worth calling out three products for the purposes of analysis:    
• 
Blockchain-based cryptoassets, such as Bitcoin, that are not backed by fiat currency or 
other reserve assets.  While they may be used for payments, investment is a primary use 
case. 
• 
Stablecoins, which are a type of cryptocurrency designed to maintain stable value, typically 
pegged to and backed by fiat currency or other high quality financial assets.  They have 
diverse and evolving uses, functioning as digital payment instruments, secondary market 
facilities for converting cryptocurrencies to fiat money (a ‘crypto-fiat bridge’), providing 
collateral for decentralised finance (DeFi), and operating to support clearing and 
settlement. 
• 
E-money, which is an electronic store of monetary value on a technical device (such as a 
digital wallet or prepaid card) that may be widely used to make payments.  E-money is 
very similar in form and function to stablecoin and increasingly is distinguished primarily by 
its regulatory classification and the ease with which they may be redeemed from the issuer 
at par. 
While they are rapidly increasing in volume and integration into the financial system, jurisdictions 
around the world are grappling with finding a regulatory home that can support the potential 
contribution of fintech and other innovative models while understanding and managing any risks 
that arise from them.  Part of this involves threshold characterisation questions arising from the 
range of services and activities involved, and how they may fit within the regulatory architecture: 
• 
Payments regulation:  Particularly for stablecoin and e-money facilities and platforms.  In 
New Zealand the primary reference point would be the designation framework under the 
Financial Market Infrastructures Act 2021 (FMI Act) and operational engagement in 
payment, clearing and settlement systems under that aegis. 
• 
Securities regulation:  Particularly for crypto assets that may be acquired for investment 
purposes. Relevant laws are directed to securities offerings, and regulation is focused on 
investor protection, disclosure, conduct and governance.  In New Zealand, the regulatory 
framework is under the FMCA, the application of which depends on whether products are 
“financial products” and there is a regulated offer (one made to the public). 
• 
Markets regulation:  Particularly for crypto-fiat bridges, platforms, and other intermediary 
or secondary market services.  The regulatory objectives are focused on market conduct, 
operational and counterparty risk, particularly for secondary platforms that facilitate 
conversion of cryptoassets to fiat currency (money).  In New Zealand, there is a regulatory 
framework for intermediary services under subpart 5B of Part 6 of the FMCA the 
application of which depends on complex definitions and carries a range of exclusions. 
• 
Prudential regulation:  Particularly for digital, challenger banks or others that operate an 
‘on balance sheet’ model encompassing deposit taking and lending.  Here the objective is 
financial stability and mitigating vulnerabilities through capital, liquidity, risk management 
and other requirements.  Some regimes that place cryptocurrencies in the payments or 


 
Conference paper – financial markets & the DTA 
16 
markets categories also feature quasi-prudential rules, for example controls on ‘backing 
assets’, liquidity or ‘own funds’ requirements.  In New Zealand, the current regulatory 
frameworks are under the BPSA and NBDT Act and in future will be the DTA. 
The key is to ensure a coherent treatment based on economic function and use, aligned with the 
objectives of the various regulatory categories and the problems they are seeking to solve. 
To date, regulatory responses to these financial innovations has been heterogeneous, but targeted 
regulatory regimes for e-money are now mature in some jurisdictions and consideration is being 
given to how to assimilate stablecoins and other crypto assets.  As part of this, new regulatory 
categories are emerging that are or may be tailored to fintech models, including for payment 
service providers (PSPs), catering for transactional facilities, and stored value facilities (SVFs), 
catering for savings products.  The following is a small sample of emerging regulation in major 
markets:   
• 
The EU was an early regulator of e-money, by way of the 2002 Electronic Money Directive, 
revised in the Second E-Money Directive 2011 (EMD2) with further changes occurring 
under the Payment Services Directive 2015 (PSD2), which have minimum capital and other 
requirements.  The EU also has the Markets in Crypto-asset Regulation (MiCAR), which 
classifies stablecoins referencing a single fiat currency as “e-money tokens”. 
• 
The United Kingdom gave recognition to the EU regulatory framework under the 
Electronic Money Regulations, which create a regulatory category of electronic money 
issuers (EMIs), including for the segregation and safeguarding of client funds, a 1:1 ratio for 
backing assets, and redemption on demand.22   
• 
The United States have enacted payments focused regulation through the GENIUS Act – 
which provide for issuer oversight, 1:1 reserve backing with cash or cash-equivalent assets, 
no interest to be payable to holders, no lending or rehypothecation of reserves, insolvency 
preference for holders, and other integrity measures – and CLARITY Act, which classifies 
cryptoassets according to the balance of their investment or payment function and assigns 
responsibility to relevant regulators (SEC and CFTC) accordingly.23 
The United Kingdom is currently in a policy process for stablecoin, which has generated 
controversy by placing this asset class under the securities/conduct regime rather than being 
treated as a form of payment infrastructure.24 
Closer to home, a reform proposal was recently announced in Australia to consider the 
appropriate way to regulate PSPs and SVFs.  The initial working paper contemplates obligations 
____________ 
22  Refer Payment Services Regulations 2017 (UK) and the Electronic Money Regulations 2011 (UK). 
23  Guiding and Establishing National Innovation for US Stablecoins (GENIUS) Act and Digital Asset Market Clarity 
(CLARITY) Act. 
24  Ferdisha Snagg and Yasmin Frischemeier “Mind the gap: UK stablecoin rules create uncertainty” (August-September 
2025) Butterworths Journal of International Banking and Financial Law 558 – the authors raise concern that the 
proposals introduce “functional incoherence”, undermine legal certainty, and risk deterring responsible innovation and 
jeopardising the ambitions of the UK to be a global hub for cryptoassets.  The primary securities and markets 
legislation in the UK, broadly equivalent to the FMCA, is the Financial Services and Markets Act 2000 and various 
regulated activities orders under it. 


 
Conference paper – financial markets & the DTA 
17 
include providing financial services efficiently, honestly, and fairly; managing conflicts of interest; 
having a dispute resolution system for retail clients; having arrangements for compensating retail 
clients; meeting solvency and cash reserve requirements; keeping and submitting financial records; 
holding surplus liquid funds, client money rules, and technical standards.25 
Aside from the crypto products, activities and providers themselves, there are also regulatory or 
reform initiatives to address the interaction with regulated entities.  Notably, the Basel Committee 
has published a Crypto Standard which provides for capital deductions based on the classification 
of cryptoassets into groups based on classification tests defined according to the safety of the 
exposures.26 
While there has been a great deal of policy and regulatory focus and activity internationally,27 no 
common approach has emerged, and proposals that have arisen have been hotly contested, on 
one side in their adequacy in consumer protection and market integrity (the protective view, that 
tends to predominate in the EU), and on the other in an enabling stance that emphasises 
innovation and market development (the maximalist view, that is evident under the current 
initiatives in the United States).   
Adjacent perimeters, common interests 
New models for banking services in many cases will invoke the perimeters of both the FMA, as 
conduct regulator, and the Reserve Bank as prudential regulator – particularly for business models 
involving payment or other transactional facilities (PSPs), savings products (SVPs), and 
intermediation models. 
In some cases the cross-over is formalised or clear from statute, for instance: 
• 
FMIs:  FMA and Reserve Bank have a dual mandate to oversee clearing and settlement 
systems and other financial market infrastructures that are designated under the FMI Act, 
with the Reserve Bank acting as sole regulator of designated pure payment systems. 
• 
Consultation:  In addition to normal conventions, the DTA requires the Reserve Bank to 
consult with the FMA for the proposed issue or cancellation of a banking license (s 17, s 54) 
and prior to the issuance of Standards (as a member of the Council of Financial Regulators 
(COFR)) (s 75). 
• 
CMPS/DCS:  There is a statutory link in the DTA-FMCA for certain intermediated 
arrangements that are recognised for the purposes of the DCS as “relevant arrangements” 
that are eligible for compensation on an intermediary basis.28   
____________ 
25  Refer https://treasury.gov.au/sites/default/files/2023-12/c2023-469663-factsheet.pdf .  
26  See Isobel Wright and George Kiladze “Fantastic cryptos and where (not) to find them: prudential rules for the digital 
age” (August-September 2025) Butterworths Journal of International Banking and Financial Law 565. 
27  Refer for example IOSCO Policy Recommendations for Crypto and Digital Asset Markets Final Report (November 
2023), IOSCO Application of the Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures to stablecoin arrangements (July 2022), 
and FSB High-level Recommendations for the Regulation, Supervision and Oversight of Global Stablecoin Arrangements: 
Final report (July 2023). 
28  Refer section 191(2) of the DTA, which defines “relevant arrangement” by reference to section 431W of the FMCA, 
which defines a “regulated client money or property service” (CMPS).  Certain occupation-related arrangements (such 


 
Conference paper – financial markets & the DTA 
18 
Formal or incidental coordination also occurs in other areas – including resolution interventions, 
market conduct issues (such as consumer communications and fair dealing), and enforcement 
actions.  Coordination also takes place for some fintechs participating in the FMA’s regulatory 
sandbox pilot.  
The regulatory status under existing laws can result in considerable complexities under either the 
FMCA or the BPSA/DTA in their own right, which are multiplied when a business model has 
elements that may straddle those regimes. 
A shift in the composition of our financial system 
Among the most vital functions of the banking system is the transmission of savings to investment, 
contributing in particular to the main purpose (before “by”) of promoting the prosperity and well-
being of New Zealanders and contributing to a sustainable and productive economy.  That deposit 
claims are instant, and loan assets are not, creates the vulnerability that, along with the practical 
and systemic importance of banks, is a key part of the rationale and basis for prudential regulation.   
New Zealand features a comparatively high level of credit intermediation (that is, the portion of 
lending offered through full service banks), at above 90%.  By way of comparison, banks’ collective 
share of the lending market in the United States is 40%, in the United Kingdom 60%, in Australia 
70%, and in Europe 80%, in each case with the remainder taken up in the capital markets, credit 
funds or other institutions in the financial sector.  
Among the factors contributing to this has been the under-developed state of New Zealand’s 
capital markets – a matter that has been subject to long term efforts of reform.  In one respect, at 
least, those have borne fruit, in the significant growth of institutional funds under management 
resulting predominantly from changes in the early to mid-2000s, including:  
• 
the establishment of KiwiSaver retirement accounts on 1 July 2007;  
• 
the creation of NZ Super Fund, which began with a contribution of $2.4 billion of public 
funds in 2003, effectively to operate as a national retirement savings account; and 
• 
the expansion of ACC’s investment function following the move in 1999 to the scheme 
being fully-funded. 
The Reserve Bank has maintained a dataset for managed funds since December 2003, when the 
sector had $57.5 billion assets under management (AUM).  The remainder of the decade saw 
incremental growth, subject to a setback during the GFC, to reach $74 billion in 2010, and 
gathered momentum from 2012, passing $100 billion for the first time in September 2013 and $150 
billion in early 2017.  The $200 billion milestone was reached in September 2019 and the 
institutional capital markets now have AUM exceeding $340 billion.  
In addition to managed funds, our sovereign wealth funds, ACC and NZ Super Fund, have 
followed a similar trajectory during this period, and now have AUM approaching $130 billion. 
____________ 
as money held in lawyers’ trust accounts or by real estate agents) are excluded from being regulated CMPS under the 
FMCA (being subject to their own rules and controls) and are added back in the Deposit Taker Regulations 2025. 


 
Conference paper – financial markets & the DTA 
19 
As a result, we’ve arrived at the position in which the following snapshots can be taken of the 
current composition of the financial system and how it has changed since a decade ago: 
Type 
AUM (2015) 
AUM (2020) 
AUM (2025) 
Banks 
$480.5B 
$629.3B 
$746.2B 
NBDTs & savings institutions29 
N/A 
N/A 
$3.2B 
Kiwisaver/other managed funds 
$128.3B 
$216.9B 
$341.1B 
Sovereign wealth funds 
$52.6B 
$83.1B 
$128.8B 
Wholesale-funded NBLIs30 
N/A 
N/A 
$21.3B 
 
A decade ago, then, the institutional capital markets had a little over $180 billion of investment 
capacity, and contributed just over a quarter of financial system assets excluding insurance (72.6% 
of system assets contributed by the regulated deposit taking sector).  Now, the institutional sector 
has almost a half-trillion of investment capacity and contributes more than a third of system assets 
(64% contributed by the regulated deposit taking sector). 
Contribution of institutional participants  
The comparisons above are not like-for-life since Kiwisaver, sovereign wealth, and other 
institutional funds have a diverse asset allocation across local and global equities and bonds and 
other asset classes, invest according to their own mandates and fiduciary duties, and generally do 
not have an infrastructure that supports general direct lending in their own right.  But they do 
combine substantially expanded investment capacity with an increasing appetite to deploy 
members’ funds in sound domestic investment and are engaged in the financial system as: 
• 
Active investors in bank-issued senior bonds, contributing to the core funding ratio as well 
as providing liquidity through shorter dated instruments.   
• 
Participants in ‘term out’ securitisation-funding support for NBLIs who have capital markets 
programmes. 
Their different liquidity profile and mandate also provide a natural home for infrastructure and 
other long-horizon assets that are crucial to social and economic development – something that 
has been a feature of the Australian investment landscape as their superannuation sector achieved 
critical mass. 
____________ 
29  Comprises deposit and other retail-funded finance companies, building societies and credit unions. 
30  Included for comparison – will double-count both Bank and Managed funds to the extent they source funding. 


 
Conference paper – financial markets & the DTA 
20 
From a financial stability perspective, their different purposes and asset allocations could help in 
delivering diversity and reducing prudential risk because the interests of their members are not 
debts and, being for retirement funds (and in the case of ACC, provision for long term scheme 
liabilities), have a different liquidity profile and longer investment horizon. 
The growth in recognition of the institutional capital markets not just as stewards of retirement 
savings but as a source of productive capital is a trend that will likely sit alongside fintech 
developments in shaping our financial system over the coming years. 
Crisis management, recovery, and resolution 
Prudential rules are designed to reduce the probability of bank failure, a resolution regime to 
avoid or mitigate the consequences of failure if it occurs.  This section focuses on the changes 
brought about by the DTA, the core elements of the work programme to bring an enhanced 
resolution regime into effect, and the statutory objectives that will govern it. 
Continuity and change under the DTA 
Resolution is premised on and shaped by the fact that normal insolvency procedures are 
inadequate to address financial stability concerns.  Up to now, the cornerstone of resolution has 
been the statutory management regime in Part 5 of the 1989 Act, and – for the largest banks – the 
accompanying Open Bank Resolution (OBR) and Outsourcing requirements (BS 17 and BS 11).   
The continuation of the statutory management toolkit in the resolution procedures in Part 7 of the 
DTA can obscure significant changes that have been ushered in under the DTA: 
• 
Depositor compensation:  The DCS is a significant new tool in the crisis management and 
has been in operation from 1 July 2025, in advance of other aspects of the new regime.  
Up to the limit of $100,000 per depositor per institution is available to all licensed deposit 
takers, including NBDTs. 
• 
Resolution:  Statutory management has generally been a terminal procedure in practice if 
not in principle.  Under the resolution procedure in Part 7 of the DTA, there is an increased 
emphasis on rehabilitation and continuity.  
• 
Statutory objectives:  Under the BPSA, there were objectives in the form of considerations 
the statutory manager was required to take into account.  There is now a complex 
framework of purposes – in section 190 relating to the DCS and section 259 relating to 
crisis management more broadly – that drive resolution both in its execution and 
preparation.  In addition, whereas the BPSA purposes were system-focused, the DTA 
includes a focus on the safety and soundness of particular deposit takers.   
• 
Control:  Statutory management was primarily structured as a delegated procedure to be 
undertaken by an insolvency official or other appointed statutory manager.  While that 
option remains available in the form of one or more “resolution managers” (who can be or 
include the Reserve Bank), the Reserve Bank now has clear responsibility as resolution 
authority. 


 
Conference paper – financial markets & the DTA 
21 
• 
Resolution funding:  In addition to deposit compensation, the DCS Fund gathered from 
levies and other sources may be deployed to undertake a resolution measure (or, until the 
regime is in full force, a statutory management measure).  This opens up a range of 
resolution options that would not have otherwise been available, avoiding the invidious 
dichotomy of a costly failure and taxpayer bailout.  Through ex post levies, the costs can be 
internalised to the sector through time. 
• 
NCWO:  To balance out the fact that creditors or classes of creditors may be treated 
differentially in resolution in pursuit of prudential aims (something that is fundamental to 
the basis for resolution), creditors and shareholders now entitled to compensation where 
they receive less in resolution than they would have received in a hypothetical liquidation. 
• 
Communication:  There are extensive requirements to communicate resolution policy, at 
the broadest level, through the Statement of Approach to Resolution (SoAR), to 
operational matters (such as providing information in connection with the DCS). 
It is important to stress that resolution is not an isolated matter but is integral to the broader 
prudential framework, including the supervisory and accountability frameworks addressed above 
that emphasise a continuum of graduated and targeted responses: 
 
The work programme – standards and prepositioning 
Implementation of Part 7 of the DTA shares in common with other areas of prudential policy the 
requirement to create new standards but also has substantial companion projects that will need to 
be advanced on an integrated basis: 
• 
Standards:  A trinity of standards is contemplated to give effect to the new resolution 
regime – an overarching Crisis Preparedness Standard under section 89, and revised forms 
of the existing OBR standard (BS17), which may be recast as “Continuity of Access to 
Deposits”, and Outsourcing (BS11) standard, which provides for continuity of essential 
services.31  Depending on policy choices, to this may be added a bail-in standard under 
section 80 of the DTA. 
____________ 
31  Refer generally Reserve Bank Crisis Management Issues Paper (August 2024). 


 
Conference paper – financial markets & the DTA 
22 
• 
Regulations:  A variety of provisions enable regulations to be made for technical or other 
matters that may be necessary or desirable, for example on the methodologies and 
assumptions and other matters relevant to NCWO valuation and compensation and 
resolution measure valuation under section 231. 
• 
Communications:  As noted above, the DTA has a heavy emphasis on transparency, so the 
work programme will need to incorporate a formal expression of the overall approach to 
resolution in the SoAR (s 261) and a range of other policy, guidance or communications 
documents that can help inform depositors and other stakeholders. 
• 
Orderly resolution plans:  Resolution plans will bring down the resolution strategies and 
tools contained in the Statement of Approach to Resolution to individual deposit takers, 
which are sometimes called ‘living wills’ (s 260). 
• 
Prepositioning:  The nature of resolution makes prepositioning crucial.  Much of this will 
occur under the Crisis Preparedness Standard (and its components) and orderly resolution 
focusing on the preparedness of individual depositors, institutional prepositioning and 
coordination, and consideration of bail-in measures that complement broader continuity 
and resolution measures. 
This work will all be significantly influenced by the purposes framework that arises under sections 3, 
190 and 259 of the DTA.  The emphasis in those purposes, and in related operative provisions and 
regulation-making powers, is on orderly resolution, confidence, limiting contagion, integration with 
the DCS to optimise stability, and continuity of essential services.   
Inherent in resolution as a procedure directed to financial stability, rather than a distributive 
insolvency procedure directed to maximise asset recovery, this can involve differential treatment of 
classes of creditors according to financial stability criteria, subject to the conditional purpose of 
respecting creditor hierarchy in section 259(1)(d)(i). 
As noted in the previous section, the crisis management regime needs to cater for entities beyond 
traditional banks, including NBDTs and which increasingly may also include fintechs and other 
entities operating under diverse business models.    
The 2024 Financial Policy Remit places emphasis on dynamism and innovation and recognises that 
the prudential laws do not provide for a ‘zero failure’ regime: 
The Government accepts that failures of individual institutions for institution-specific reasons will occur 
from time to time, consistent with the normal operation of a dynamic market. The Government 
expects these to be managed in a manner that minimises the disruption to the financial system and 
broader economy, and prioritises protections for consumers, depositors, and public funds. 
Another key influence on the work programme and shape of the resolution regime is the 
interaction with the current review of capital settings.  In particular, this includes the potential for 
different forms of loss absorbing capital and bail-in considerations. 


 
Conference paper – financial markets & the DTA 
23 
Where to from here? 
The DTA and companion institutional legislation are a major national investment in modernisation 
and fitness-for-purpose of the rules that shape and protect our financial system.  It is work that 
takes place against a shifting dynamic of market developments and a backdrop of forces in 
inherent tension – stability and dynamism, innovation and depositor/consumer protection.  It is a 
project laden with difficult judgements that can only benefit of engagement from the system’s 
stakeholders. 
 
Ross Pennington 
15 October 2025
