BANK: RBNZ
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: NZ Society of Actuaries - Appointed actuaries forum event
DATE: 25/06/2025
SPEAKER: Appointed actuaries forum event
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/speeches/2025/nzsa-scott-mckinnon-speech-june-2025-final.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

UNCLASSIFIED 
UNCLASSIFIED 
 
Speech – NZSA Conference – 25 June 2025 
Scott McKinnon, Director of Specialist Supervision 
 
Intro 
- E nga mana  
- E nga reo  
- E nga tapu o tenei whenua  
- Tena koutou katoa  
- Hello everyone.  I’m Scott McKinnon [Introduce Self] 
- It’s great to be here and I’d like to thank the Helen and the wider NZSA 
commuity for the opportunity to come and speak to you today. 
 
- I’d like to cover three things: 
o Firstly, I’ll talk about recent developments in the sector and the 
importance of looking forward through uncertainty.  
o Secondly, I’ll speak on the role of Appointed Actuaries as trusted 
advisors supporting decisionmakers; and 
o Thirdly, I’d like to spend a bit of time on the importance of the 
partnership between Appointed Actuaries and the RBNZ.  
 
Looking forward, not back  
- The opportunity to attend this conference was also a welcome chance to 
reflect on the nature of the challenges facing the insurance sector today.  
- As I prepared, I cast my mind back to the not-so-distant past and was 
briefly taken aback. When I first joined the Reserve Bank in 2012, the 
Insurance Prudential Supervision regime had only just been established. 
Standing here, thirteen years later, we are all looking out onto a completely 
different landscape in terms of supervision and the sector.  
- Past data, which we used to rely on very heavily, is an increasingly 
unreliable compass for prudential supervisors looking to assess emerging 
risks.  


 
 
UNCLASSIFIED 
UNCLASSIFIED 
- To illustrate, all across the sector, climate change, exponential advances in 
technology, behavioural shifts, and economic uncertainty are making the 
task of accurate forecasting challenging.  
o In terms of climate, we continue to see an increasing frequency and 
severity of extreme weather events.  This trend has accelerated the 
need for more risk-based-pricing and product innovation, as we face 
into a world where natural disasters become part of business as 
usual.  
o For technology, the rapid, exponential advances in tech not only 
bring opportunities for firms, but also new threats and vulnerabilities. 
Cyber risk, fraud, and the widespread use of AI require investment 
and attention to thoughtfully address.  
o Behaviour, too, is changing. In the wake of a global pandemic, 
growing geopolitical uncertainty, and global economic inter-
dependence, consumers’ expectations of and interactions with their 
insurers are developing rapidly and unpredictably.  
 
- The upshot of this, is that we are certain of one thing – that the future will 
not resemble the past, and uncertainty is likely to become much more 
common place. 
- The question then is: who will assist decision-makers as they navigate 
through that uncertainty?  
 
Trusted advisor & challenge 
- This is where all of you come in, and from our perspective this is where the 
skills you have are critical.  
- In terms of your technical skills, as Appointed Actuaries, you are an 
invaluable resource to your employers, regulators, and to NZ Inc and have 
been enshrined in the statutory framework because we see the Appointed 
Actuary as a key contributor to the sound and prudent running of an 
insurer.  You are uniquely placed to have visibility and the skillset needed to 
identify and assess the material risks an insurer faces. 
- However, technical skills only go so far.  Our view is it is critical to the long-
term health of insurers that Appointed Actuaries can establish themselves 
as trusted advisors who can influence decisions.  


 
 
UNCLASSIFIED 
UNCLASSIFIED 
- To achieve this, soft skills are critical.  You will be required to build trust, 
communicate with impact, and influence key decisions without relying on 
line management authority.  All of which will test your soft skills and so we 
encourage you to continue to invest in them.  
 
- What are the soft-skills we are referring to? 
o Your approach to communication generally, through the ability to 
convey complex messages in a manner that makes them accessible; 
o Investing time and effort into building good professional 
relationships with key stakeholders, which in turn establishes an 
initial degree of trust; and 
o Being able to understand the perspectives of the decision makers 
and constructively tailor your messages accordingly.  Black and white 
numbers are one thing, but Boards will generally have to consider a 
broader range of strategic factors when making decisions. 
 
- The risk is that without the soft skills, technical messages will not resonate 
as strongly as they should. 
- Regular, trusted, challenge from the Appointed Actuary strengthens 
governance, supports better risk-based decisions and reinforces 
impartiality.  
- Our findings from thematic reviews and our experience as supervisors show 
that firms where the board is supported with impartial trusted advice, 
where directors have unfettered access to management, and where 
challenge is encouraged, are better equipped to face the challenges of 
operating in the uncertain and highly dynamic environment of today. 
 
Partnership for systemic resilience 
- We are not asking you to do this alone of course.  
- The Reserve Bank and Appointed Actuaries have joint goals and 
complementary responsibilities: 
o the oversight of material risks,  
o ensuring the prudent management of a firm; and 
o Building resilience in the insurance sector. 
These complementary roles give us two perspectives on the same horizon – 
one shaped by internal insight and influence, the other by external 


 
 
UNCLASSIFIED 
UNCLASSIFIED 
oversight and public mandate; both working to support sound decisions, 
strong governance, and confidence in the credibility of insurance in NZ. 
- On our side, we will continue to work closely with Appointed Actuaries.  
- In 2019, we spoke to many of you as part of the Appointed Actuary 
Thematic Review – our first review of the role since the enactment of IPSA. 
The objectives of the thematic were to better understand how the role was 
working in practice and to identify potential areas for improvement to 
make both the role and the regime more effective.  
- The Thematic Review identified a number of examples of where we 
overserved good practice. These included: 
o Direct and unfettered access to Boards and Board committees; 
o Practices that support the continuity and resilience of the Appointed 
Actuary function; and 
o A broader, stakeholder-focused approach to risk and advice. 
- However, we found that while Appointed Actuaries were deemed effective 
in their roles, and the role itself was seen as attractive, there was a need for 
the Reserve Bank to more clearly communicate our expectations of the role. 
While our view of the role was broad, we found that some insurers had 
viewed having an Appointed Actuary as merely a fulfilment of a statutory 
obligation. Or, dare I say it, a compliance obligation to be ticked. 
- The review also identified several areas where we believe that 
improvements were needed to strengthen the profession’s contribution: 
o First, we recommended taking a broader and more forward-looking 
approach to risk. Appointed Actuaries are expected to comment on 
all material risks to financial condition, including operational risk and 
premium adequacy – not just technical solvency metrics. 
o Second, we found variability in governance processes supporting the 
independence and appointment of the Appointed Actuary. In some 
cases, there was a lack of formal handover procedures, periodic 
reassessments, or clearly documented conflict-of-interest policies—
each of which plays a role in maintaining the credibility and 
continuity of the function. 
o Third, we reinforced the importance of clear and timely engagement 
with the Reserve Bank. The statutory obligation to report emerging 
solvency concerns is a critical safeguard, and the review encouraged 
actuaries and insurers alike to adopt a conservative approach to this 
duty – acting early, rather than waiting for certainty – and by the 


 
 
UNCLASSIFIED 
UNCLASSIFIED 
way, this is exactly the same message we give our supervisors – 
certainty is often elusive.  Trust your instincts even when you don’t 
have all the information.  The alternative can often mean waiting 
until it is too late, or the problem has become much more material. 
 
- While progress has been made, our observation is that there remains work 
to be done, although the degree is very entity specific.  We ask you all 
though to continue to focus on these recommendations.  
- For ourselves, as the intensity of our supervision has increased, we have 
also dedicated more resources to strengthening our relationship with you.  
o As part of our approach to supervision, you can expect us to 
communicate openly and transparently with you about the key risks 
we see facing your firms;  
o Every year we formalise and set out our annual engagement 
schedule this includes setting aside time for one-on-one 
conversations with you and your colleagues; and 
o We ask, regularly, for you to share your views and concerns with us, 
and the release of the Relationship Charter has also formalised a 
feedback mechanism for you to share, anonymously, your reflections 
on your relationship with us. We are grateful to those of you who 
participated this year. 
- We are also grateful to those of you who have engaged with us throughout 
our consultations on the review of IPSA. Your contributions have been very 
valuable as we have scoped and refined the future of our legislation. The 
NZSA’s role, both as a key source of knowledge for us, and as a self-
regulatory body itself, remains highly important. Events like these give us 
an opportunity to foster closer collaboration, and to ensure that lines of 
communication remain wide open. 
 
Conclusion 
- To conclude then, I note that as we look forward into an uncertain future, 
there is some comfort to be found in enduring truths.  
- Regardless of the challenges that will face insurers next week, next month, 
next year – decisionmakers will need trusted advisors to guide them with 
expert and impartial advice, and to challenge them consistently and 
constructively.  


 
 
UNCLASSIFIED 
UNCLASSIFIED 
- In your role as Appointed Actuaries, we rely on you to inform and influence 
for the continued resilience of your firms.  
- In our role as the regulator and supervisor, we will work to progress our 
joint goals and to support you in your work, to maintain prudent 
management of your insurer and the soundness and efficiency of the 
sector. 
- Thank you very much for your time and attention.  
 
With any remaining time, I’m happy to take questions from the floor.
