BANK: RBNZ
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Speech on lessons from monetary and fiscal policy during COVID-19
DATE: 15/10/2025
SPEAKER: By Paul Conway
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/speeches/2025/lessons-from-monetary-and-fiscal-policy-during-covid-19-speech.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

* With thanks to Daniel Wills and Julian Wood who co-authored this speech with me. 
Navigating 
economic storms: 
Lessons from 
monetary and 
fiscal policy 
during COVID-19  
 
A speech delivered to the Citi Australia & New Zealand 
Investment Conference, Sydney Australia 
On 15 October 2025 
By Paul Conway, Chief Economist/Director of Economics* 


Navigating economic storms: Lessons from monetary and fiscal 
policy during COVID-19 
Introduction 
Kia ora koutou. I’d like to start by acknowledging the Traditional Custodians of the land we’re 
meeting on today and pay my respects to their Elders past and present.  
It’s great to be here with you here in Sydney, a wonderful city that I was lucky enough to live in for 
a few years back in the 1980s, which was a massive amount of fun. Thanks to the organisers for 
inviting me back today.  
I want to share some lessons on how monetary and fiscal policy can work alongside each other in 
both stable and turbulent economic times. Drawing on New Zealand’s pandemic experience, I’ll 
reflect on how the two sets of tools are used over the economic cycle and how that changes when 
the Official Cash Rate (OCR) reaches its Effective Lower Bound (ELB). I’ll finish with some thoughts 
on how monetary policy can work alongside fiscal policy in a crisis while maintaining its 
independence.  
I want to be clear up front that we do not expect to use additional monetary policy (AMP) tools 
again anytime soon. The OCR is our preferred tool for managing the level of monetary stimulus 
through economic cycles, provided it is above its ELB. Rather, COVID-19 gave us a crash course on 
the use of AMP tools and on how monetary and fiscal policy can interact in times of extreme 
economic turbulence. It’s important that we learn from that and carry those lessons forward to be 
ready for the next major shock.  
Also, I will not be revisiting the question of whether the right amount of monetary and fiscal policy 
stimulus was delivered during the pandemic. That’s a topic that we have dealt with at length in two 
recent RBNZ reviews of pandemic-era monetary policy.1 
So, what can we learn from our pandemic experience about how monetary and fiscal policy should 
work alongside each other? Here are some key lessons:  
 
Outside of crises, monetary policy stabilises the economy by keeping inflation low and stable 
over the medium term. Fiscal policy maintains long-run debt sustainability. Whether monetary 
and fiscal policies are moving in the same direction or apart, the economy can remain stable 
as each policy area pursues its objectives independently.  
 
During economic crises, the OCR can hit its effective lower bound. At that point, additional 
monetary policy tools and fiscal policy can help stabilise the economy. Objectives can briefly 
align in an ‘all hands on deck’ effort to steady financial markets, economic activity, 
employment, and inflation.  
 
Analysis by the Treasury finds that during the COVID-19 pandemic, fiscal policy tools provided 
crucial support to stabilise incomes and prevent mass unemployment. However, lags and 
persistence in fiscal spending highlighted the challenges of using these tools for economic 
stabilisation.  
____________ 
1 This topic is dealt with at length RBNZ (2022), and RBNZ (2025). 


 
The use of Large Scale Asset Purchases (LSAPs) by the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) 
during the pandemic stabilised financial markets and supported economic recovery by 
lowering interest rates. Modelling suggests that LSAPs had only a small impact on the Crown 
balance sheet once the economic benefits are considered. Accordingly, LSAPs have a key role 
to play in financial and economic crises in which the OCR hits the ELB.  
 
At the ELB, monetary and fiscal policymakers need clear sight of each other’s actions. Arms-
length communication – fine in smooth seas – is not enough in a crisis. Timely and complete 
information is key when no one policy area can necessarily take the lead, and when the 
optimal choice of tools is not always clear cut. 
 
Monetary and fiscal policy working alongside each other in a crisis does not mean joint 
decision-making. Independent monetary policy is essential to keep inflation expectations 
anchored and central bank credibility intact. Monetary policymakers must remain ready and 
able to deploy all available tools swiftly and at the right scale as required.  
Central bank independence and economic stability 
The late 1970s and 1980s are a useful starting point for understanding how monetary and fiscal 
policy operate in New Zealand today. Back then, the political temptation was to use fiscal policy to 
push demand beyond the economy’s productive capacity, with monetary policy set to 
accommodate. The outcome was unsustainable growth, rising public debt, and double-digit 
inflation.2 
The circuit breaker came with the sweeping reforms of the mid- to late-1980s. Among much else, 
these reforms clarified the roles, goals, and timeframes of macroeconomic stabilisation policies. 
Critically, monetary policy was given operational independence and a clear inflation target – 
creating the anchor of stability that still underpins New Zealand’s framework today.  
Since then, monetary policy has worked to maintain low and stable inflation by smoothing the 
business cycle and keeping inflation expectations anchored. Fiscal policy provides public goods 
and services and redistributes income, while maintaining long-run debt sustainability. Fiscal policy 
does stabilise demand, but mainly through automatic stabilisers – changes in tax and transfers that 
move with the economy.  
Monetary and fiscal policies are distinct from structural policy settings. Structural policies – 
including regulation – shape the economy’s long-run potential. They influence how competitive 
markets are, how easily resources shift from low- to high-productivity sectors, and how quickly 
new technologies spread across firms. These settings matter not just for long-run growth, but also 
for how resilient the economy is when shocks hit. 
Smooth seas: the zone of stability 
When monetary policy is focused on low and stable inflation, and fiscal policy on maintaining 
sustainable debt, the economy can enter a ‘zone of stability’.3 In this zone, the influence of one 
policy on the other is predictable and manageable, so stability is maintained even when policies 
sometimes row against each other to meet their different objectives.  
____________ 
2 (Graham & Smith, 2012). 
3 (Bank for International Settlements, 2023).  


Delegating an inflation target to an independent central bank limits the need for tight coordination 
when economic seas are calm. Monetary policy takes fiscal settings as given and responds 
accordingly, with arm’s-length communication between authorities. Monetary policy moves 
second in response to fiscal policy decisions made by government.4  
The zone of stability depends on clear mandates, credible institutions, and anchored inflation 
expectations. It also means building fiscal buffers in good times, so there is room to respond when 
shocks arrive. It rests on sustainable public debt. Very high debt risks ‘fiscal dominance’, where 
monetary policy is forced to accommodate government deficits. This erodes central bank 
independence, increases inflation risk, and may move the economy out of the stable zone. 
Structural policies are also key – by lifting productivity growth and improving economic resilience, 
pro-growth policy settings effectively widen the zone of stability.  
Stormy seas: potentially ‘all hands on deck’  
In an economic crisis, the OCR may hit its ELB – the lowest rate it can be cut to without significant 
distortions or unintended consequences.5 At that point, if more stimulus is needed to stabilise the 
economy, AMP tools and fiscal policy come into play.  
In these circumstances, objectives can temporarily align, with both monetary and fiscal policies 
acting countercyclically to offset the shock. Fiscal measures are particularly effective near the lower 
bound, as spending is less likely to crowd out other expenditure or trigger tighter monetary 
settings.6 
Crisis conditions may also create more frequent and irregular decision-making cycles. The strict 
fiscal ‘leader’ and monetary policy ‘follower’ dynamic breaks down, placing greater emphasis on 
more timely and full information sharing. However, as I’ll elaborate on in a minute, even in a crisis, 
it is not about making joint decisions nor giving politicians license to direct monetary policy. 
Monetary and fiscal policy during COVID-19 
Let’s look at the ebb and flow of monetary and fiscal policy setting in New Zealand over recent 
decades before focusing in on the COVID-19 experience.  
After the Global Financial Crisis of 2008, monetary and fiscal policy both moved quickly into 
expansionary territory to support confidence and stability (figure 1). The Canterbury earthquakes in 
2011 resulted in further fiscal stimulus, while monetary policy became less expansionary as the 
wider economy recovered.  
By the mid-2010s, the pattern had flipped: monetary policy was expansionary given weak growth 
and low inflation, while fiscal policy tightened to pay down debt and rebuild fiscal buffers. That 
____________ 
4 Economists refer to this as a Stackelberg game, where monetary policy internalises fiscal actions to ensure price stability (Brook, 2013). 
5 The effective lower bound (ELB) for interest rates reflects two main factors: the cost and convenience of holding cash, and how banks 
respond to very low rates. If interest rates drop too low, banks may struggle to lower deposit rates without losing customers to cash. 
This can squeeze their profits and make them less willing to lend, reducing credit availability in the economy (see BIS, 2019).  
6 The Treasury estimates that fiscal multipliers are positive and increase around the ELB (The Treasury, 2024). Some modelling estimates 
a ratio of greater than 1:1 for each dollar spent for some forms of spending when interest rates are fixed around the lower bound for 
at least two years (Binning, 2024)    


proved prescient, giving fiscal policy the space to swing back to being strongly expansionary when 
COVID-19 struck.7  
During the pandemic, New Zealand's monetary and fiscal authorities both acted swiftly to stabilise 
the economy. The MPC adopted a 'least regrets' approach, cutting the OCR to 0.25% and 
committing to hold it there for a year. They also purchased $53 billion in government bonds 
through the LSAP programme and provided $19 billion in bank funding via the Funding for 
Lending Programme. 
This balance sheet expansion was comparable to efforts in Australia and Canada and well below 
the OECD average (figure 2). It was also the first time the MPC had implemented an LSAP 
programme, and the total size of the RBNZ’s balance sheet peaked at a relatively low share of 
GDP compared to the OECD average.8 
New Zealand’s fiscal policy was arguably more assertive. Treasury estimates the total fiscal cost of 
responding to the COVID-19 pandemic at $66 billion – around 20 percent of GDP and well above 
the OECD average (figure 3).  
It’s important that we learn from the use of these tools in the pandemic. To that end, we have 
reviewed of our COVID-era monetary policy settings and studied the effects of LSAPs, the main 
AMP Tool used by the MPC during the crisis. The Treasury has reviewed how fiscal tools were 
used. Let’s turn to what we’ve learned so far. 
Figure 1: Monetary and fiscal policy stances* 
 
Source: RBNZ, The Treasury.  
Notes: The monetary stance is proxied as the OCR minus the estimated long-run nominal OCR (indicator average, % p.a.). The fiscal 
stance is proxied by the primary balance adjusted for automatic stabilisers (% of GDP). The output gap is as a % of potential GDP. 
 
 
____________ 
7 White (2024). 
8 According to BIS data, the size of the RBNZ’s balance sheet peaked at about 26% of GDP in 2022q3 in contrast to a peak of 60% on 
average across central banks in OECD economies (OECD average excluding Luxembourg).  
Contractionary policy 
Expansionary policy 


Figure 2: Change in central bank assets (% nominal GDP), Q4 2019 to Q4 2021 
 
Sources: IMF; Haver. Public assets are claims on central and local governments. Private assets are claims on banks, other financial 
institutions, public non-financial corporations, and the private sector (guarantees not considered). Other assets include FX, gold 
reserves, and claims outside public/private categories. OECD Average excludes Luxembourg. 
Figure 3: COVID-19 fiscal measures across advanced economies (as of October 2021) 
 
Source: IMF Database of Fiscal Policy Responses to COVID-19 (Oct 2021). Figure 3 shows IMF estimates of additional spending and 
foregone revenue in response to the pandemic. These measures include health and unemployment spending, capital grants, wage 
subsidies, transfers, and tax relief. Equity, loans, and guarantees are excluded as they have no immediate fiscal impact and final costs 
are not yet reported. This estimate differs slightly from the more recent Treasury estimate which is 20.4% of GDP. 
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Denmark
Sweden
Finland
Portugal
Korea
Norway
Switzerland
Belgium
Spain
Czech republic
France
The Netherlands
Italy
Advanced Economies
Germany
Canada
Japan
Australia
Singapore
United Kingdom
New Zealand
United States
Percent of Gross Domestic Product (GDP)


Fiscal policy tools 
Fiscal actions in a crisis should ideally be timely, targeted, and temporary. Support should arrive 
quickly, target affected people, and phase out post-crisis to avoid unsustainable debt.9 According 
to the Treasury, New Zealand's fiscal response to the pandemic only partially met these criteria 
(table 1).10  
The wage subsidy reached businesses within days and was clearly time limited. Broadly speaking, it 
was targeted at preventing mass unemployment, although there were concerns about businesses 
not needing the subsidy being eligible. The wage subsidy may have also weakened ‘creative 
destruction’ in the economy, slowing productivity growth.11  
Other parts of the fiscal response failed the ‘timeliness’ and ‘temporary’ tests. For example, 
Treasury estimates that over 70% of the rise in general government consumption and investment 
occurred after mid-2021, and over a third after mid-2022, by which time the economy was 
recovering strongly. More generally, government consumption and investment as a share of the 
economy remained high by historical standards in the aftermath of the pandemic, but has started 
to decline in recent years (figure 4). 
This lag and persistence in pandemic-related fiscal spending resulted in fiscal policy continuing to 
add economic stimulus while monetary policy became restrictive to reduce inflation and keep 
medium-term inflation expectations in check (figure 1 above). In other words, containing inflation 
over this period required the OCR to be higher than otherwise if fiscal support during the 
pandemic had been more timely and temporary.  
Looking ahead, as Treasury outline, fiscal policy challenges will intensify as ageing populations 
drive structural increases in fiscal spending, particularly through New Zealand’s pension and 
healthcare costs (figure 5). Without reform, these pressures risk shrinking the zone of stability and 
placing greater strain on both fiscal and monetary policy. 
 
 
____________ 
9 (Elmendorf & Furman, 2008) 
10 (The Treasury, 2025) 
11 Recent international studies indicate that wage subsidy programmes may reduce productivity by limiting the movement of workers 
between jobs (Tibor Lalinsky et. al., 2024), (Lalinsky, Meriküll & Lopez-Garcia, 2024), (Francois de Soyres et al., 2024), (Tenreyro, 2021). 
In New Zealand, there is some direct evidence of negative productivity impacts from the COVID-19 wage subsidy, however observed 
short-term effects on resource allocation fade by late 2020 (Andrews, Charlton & Moore, 2021). Both the New Zealand Royal 
Commission and  Hyslop, Maré & Minehan (2023) highlight the need for further research to determine if broader, long-term 
productivity consequences exist within New Zealand. 


Table 1: Treasury’s analysis of fiscal policy tools effectiveness during a downside economic shock  
or cycle 
Fiscal tool 
Timely 
Temp. 
Targeted 
COVID-19 Example(s) 
Transfers / 
Benefits  
 
 
 
COVID-19 Income Relief Payment, 
benefit increases, Winter Energy Payment 
Lump-sum 
Payments  
 
 
* 
2022 Cost of Living Payment 
Subsidies  
 
 
 
Childcare/support, public transport fee 
reductions 
Wage 
Subsidies, 
Credit & 
Liquidity 
Support  
 
 
 
COVID-19 Wage Subsidy, Small Business 
Cashflow Scheme, Business Finance 
Guarantee Scheme 
Government 
Spending  
 
 
 
Shovel-Ready Infrastructure, public 
consumption, health system spending 
Source: Based on analysis from Treasury (2025) Te Ara Mokopuna 2025 Long-term Insights Briefing and table 4.1 p71-2.  
=yes, 
=no, 
= mixed results or varies by tool. *Treasury note limits to geographical targeting with lump-sum payments. 
 
Figure 4: Government consumption and investment (share of potential GDP, seasonally adjusted) 
 
Source: Statistics New Zealand, The Treasury, Reserve Bank of New Zealand estimates.  
 
 


Figure 5: Public debt and economic shocks: New Zealand (Net core crown debt, % GDP)  
 
Source: (The Treasury, 2025).  
Additional monetary policy tools: the LSAP 
Let’s turn to monetary policy during the pandemic, with a focus on LSAPs – the primary tool for 
delivering additional monetary policy stimulus once the OCR reached its ELB at the time of 0.25%.  
As has been widely publicised, the LSAP programme resulted in mark-to-market losses of around 
$10.5 billion for the RBNZ once the recovery kicked in and interest rates increased. That’s about 
3.2% of New Zealand’s GDP. These losses occurred as the post-pandemic surge in inflation 
resulted in sharply higher short-term interest rates, crystallising large losses on the LSAP portfolio. 
So, were LSAPs worth the cost? To go some way towards answering that question, we need to 
understand the various ways in which LSAPs influenced financial markets and the broader 
economy during the crisis.  
First, LSAPs clearly helped keep financial markets in New Zealand running smoothly. By providing 
liquidity at critical times, LSAPs restored market confidence and improved trading conditions 
(figure 6). This was critical in transmitting lower interest rates through to the real side of the 
economy.  
Second, LSAPs lowered long term interest rates. In combination with other tools, our estimates 
suggest that this was equivalent to cutting the OCR by around 90 basis points.12 To help 
understand if the benefits of this were worth the cost, we have modelled the broader economic 
effects of LSAPs.13 Of course, this model is not perfect – no model is. But it helps bring the broader 
picture into focus and advance the conversation on the net benefits of LSAPs. 
____________ 
12 (Reserve Bank of New Zealand, 2022) 
13 (Chipeniuk, Kolasa, Lindé, Ludvich, & Quigg, 2025). This model of quantitative easing has been calibrated to reflect the New Zealand 
economy during COVID-19. We are releasing this work alongside today’s speech. 
0
20
40
60
80
1972
1982
1992
2002
2012
2022
2032
2042
Percent of GDP
Year ending 30 June (from 1990)
Pre-2009 definition
Current definition
2021 Treasury Long-term Fiscal Statement projection
Repeated
economic 
challenges 
and policy 
Early 1990s 
downturn
Asian
financial 
crisis
GFC and 
Canterbury 
earthquakes
COVID-19 
pandemic
Impact of long-term 
pressures such as 
population ageing 
assuming no policy 
change
Projection


On balance, the modelling suggests that LSAPs worked broadly as anticipated by the MPC and 
effectively paid for themselves. In short, LSAPs lowered long-term interest rates, which held down 
the exchange rate and supported exports (figure 7). In turn, this supported economic growth and 
prevented inflation from dropping further below the target midpoint in 2020 (figure 8).  
By boosting economic activity during the pandemic, LSAPs increased government tax revenues. 
This higher revenue almost entirely covered the direct losses from LSAPs, leaving consolidated 
Crown debt virtually unchanged over the medium term (figure 9).  
Overall, the model suggests LSAPs are a powerful macro-stabilisation tool. But like fiscal tools, they 
come with trade-offs. They allow for a faster recovery, with stronger growth and tax revenue, but 
also the potential for direct losses on bond sales. Moreover, our modelling to date suggests that 
they rely heavily on the exchange rate for transmission, rather than working through domestic 
channels. Judging these risks and trade-offs will be vital within the context of any particular crisis. 
This model also allows us to explore the potential use of negative interest rates to support 
economic activity and keep inflation within target during a crisis. If moderately negative interest 
rates had been possible during the pandemic, our work suggests that could have delivered similar 
outcomes for growth and inflation as LSAPs, but at a lower cost to the Crown balance sheet (figure 
10).  
So, if negative rates had been operationally available to the MPC in 2020, they would have been a 
preferred tool for supporting the economy.14 This is consistent with our view that the OCR is our 
preferred tool for managing the level of monetary stimulus through economic cycles, provided it is 
above its ELB. By extension, this implies that we would not use LSAPs outside of stabilising financial 
market dysfunction or of an acute economic crisis when the OCR is at its ELB.  
Even so, there will always be an ELB for the OCR, even if it is slightly negative. Consequently, we 
need to remain ready to use LSAPs, in targeted circumstances, as and when required.  
Figure 6: Bid-ask spreads in 2020        
 
Source: Bloomberg, RBNZ estimates. 
____________ 
14 (Orr, 2020) 


Figure 7: Long-term rate and the real exchange rate with and without LSAPs 
   
 
Source: (Chipeniuk, Kolasa, Lindé, Ludvich, & Quigg, 2025). 
Figure 8: Consumer price inflation and output with and without LSAPs 
   
 
Source: (Chipeniuk, Kolasa, Lindé, Ludvich, & Quigg. 2025). 
Figure 9: Cumulative tax revenue and government debt with and without LSAPs 
   
 
Source: (Chipeniuk, Kolasa, Lindé, Ludvich, & Quigg, 2025). 
 


Figure 10: Consumer price inflation and output with negative interest rates 
    
 
Source: (Chipeniuk, Kolasa, Lindé, Ludvich, & Quigg, 2025). 
Working alongside each other in a crisis  
As I mentioned in the introduction, this speech does not revisit whether the right amount of 
monetary and fiscal stimulus was delivered in the pandemic. Our reviews show that, in hindsight, 
an earlier or stronger monetary tightening could have curbed inflation, but this was constrained by 
available data and the MPC’s dual mandate at the time.15 
Part of the reason why stabilisation policies proved so expansionary is the interaction of monetary 
and fiscal policy over the crisis. Ultimately, there is no ‘one-size fits all’ tool for macroeconomic 
stabilisation in a crisis and the best outcome is likely to come from a mix of monetary and fiscal 
policies, informed by lessons from past experience.  
Getting that response right means having the ability for monetary and fiscal policymakers to work 
together closely in times of crisis. This means sharing perspectives on the crisis in real time, 
understanding each other’s policy reaction functions, and the likely economic impacts of different 
stabilisation policies.  
Crucially, working alongside each other does not mean joint decision-making. Indeed, any loss of 
monetary policy independence, even in a crisis, risks politicising inflation, fiscal dominance, and 
reducing the size of the zone of stability. This includes MPC having the operational independence 
to deploy AMP tools, such as the LSAP, to help stabilise the economy as and when required. 
Central bank credibility hinges on that readiness and a demonstrated commitment to keeping 
inflation anchored, even in extraordinary times.  
The RBNZ and Treasury have recently clarified and strengthened institutional arrangements for 
working alongside each other. This includes an updated Memorandum of Understanding on the 
____________ 
15 “The Reserve Bank of New Zealand (Monetary Policy) Amendment Act 2018 formally added “supporting maximum sustainable 
employment” as one of the Reserve Bank’s economic objectives, alongside “achieving and maintaining stability in the general level of 
prices over the medium term”, effectively establishing a dual mandate central bank. The maximum sustainable employment (MSE) 
objective was subsequently removed by the Reserve Bank of New Zealand (Economic Objective) Amendment Act 2023 and reverted 
the Reserve Bank back to a primary focus on price stability.” (Chen & Richardson, 2025) 


role of the Treasury observer on the MPC to reinforce cross-agency communications. The RBNZ 
Board now has enhanced oversight and financial risk management protocols to reinforce fiscal 
responsibility in MPC decision-making and independence.16 We are also working on some broad 
guidelines on how to enhance monetary-fiscal co-ordination in times of crisis.   
This approach aligns with international best practice, where central banks and governments 
maintain clear boundaries while sharing information and aligning objectives during extraordinary 
shocks. 
Conclusion  
In closing, New Zealand’s pandemic experience shows that monetary and fiscal policy each play 
vital, distinct roles in stabilising the economy and can work powerfully together in a crisis.  
Independent mandates and clear objectives for stability are critical, even as extraordinary shocks 
demand a pragmatic, well-informed response that leverages the strengths of both policy domains. 
While working together in a crisis is vital, it must not compromise the MPC’s ability to act 
independently, lest it risk fiscal dominance or undermine public trust. 
During the pandemic, LSAPs and assertive fiscal measures provided rapid support to households, 
businesses, and financial markets, helping to avert deeper economic harm. While the combined 
response ultimately contributed to an inflation outbreak, the debate on the role of LSAPs in macro 
stabilisation should not be conflated with the debate on whether the right amount of monetary 
and fiscal policy stimulus was delivered during the pandemic.  
All stabilisation policies come with trade-offs. But the evidence suggests that LSAPs can play an 
essential role in mitigating financial and economic crises. How and when to use this tool depends 
on the circumstances and risks facing MPC. While the OCR is our preferred tool, we need to keep 
LSAPs in the toolbox for use in targeted interventions during financial and economic crisis in which 
the OCR has hit the ELB.  
Even then, it is unrealistic to expect monetary or fiscal policy, whether acting independently or in 
concert, to perfectly offset every shock that comes our way. Adjusting to economic disruptions is a 
fact of life that ultimately promotes innovation, and resilience.  
Looking ahead, we will continue improving our understanding of how AMP tools influence the 
economy and strengthen institutional arrangements to coordinate with our fiscal counterparts. As 
new evidence emerges, we’ll continue to update our approach to remain as prepared as possible 
to help New Zealand weather whatever economic storms come our way. In doing so we must 
avoid choices that threaten monetary policy’s operational independence or focus on medium-term 
inflation pressures.  
Ultimately, the goal is resilient policy frameworks that allow each policy area to apply the right tool 
at the right time, anchoring inflation expectations, supporting sustainable growth while 
____________ 
16 There is an enhanced role for the RBNZ Board in managing and reporting on financial risks—including risks to the Government’s 
balance sheet—under the Statement of Financial Risk Management. Changes to the MPC's risk appetite statement and Charter now 
recognise the importance of financial risks and fiscal responsibility in MPC decisions. 


safeguarding public confidence. By carrying forward the lessons of the pandemic, we can ensure 
New Zealand remains prepared for whatever economic storms lie ahead. 
Thank you.
