BANK: RBNZ
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: 2025 Commonwealth Bank Global Markets Conference
DATE: 29/10/2025
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/speeches/2025/speech_transmission_ar_cba_october-2025.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Transmission 
currents and the 
flow of monetary 
policy to financial 
conditions  
By Adam Richardson, Director, Financial Markets 
A speech delivered to the 2025 Commonwealth Bank Global Markets Conference 
in Sydney, Australia on Wednesday 29 October 20251 
 
EMBARGOED UNTIL 9:00AM SYDNEY TIME 29 OCTOBER 2025 
1  With thanks to Finn Robinson and Chris Stephens who co-authored this speech with me. 


 
 
2 
 
Good morning. Thanks for the opportunity to speak at this year’s CBA Global Markets conference.  
As you’ll all be aware, our Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) has cut the Official Cash Rate (OCR) 
by 300 basis points to 2.5 percent since August 2024.  
Today I want to talk to you about the transmission of these cuts, via New Zealand financial 
markets, to domestic financial conditions. About a year ago, our Assistant Governor, Karen Silk, 
kicked the tyres on how our most recent hiking cycle had transmitted through to the borrowing 
rates faced by businesses and households.1 We are now more than a year into the interest rate 
cutting cycle and it seems like an apt time to check in on transmission once again. I will explore 
three themes relating to the transmission of monetary policy to financial conditions: 
1. 
Transmission to financial markets is playing out largely as expected. But as with any cycle, 
there are some unique features that we have had to take account of when assessing the 
stance of monetary policy.   
2. The cash flow channel is an important and very visible part of monetary policy transmission. 
However, other channels of transmission potentially play a more important role.   
3. International factors are a major factor influencing New Zealand’s financial conditions. But in 
the end, we have the tools to set domestic monetary policy where it needs to be to ensure 
price stability. 
The anatomy of a retail rate 
Monetary policy works, at its core, by moving interest rates faced by businesses and households. 
When we raise or lower the OCR, it changes the price of credit, which alters saving and investment 
decisions. Households bring spending forward or push it back, firms adjust investment plans. 
Those shifts in demand flow through to inflation over time. We call this the intertemporal 
substitution channel of monetary policy. 2 
For most New Zealand households, mortgage and deposit rates are the most significant interest 
rates affecting their finances. Given their central role in shaping financial conditions in New 
Zealand, this speech will place particular emphasis on the transmission of monetary policy via 
mortgage rates, but this doesn’t mean we should downplay the importance of deposit rates.  
Relatively short-term fixed mortgage rates are very popular in New Zealand, so a two-year 
mortgage rate is a good, practical yardstick when we think about how changes in the OCR are 
filtering through to mortgage-holding households. 
Before we dive into the detail, bear with me for a moment as I sketch a deliberately simplified 
model that we use at the RBNZ to help us understand how a change in the OCR may be 
transmitting through to the 2-year mortgage rate and how other developments in domestic 
financial conditions may impact this transmission. I know this is bread-and-butter for most of you 
in this room, but it’s useful to have a common framework to help anchor the discussion.  
There are three component parts to our 2-year mortgage rate model:  
1. 
The wholesale rate. For a 2-year mortgage we use the 2-year swap rate, which generally reflects 
market expectations for the OCR over the next two years plus a small market risk premium.  
____________ 
1 See Silk (2024,a) 
2 There are other transmission channels, which are explained in the RBNZ’s Monetary Policy Handbook.  


 
 
3 
 
2. The size of funding spreads, which is the gap between banks’ retail/wholesale funding costs and 
wholesale rates, capturing credit and liquidity premia. 
3. A residual or mark-up. This is the difference between the 2-year mortgage rate and the prior 
two components. This broadly reflects banks’ gross profit on mortgages. 
As shown in figure 1, movements in the 2-year swap rate (in blue) tend to be the principal 
determinant of changes in the 2-year mortgage rate.  
This reflects that most of the movement in mortgage rates is driven by expectations of future 
short-term interest rates.  
Figure 1: Decomposition of the 2-year mortgage rate 
 
Source: RBNZ, Bloomberg. Data as at October 2025. 
In contrast, changes in the size of funding spreads (in orange) and the residual ‘mark-up’ (in pink) 
have historically had a much smaller impact.  
However, crisis periods tend to create exceptions to this rule. For example, we would expect the 
funding spread component to push mortgage rates higher than otherwise during periods like the 
Global Financial Crisis (GFC) and the onset of the pandemic, when global funding conditions 
deteriorated and wholesale spreads widened sharply.3  
Furthermore, financial conditions can also be impacted by the policy response to such events. For 
instance, the lingering impact of the COVID-era fiscal expansion and monetary policy easing put 
downward pressure on funding spreads during the most recent interest rate tightening cycle. This 
resulted in less restrictive financial conditions for the same level of the OCR when compared with 
previous cycles, which the MPC then had to factor into its policy rate deliberations.4  
With this simple model in place, let me move on to a few factors in monetary policy transmission 
that are unique to this easing cycle. 
____________ 
3 See Cassino and Yao (2011) for an overview of the New Zealand experience, and the Reserve Bank’s emergency liquidity measures 
deployed during the GFC. 
4 This is covered in more detail in Silk (2024,a) and Wynands (2024). 


 
 
4 
 
Keeping an eye on the cashflow channel 
Marginal mortgage rates (and business and wholesale rates), like the one proxied by our 2-year 
mortgage model, are an important measure of some of the key channels through which monetary 
policy affects behaviour and ultimately the economy and inflation. In particular, the savings and 
investment, household wealth and the exchange rate channels are largely influenced by these 
marginal interest rates. Low interest rates today boost investment and spending, lower the 
exchange rate and increase asset prices and spending out of wealth.  
While these transmission channels typically have the greatest influence on financial conditions and 
the wider economy, there are other channels of transmission that we closely monitor.  
One of these channels is the cashflow channel. Unlike the intertemporal, exchange rate, or wealth 
channels, where marginal rates play a key role, the cashflow channel bites when changes in 
interest rates show up in household disposable incomes and business’ finances. The cashflow 
channel is about timing and plumbing: when fixed-rate mortgages reset, when small-medium 
enterprises (SMEs) roll their loans, when hedges mature, when deposit rates are repriced, and 
when wholesale funding costs flow through product curves. Until these events occur, expected 
easing mostly lives on spreadsheets; after them, it exists in monthly cashflows. This is why the 
proportion of debt distributed across fixed versus floating rates, the pipeline of upcoming 
repricing, and banks’ pass-through decisions influence the speed at which an OCR cut turns into 
real spending power for indebted households and working capital relief for businesses. 
One recent factor shaping the cashflow channel in New Zealand has been the terms over which 
households choose to structure their mortgages. Historically, New Zealand mortgage holders have 
preferred to fix for terms of one to three years, with relatively little interest in shorter terms 
(including floating rates). However, from early 2024 preferences shifted to shorter terms in 
anticipation of falls in the OCR and mortgage rates. This shift is outlined in figure 2, which shows 
new mortgage lending volume by tenor.5 By November 2024, around 95% of new mortgage flows 
were directed towards terms of one year or less, with around 60% of these flows at six months or 
floating (shown by the blue and pink bars). Significantly for the cashflow channel, households were 
paying a premium to do this. Shorter-term rates were higher than longer-term rates because at 
that stage the mortgage curve was still inverted.  
That meant, even though advertised rates were falling from December 2023, the average rate on 
the outstanding stock of mortgages didn’t peak until November 2024. This is shown by the dashed 
purple line in figure 3. More recently, as the OCR has fallen further, borrowers have been willing to 
lock in for longer terms. Ongoing declines in advertised mortgage rates, plus a rising share of 
loans being repriced, have led to an easing in overall financial conditions at the margin. In short: 
because of the trend for short-term mortgages at higher rates, transmission through the cashflow 
channel was relatively slow in the early part of the easing cycle. It has now picked up, as many 
mortgage holders have repriced on to lower rates.  
 
 
____________ 
5 This excludes same bank refixing. 


 
 
5 
 
Figure 2. Proportion of new mortgage lending volume by tenor 
Source: RBNZ. Data as at August 2025. 
Figure 3. Advertised mortgage rates and average rate on the outstanding stock of 
mortgages 
Source: Interest.co.nz, Bloomberg, RBNZ. Data as at August 2025.  
These examples show how factors which sit outside of the RBNZ’s monetary policy stance can 
influence financial conditions in New Zealand and may, at the margin, have implications for the 
outlook for inflation and therefore monetary policy. However, it’s important to note that the MPC 
takes these factors into account when setting monetary policy, to achieve an overall level of 
domestic financial conditions that is deemed necessary to return inflation to the 2 percent target 
mid-point over the medium term. For example, to offset the lingering effects of COVID-era 
stimulus on financial conditions, the response can be as simple as keeping the OCR slightly higher 
than otherwise.  


 
 
6 
 
I should also note that in the RBNZ’s frameworks, including the main macroeconomic model, 
NZSIM, the intertemporal substitution channel is more important than the cash flow channel.6 
Changing the level of interest rates in the economy has a powerful effect on savings and investment 
behaviour and can be the difference between an investment project going ahead, a business taking 
on more staff, or a household making the decision to purchase a property. However, the influence 
of this intertemporal substitution channel is hard to directly observe in the data. 
The cash flow channel is much easier to observe, given readily accessible data on mortgage and 
business lending, and deposit flows. It is also more tangible for households and businesses, who 
can directly see the cashflow channel in action as borrowing and savings roll onto new rates. When 
other factors, such as the change in mortgage fixing behaviour seen recently, impacts the speed of 
monetary policy transmission via the cashflow channel, this naturally leads to questions about the 
efficacy of monetary policy. In situations like these, it’s worth remembering that monetary policy 
influences the economy through many channels, including intertemporal substitution, household 
wealth effects, the exchange rate, and inflation expectations. It’s important that we account for all 
these and avoid overemphasising the influence of more observable factors like mortgage fixing 
behaviour, even while acknowledging their significance.  
Trends in New Zealand financial markets must be interpreted in 
their global context 
Global interconnectedness means New Zealand imports economic and financial conditions from 
overseas: shifts in overseas growth, inflation, risk appetite and policy settings quickly flow into our 
exchange rate, wholesale funding costs, and long-term yields.  
Moves in global bond markets, changes in term premia, and fluctuations in global market volatility 
can tighten or loosen New Zealand financial conditions even when the OCR is unchanged. That’s 
why we read our yield curve, and the stance of policy, through a global lens as well as a domestic 
one. 
Figure 4 shows 10-year sovereign bond yields for New Zealand, Australia, and the US. The pink line 
is a global interest rate factor, or a common global interest rate trend, which we estimate from a 
panel of 10-year sovereign bond yields for a range of advanced economies.7 Yields for different 
countries do move independently from others from time to time – and over most of the sample 
period the New Zealand yield has been significantly higher than the global factor8 – but it is also 
clear from figure 4 that fluctuations in longer-term yields are usually highly correlated with this 
global factor. We estimate over 70 percent of the monthly change in the 10-year NZGB yield can 
be explained by the global factor – with this estimate increasing over time.9 
 
 
 
____________ 
6 RBNZ Monetary Policy Handbook. 
7 Following Lewis and Rosborough (2013), the global factor is constructed using the first principal component obtained from applying 
principal component analysis to monthly changes in 10-year sovereign bonds for a range of advanced economies.  
8 This reflects a combination of factors, including a liquidity premium for New Zealand markets, which tend to be small and relatively 
illiquid compared to core markets like the US Treasury market; lack of reserve currency status compared to the US; and other 
macroeconomic factors such as a generally higher policy rate (and estimated neutral rate) than other countries. 
9 Lewis and Rosborough (2013) found an adjusted R-squared of 0.62 when predicting the monthly change in NZGB yields with the 
global factor, and idiosyncratic Australia and US factors. Estimating the model in 2025 results in an adjusted R-squared of 0.73. 


 
 
7 
 
Figure 4. Global 10-year sovereign yields versus global factor 
 
Source: Bloomberg, RBNZ, Lewis and Rosborough (2013) 
Yield curves have steepened significantly 
Since the MPC started lowering the OCR in August 2024, short-term rates have fallen by 
substantially more than long-term rates and as a result we have seen a sharp steepening of 
interest rate curves in New Zealand. As I will unpack next, the implications of a steeper yield curve 
for monetary policy transmission depend on the underlying drivers of that steepening trend. And, 
as is often the case in New Zealand, this trend needs to be understood in a global context.  
Figure 5, which shows a strong correlation in the difference between 10- and 2-year New Zealand, 
US and Australian sovereign bond yields, provides an illustration of this global context. The yield 
curve steepening for New Zealand over the past year has been particularly sharp.  
Figure 5. Sovereign yield curve slopes (10-year minus 2-year sovereign bond yields) 
 
Source: Bloomberg, RBNZ 


 
 
8 
 
The policy implications of yield curve steepening depend on the underlying driver 
It is normal for the yield curve to steepen during a policy rate cutting cycle – and it is a common 
pattern for New Zealand, as shown in figure 6. If financial markets believe looser monetary policy 
will succeed in lifting growth and inflation, then longer-term rates should fall by less than short-
term rates in anticipation of a higher OCR in the future. This pattern was particularly noticeable 
during the GFC, and has also played out again more recently, with the NZGB yield curve 
steepening significantly as the OCR has been lowered from its post-pandemic high of 5.5 percent, 
as shown in figure 6. 
Figure 6. NZGB yield curve slope (10-year minus 2-year yield) versus the policy rate 
 
Source: LSEG, RBNZ. Data as at 21 October 2025. 
Note: The 10s-2s spread is calculated from 10- and 2-year zero coupon yields obtained from fitting a Nelson Siegel Svensson yield 
curve model following the approach outlined in Krippner and Thorsrud (2009) and Lewis (2015). 
 
What is less usual about these movements in the yield curve is the lack of any significant declines 
in longer-term interest rates, at least until more recently. As shown in figure 7, during rate cutting 
cycles in New Zealand since 2001, the 10-year NZGB yield has, on average, declined by around 50 
basis points in the year after the first cut. This was not the case in the year since the first rate cut of 
this cycle, in August 2024. In fact, the 10-year yield increased by around 30 basis points over this 
period.  


 
 
9 
 
Figure 7. Change in 10-year NZGB yield before and after first OCR cut 
 
Source: Bloomberg 
 
Interpreting the underlying drivers of these movements in yields helps us understand how the 
RBNZ’s monetary policy stance is influencing domestic financial conditions. The smaller declines in 
long-term yields compared to short-term yields may reflect expectations of future growth and 
inflation, which can be influenced by our monetary policy stance. Or they may reflect higher term 
premia amid increased global economic and geopolitical uncertainty, over which we have less 
control. To guide our thinking, we often find it helpful to think of a government bond yield as 
being made up of two separate components. The first is market expectations of the OCR over the 
relevant term. The second is a ‘term premium’ that reflects the additional return investors demand 
as compensation for the risk of holding longer-dated securities (figure 8).10 
Figure 8. NZGB curve decomposition  
 
Source: LSEG, RBNZ. Data as at 21 October 2025. 
Note: these are zero coupon yields and not yields to maturity. 
____________ 
10 See Callaghan (2019) for discussion in the New Zealand context. 


 
 
10 
 
 
Figure 9 decomposes the change in the 10-year NZGB yield between these two components since 
July 2024. It shows that, until September, the increase in the term premium on the 10-year NZGB 
had more than offset the negative contribution from expectations for the future path of short-term 
interest rates, as the OCR has been cut. Figure 10 shows that term premium estimates for the US, 
Australia, and New Zealand over time are highly correlated, with all three having increased by 
around two percentage points since 2020, putting significant upward pressure on longer-term 
interest rates across these economies. Looking at this through a global lens, it appears likely that 
much of the increase in the estimated term premium for New Zealand has been driven by higher 
term premia in the US and other major economies.  
Figure 9.  Decomposition of the change in the 10-year NZGB yield since July 2024 
 
Source: RBNZ, Adrian et al. (2013),  Callaghan (2019), and Jennison (2017). Data as at 21 October 2025. 
Note: these are zero coupon yields and not yields to maturity. 
Figure 10. Term premium estimates for 10-year sovereign bonds yields 
 
Source: Bloomberg, Haver, RBNZ. US and NZ data as at October 2025, Australian data as at August 2025. 


 
 
11 
 
The implication from this analysis is that the relatively high level of long-term interest rates 
compared to short-term rates in New Zealand is, at least in part, due to higher term premia, not 
just expectations for future growth and inflation in the wake of recent interest rate cuts. The 
literature points to several factors that can drive the term premium on government bonds, 
including inflation uncertainty, implied bond market volatility, and monetary policy tools like LSAP 
programmes that are designed specifically to reduce the term premium.11 More recently, investor 
concerns about the ability of markets to absorb elevated sovereign bond supply globally has also 
likely placed upward pressure on term premia.12  
A steeper curve led by expectations of future growth and inflation is one thing; a steeper curve led 
by a higher term premium is another. Our research points to a clear difference: when steepening is 
driven by higher term premia, increases in the term premium may have similar effects on the 
economy as a negative demand shock. That is, increases in the term premium appear to reduce 
inflation and increase unemployment relative to an expectations-led steepening. That’s why, in our 
monitoring, we split long rates into two parts, expected future short rates and term premia, before 
advising on what moves in the curve mean for inflation and activity. 
None of this means we lack control of domestic financial conditions. A lot of the common 
movement in global interest rates reflects common economic cycles and spillovers. For example, 
fiscal stimulus in the US may increase US activity and therefore boost demand for New Zealand 
exports. At the same time, this policy would likely raise interest rates in both countries. Paired with 
a free-floating exchange rate, market forces can naturally help keep a lid on inflation in the face of 
global shocks.  
Our job is to set the OCR at a level that is consistent with the financial conditions New Zealand 
requires and communicate the outlook clearly, so policy rate expectations align with our price 
stability mandate. If we see interest rate curve moves that look inconsistent with price stability, such 
as a term premium-driven tightening of financial conditions that unduly restrains demand, the 
MPC can adapt policy settings to bring financial conditions back to a level that is consistent with its 
mandate.  
Reading global signals is therefore important for us to understand the drivers of financial 
conditions in New Zealand. This in turn supports our understanding of what level of the OCR will 
deliver the financial conditions we need to achieve MPC’s remit. 
Spillovers and safeguards in New Zealand bond markets  
Periods of global risk aversion can also significantly impact domestic financial markets. When risk 
appetite sours offshore, liquidity in New Zealand financial markets can thin, and price discovery 
can become impaired – often quickly and without any change in the OCR. Part of our job, under 
the RBNZ’s monetary policy and financial stability mandates, is to monitor markets for those signs 
of dysfunction. This allows us to assess whether the transmission of monetary policy is being 
impaired and evaluate possible financial stability risks. If needed, we stand ready to act. Such 
occasions have been rare: they have been limited to periods of severe global financial market 
dysfunction during the GFC and at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
____________ 
11 For example, see Kumar et al. (2022), Callaghan (2019), Adrian et al. (2013), RBNZ Monetary Policy Handbook.  
12 Aquilina et al. (2024), for example, argue that increased expected bond issuance is putting upward pressure on bond-swap spreads in 
the US, euro area, and Japan. 


 
 
12 
 
The ‘dash-for-cash’ episode at the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic highlighted how quickly 
market functioning can deteriorate.13 Significant selling of sovereign bonds by investors to raise 
cash ran up against dealer balance sheet capacity constraints, resulting in sharp deteriorations in 
bond market functioning. The risk of similar episodes occurring may be elevated in the current 
environment, where a significant net issuance of sovereign bonds is coupled with a shrinking 
dealer capacity relative to the size of ever-growing sovereign bond markets.14 
More recently, in April, global bond markets went through a short, sharp episode of illiquidity 
following the announcement of broader U.S. tariffs. The shock rippled quickly through major 
sovereign markets as leveraged positions were unwound and market depth thinned. New Zealand 
was no different: we saw a brief period of reduced liquidity in NZGBs, wider bid–ask spreads, as 
shown in figure 11, and a rapid repricing before conditions normalised. It was a reminder that, in an 
interconnected system, global market stress can show up here fast. 
Figure 11. Bid-ask spread on 2- and 10-year NZGBs 
 
      Source: Bloomberg, RBNZ. Data as at 21 October 2025. 
 
That April episode was brief. In the end, the announcement of a 90-day pause on the U.S. tariffs 
resulted in a return in bond market liquidity and no disruption to bond issuance, with core financial 
markets doing their job in price discovery and risk transfer. In other words, the system absorbed 
the shock without it having a major impact on New Zealand financial conditions.  
This episode reinforces the view that, while short periods of poor market liquidity generally do not 
need to be met with central bank intervention, it is prudent to be ready to support market 
functioning, if required. However, we need to provide space for markets to self-correct, and any 
interventions should be limited to scenarios where the RBNZ’s policy objectives are likely to be 
compromised.15  
If NZGB dysfunction were more persistent or threatened our objectives, we have the tools to 
reinforce the stance of policy we need: communication to anchor expectations; adjustments to our 
business as usual (BAU) liquidity operations; and, where warranted, crisis tools such as the Bond 
____________ 
13 Barone et al. (2022). 
14 Duffie (2023) discusses dealer balance sheet capacity and US Treasury market functioning.  
15 Silk (2024,b). 


 
 
13 
 
Market Liquidity Support (BMLS). These, and other tools, sit alongside the OCR to ensure the yield 
curve and market plumbing remain consistent with price stability and financial stability. 
Conclusion  
To wrap things up, I want to repeat the three key themes I have covered in this speech.  
First, transmission of recent OCR cuts to financial markets is largely playing out as expected. But as 
with any cycle, there are some unique features that we have had to take account of when 
assessing the stance of monetary policy. One has been a rise in the global bond term premium 
putting upward pressure on domestic interest rates. The other has been the initial response of 
households to opt for floating or short-term fixed mortgage rates – and the subsequent reversal of 
this trend.  
The second point is to discuss the importance of the cash-flow channel in transmission – but at the 
same time caution against overemphasizing this channel just because it is the easier one to 
observe in real time.  
And finally, international factors drive a large proportion of the movement in New Zealand’s 
interest rates. But that doesn’t mean we lack control of New Zealand monetary policy. We have 
the tools we need to steer domestic financial conditions to levels consistent with inflation settling at 
2 percent in the medium term.  
Thank you.  
 
 


 
 
14 
 
References 
Adrian, T., Crump, R. K., & Moench, E. (2013). Pricing the term structure with linear regressions. 
Journal of Financial Economics, 110(1), 110–138. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jfineco.2013.04.009 
Bank for International Settlements. (2025). Annual economic report 2025. Retrieved July 31, 2025, 
from Bis.org website: https://www.bis.org/publ/arpdf/ar2025e.htm 
Brandt, L., Guilhem, A. S., Schröder, M., & Van Robays, I. (2021). What drives euro area financial 
market developments? The role of US spillovers and Global Risk. ECB Working Paper Series, 2560. 
https://doi.org/10.2139/ssrn.3855932 
Callaghan, M. (2019). Expectations and the term premium in New Zealand long-term interest rates. 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Note, 2019(2), 1–20. Retrieved from 
https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/analytical-
notes/2019/an2019-02.pdf 
Cassino, E., & Yao, A. (2011). New Zealand’s emergency liquidity measures during the global 
financial crisis. Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 74(2), 39–50. Retrieved from 
https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/bulletins/2011/2011jun74-
2cassinoyao.pdf 
Chipeniuk, K., Kolasa, M., Lindé,J., Ludvich,E. & Quigg,M. (2025). Macroeconomic and Fiscal 
Impacts of Quantitative Easing in New Zealand. Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Note, 
2025(9). Retrieved from https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/hub/publications/analytical-
note/2025/macroeconomic-and-fiscal-impacts-of-quantitative-easing-in-new-zealand 
Dudley, W. C. (2017). The importance of financial conditions in the conduct of monetary policy. 
University of South Florida Sarasota-Manatee. Retrieved from 
https://www.bis.org/review/r170331c.htm 
Duffie, D. (2023). Resilience redux in the US Treasury market. Jackson Hole Symposium, Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City, August. Retrieved from 
https://www.kansascityfed.org/Jackson%20Hole/documents/9726/JH_Paper_Duffie.pdf 
Jennison, F. (2017). Estimation of the term premium within Australian treasury bonds. Australian 
Office of Financial Management Working Paper, 2017(1), 1–20. Retrieved from 
https://www.aofm.gov.au/publications/research/estimation-term-premium-within-australian-
treasury-bonds 
Kengmana, B. (2021). RAMPed up: RBNZ’s Additional Monetary Policy tookit. Reserve Bank of  
New Zealand Bulletin, 84(1), 1–32. Retrieved from https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-
/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/bulletins/2021/rbb2021-84-01.pdf 
Krippner, L., & Thorsrud, L. A. (2009). Forecasting New Zealand’s economic growth using yield 
curve information. Reserve Bank of New Zealand Discussion Paper, 2025(1), 1–39. Retrieved from 
https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/discussion-
papers/2009/dp09-18.pdf 
 


 
 
15 
 
Lewis, M. (2015). Forecasting with macro-finance models: Applications to United States and  
New Zealand (pp. 1–120). Open Access Te Herenga Waka-Victoria University of Wellington. 
Retrieved from Open Access Te Herenga Waka-Victoria University of Wellington website: 
https://openaccess.wgtn.ac.nz/articles/thesis/Forecasting_with_Macro-
Finance_Models_Applications_to_United_States_and_New_Zealand/17011883 
Lewis, M., & Rosborough, L. (2013). What in the world moves New Zealand bond yields?  
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Note, 2013(08), 1–18. Retrieved from 
https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/2e3ed1dad4a14128a7e067d33fdf065a.ashx?sc_lang=en 
Nolan, G., & Tong, E. (2022). The effects of the Funding for Lending Programme on funding costs 
and mortgage rates. Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Notes, 2022(12), 1–15. Retrieved from 
https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/analytical-
notes/2022/analytical-note--the-effects-of-the-funding-for-lending-programme-on-funding-
costs-and-mortgage-rate.pdf 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand. (2024). Monetary Policy Handbook. Reserve Bank of New Zealand. 
Retrieved from Reserve Bank of New Zealand website: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-
/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/monetary-policy/monetary-policy-handbook/monetary-policy-
handbook-july-2024.pdf 
Shin, H., Wooldridge, P., & Xia, D. (2025). US dollar’s slide in April 2025: the role of FX hedging.  
BIS Bulletin, 105, 1–6. Retrieved from https://www.bis.org/publ/bisbull105.pdf 
Silk, K. (2024a). Transmission of monetary policy to financial conditions. Presented at the  
Citi Australian & New Zealand Investment Conference. Retrieved from 
https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/hub/news/2024/10/transmission-of-monetary-policy-to-financial-
conditions 
Silk, K. (2024b). Liquidity management: Principles for liquidity provision and the end of an abundant 
era. Presented at the CBA Global Markets Conference. Retrieved from https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-
/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/events/2024/10/liquidity-management-principles-for-liquidity-
provision-and-the-end-of-an-abundant-era.pdf 
Wynands, S. (2024). Transmission accomplished? Monetary policy pass-through to bank funding 
costs and mortgage rates. Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, 87(7), 1–22. Retrieved from 
https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/events/2024/10/bulletin--transmission-
accomplished--monetary-policy-passthrough-to-bank-funding-costs-and-mortgage.pdf
