BANK: RBNZ
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Business Canterbury Lunch
DATE: 20/02/2026
SPEAKER: By Anna Breman
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/speeches/2026/business-canterbury-speech-anna-breman-feb-2026.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Eyes on the horizon: 
Looking ahead in 
a volatile world 
A speech delivered to Business Canterbury  
in Christchurch 
On 20 February 2026 
By Anna Breman, Governor  
 
 
 


 
Eyes on the horizon: Looking ahead in a volatile world 
1 
Eyes on the horizon: Looking ahead in a volatile world1 
Introduction 
It is a pleasure to be here today. I would like to thank Business Canterbury for inviting me to speak 
to you all. This is my first time in Christchurch, and indeed in New Zealand’s South Island. I am 
already impressed by your lively and scenic city. I know that Canterbury went through a very 
challenging period following the earthquakes. But you have rebuilt and emerged as one of the 
bright spots of the New Zealand economy today. I am keen to meet with you and learn more 
about your region and its economy.  
Being Reserve Bank Governor comes with a profound sense of responsibility, because the 
decisions of the Reserve Bank have such wide-reaching impacts for New Zealanders. My focus as 
Governor will be on the Reserve Bank’s core mandates. For monetary policy our mandate is very 
clear: we’re tasked with keeping inflation low and stable.  
Today, I want to focus on the need for monetary policy to be forward looking. This is important for 
three main reasons. First, it takes time for changes in the Official Cash Rate (OCR) to influence the 
economy and inflation. Second, economic data are often highly volatile and lagged. And third, 
forward-looking policy helps financial markets adjust to new information.  
In practice, this means we base our monetary policy decisions on a forecast of where inflation is 
heading, and not on where it is today. But importantly, we learn from incoming data and adjust 
monetary policy as we go so that inflation converges to the target. So, being forward looking does 
not mean that monetary policy is on a preset course.  
Our current situation is a good example of the need to stay focussed on the future. With inflation 
slightly above our target range, how do we ensure that inflation will return sustainably to target 
without stifling the nascent economic recovery? But before I explain our latest decision, let me 
highlight why low and stable inflation is so important.  
Keeping inflation low and stable is the best contribution monetary policy 
can make to helping New Zealanders  
The 1970s and 1980s show us what can happen when monetary policy does not have a clear focus 
on price stability. Before 1990, the government could direct the Reserve Bank in setting monetary 
policy, with policy settings often directed at boosting growth and employment.2   
What’s the problem with that? You could sometimes use monetary policy to give the economy a 
short-term rush. But what New Zealand got in this period was very high inflation with no enduring 
improvement in growth or employment (figure 1). Volatility in inflation and real incomes created 
____________ 
1 I would like to thank Lewis Kerr, Rebecca Williams, Paul Conway and Chris Bloor for their excellent work and comments on this 
speech. 
2 Graham and Smith (2012) provide a brief history of monetary policy objectives and independence in New Zealand. 


 
Eyes on the horizon: Looking ahead in a volatile world 
2 
uncertainty for people and businesses trying to plan for their futures.3 Average weekly earnings 
were largely stagnant in inflation-adjusted terms over the 1980s.  
In 1990 the Reserve Bank was given clear responsibility for price stability, and independence to 
decide New Zealand’s monetary policy. Since then, New Zealand has enjoyed much lower 
inflation. Of course, other factors – like globalisation – helped keep inflation low too. But having an 
independent central bank focused on price stability has been key.4   
Low and stable inflation makes it easier for households and businesses to make decisions and plan 
for their futures. It helps ensure that New Zealander’s incomes and savings aren’t eroded by 
rapidly rising prices. And it supports healthy growth, with a strong labour market and growing real 
incomes.  
In recent years New Zealand, like many other countries, has experienced the pain of high inflation 
for the first time since the 1980s. Even though inflation has fallen since the peak in 2022, many 
households and businesses are still feeling the effects of several years of high inflation and weak 
growth. How do we ensure inflation returns sustainably to target without stifling the nascent 
economic recovery?  
Figure 1: Consumer price inflation before and after inflation targeting 
(annual) 
 
 
Source: Stats NZ. 
Note: The shaded area represents the Reserve Bank’s inflation target range, which is currently 1 to 3 percent for annual 
CPI inflation over the medium term. 
 
 
____________ 
3 A significant body of research addresses the costs of high inflation. Influential work on this topic includes Friedman (1969), 
Barro (1995), Feldstein (1997), Lucas (2000), and Woodford (2003). Chapter 2 of the Reserve Bank's Monetary Policy Handbook 
provides a brief non-technical overview of the main costs of inflation. 
4 The ideas in Kydland and Prescott (1977), Barro and Gordon (1983), and Rogoff (1985) were influential in motivating the shift 
globally towards central bank independence and inflation targeting. Various researchers have since assessed the impacts of 
central bank independence on economic outcomes, with Buckle (2023) providing a recent overview of the evidence.   


 
Eyes on the horizon: Looking ahead in a volatile world 
3 
Monetary policy decision: New Zealand’s economy has room to recover 
while inflation falls to 2 percent 
This week, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) decided to leave the OCR unchanged at 2.25 
precent (figure 2). The Committee emphasised that an economic recovery is underway, and that 
there are signs of it broadening across the economy. Inflation is slightly above our target range at 
3.1 percent. However, we are confident that inflation will return to the target midpoint over the 
next 12 months.  
Let me explain how we used our future-focussed Remit to guide our decision before I get into the 
details of the outlook for the New Zealand economy and inflation.  
Figure 2: Official Cash Rate (OCR) 
(quarterly average) 
 
Source: RBNZ estimates. 
Note: The projection is from the Reserve Bank’s February 2026 Monetary Policy Statement. 
We must understand the present, but look ahead to the future  
I want to stress that we are never comfortable having inflation outside our target range. But we 
must accept what has already happened, understand it, and then look ahead.  
That’s what our Remit asks of us: that we focus on future inflation.5  
This makes good sense. Let me give you three main reasons for this.  
Monetary policy takes time to impact the economy 
First, our monetary policy decisions take time to flow through to inflation – about 6 to 9 quarters 
for the peak impact.6 Increasing the OCR now would not bring inflation down immediately. But it 
would hamper the economic recovery. And if the recent increase in inflation proved temporary, we 
would risk undershooting our inflation target. 
____________ 
5 See the Remit for the Monetary Policy Committee. 
6 See Chapter 4 of the Reserve Bank’s November 2023 Monetary Policy Statement for a discussion of monetary policy 
transmission lags in New Zealand. 


 
Eyes on the horizon: Looking ahead in a volatile world 
4 
Economic data are often volatile and lagged 
Second, economic data can be highly volatile.7 For example, for the first three quarters of 2025 
New Zealand’s measured economic growth fluctuated between strongly positive and strongly 
negative.8 This volatility reflected many factors – including fluctuations in the timing of agricultural 
production, changes in energy supply for manufacturers, and changing seasonal patterns.  
Inflation is constantly pushed around by temporary changes in the prices of global commodities 
and services, as well as fluctuations in domestic energy prices and the ‘one-off’ effects of some 
central and local government policy changes.  
If we reacted to short-term economic volatility, we would simply add to it. Instead, we aim to 
understand what each new piece of data tells us about the fundamental drivers of inflation, and 
whether it represents a new trend or temporary volatility. 
In reality, this is challenging, particularly in times of great uncertainty.9 In such circumstances, it 
may be better to publish several alternative scenarios instead of a central projection. For example, 
in the early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic the Reserve Bank published three scenarios instead 
of a central projection. Similarly, the Bank of Canada switched to publishing multiple scenarios for 
a period following US announcements of higher tariffs in April 2025.    
But even in more normal times, it is a challenge to stay focussed on the future when our data are 
always behind us. Our latest inflation and unemployment data are for the last three months of last 
year, while our latest GDP data are even older, covering July to September of last year.  
Forward-looking policy helps financial markets adjust to new information 
Third, focusing on the future helps financial markets anticipate how the MPC will react to new 
information about inflationary pressure. This allows financial conditions to change in response to 
new data – in a way that helps us to achieve our mandate – even before the MPC has met to 
consider the new data and adjust monetary policy.  
To support this, the Reserve Bank publishes a forward-looking track for the OCR, in combination 
with economic projections, and a discussion of the main risks to our assessment.10 Publishing 
alternative scenarios more regularly can be considered to further help markets understand our 
reaction function.11 
Of course, given volatility in the economic data, financial markets can react strongly to movements 
in the data that turn out to reflect temporary factors, rather than fundamental changes in 
economic conditions.  
____________ 
7 Schnabel (2022) discusses some of the global factors that have contributed to increased economic volatility since the outbreak 
of COVID-19.  
8 Measured quarterly real economic growth was 1.1% in the March 2025 quarter, -1.0% in the June 2025 quarter, and 1.1% in the 
September 2025 quarter. 
9 Bohm and Sing (2022) and Knowles and Patel (2025) discuss the Reserve Bank’s forecasting performance following the 
beginning of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
10 Richardson and Williams (2025) discuss the role of forecasting in monetary policy at the Reserve Bank of New Zealand. 
11 Breman (2025). 


 
Eyes on the horizon: Looking ahead in a volatile world 
5 
With that said, let me go into how understanding the present but looking ahead to the future is 
relevant for our current monetary policy stance. 
An economic recovery is underway, and there are signs it is broadening  
across the economy 
The economy is at an early stage in its recovery. With ongoing strength in commodity prices, 
economic activity in the agricultural sector and regional New Zealand remains strong. In response 
to lower interest rates, economic growth is broadening across sectors of the economy, such as 
manufacturing, construction and some retail. The chill from the surge in uncertainty about tariffs 
last year has partly abated.  
New Zealand’s economy expanded in the September quarter last year, and our indicators point to 
an ongoing recovery into the end of 2025 and the start of 2026 (figure 3).  
As for the labour market, unemployment remains elevated, and wage growth remains subdued 
(figure 4). But there are signs that the labour market is beginning to stabilise. The labour market 
often only improves once employers are confident business really is picking up, which we expect 
will happen this year. 
Just like the downturn, the recovery is likely to be uneven. We have already seen stronger growth 
in exports, business investment, and house building, compared to relatively subdued growth in 
household consumption. I will hear today about how the recovery is going in Canterbury, and I’m 
looking forward visiting other regions to hear what’s happening there. 
Figure 3: New Zealand’s real Gross Domestic Product 
(production measure, seasonally adjusted) 
 
 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: The production measure of GDP is a measure of the volume of production and is expressed in 2009/2010 prices. 
The projection is from the Reserve Bank’s February 2026 Monetary Policy Statement. 
 
 


 
Eyes on the horizon: Looking ahead in a volatile world 
6 
Figure 4: Unemployment rate 
(unemployed people as a share of the labour force, seasonally adjusted) 
 
 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: The projection is from the Reserve Bank’s February 2026 Monetary Policy Statement. 
The path has been bumpy, but inflation is expected to return to our 2 percent 
target midpoint over the next 12 months 
The path lower for inflation has been a bumpy one. Annual consumer price inflation fell from its 
post-COVID peak of 7.3 percent in mid-2022 to 2.2 percent in the second half of 2024. It 
increased over 2025 to 3.1 percent in the December quarter of last year, which is just outside our 
1-3 percent target range. However, we expect inflation to be back in our target range now in the 
first quarter of this year and to return to our target midpoint over the next 12 months (figure 5).  
This judgement is a critical part of the MPC’s forward-looking assessment and decision to hold the 
OCR at 2.25 percent. We needed to assess whether the recent increase in annual consumer price 
inflation is a sign of broader inflationary pressure, or just a temporary bump in inflation’s path 
lower.  
Figure 5: Consumer price inflation 
(annual) 
 
 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: The projection is from the Reserve Bank’s February 2026 Monetary Policy Statement. The shaded area represents 
the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI inflation over the medium term. 


 
Eyes on the horizon: Looking ahead in a volatile world 
7 
Global factors have increased inflation for goods and services that can be traded 
internationally 
Global factors are behind much of the recent increase in inflation in New Zealand. Many of the 
products New Zealand households consume can be bought on international markets. The prices 
we pay for these products – even the ones that are made here in New Zealand – are heavily 
influenced by prices in global markets.  
Inflation for tradables products picked up in 2025, after being negative in the second half of 2024 
(figure 6). Rising inflation for tradable food and transport – which includes both fuel and airfares – 
explains much of this increase (figure 7).  
Fluctuations in tradables inflation are common and often short-lived. Looking forward, tradables 
inflation is expected to fall back over the next 12 months given relatively stable import prices and 
some support from the recent appreciation in the New Zealand dollar. 
Figure 6: Contributions of tradables and non-tradables inflation to CPI inflation 
(annual) 
 
 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: Tradable and non-tradable goods and services make up approximately 42% and 58% of the CPI basket 
respectively.  
 
 


 
Eyes on the horizon: Looking ahead in a volatile world 
8 
Figure 7: Contributions of food and transport to tradables inflation 
(annual) 
 
 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 
Non-tradables inflation has been declining, but only gradually 
What about goods and services that aren’t exposed to global volatility – such as housing and local 
services? Prices for these ‘non-tradables’ are driven much more by what’s happening here at 
home. Non-tradables inflation has been declining since 2022, but it has been a slow grind lower, 
and non-tradables inflation has proven more stubborn than expected by the Monetary Policy 
Committee over the past few years (figure 8).  
The decline in non-tradables inflation has predominantly been driven by weak demand in the 
economy. When demand is weak, people and businesses compete less for goods and services and 
productive inputs, and inflationary pressure in the economy falls.  
This has been the case in New Zealand over the past two years – weak demand in the economy 
has kept a lid on these pressures (figure 9, green bars). Weak demand is expected to continue to 
pull non-tradables inflation down over 2026, but by less and less as the economy recovers.  
With weak demand in the economy, why hasn’t non-tradables inflation fallen faster? In other 
words, why has non-tradables inflation been so persistent? An important reason for this is that the 
pricing decisions of firms and workers have been slow to adjust back to a low inflation 
environment.  
When inflation is high, businesses tend to increase their prices to catch up with or get ahead of 
rising input costs and workers try to negotiate higher pay rises, so the purchasing power of their 
incomes does not fall behind. These decisions add up to keep inflation higher for longer, with 
persistent effects that can be felt for years.  
We think this process has been slowing down as headline inflation has declined, and that it will 
slow further as households and businesses continue to adjust back to a low-inflation environment 
(figure 9, blue bars). Consistent with this, expectations for future inflation are well within our 
inflation target band (figure 10).  
 


 
Eyes on the horizon: Looking ahead in a volatile world 
9 
Figure 8: Non-tradables inflation, with previous Reserve Bank forecasts 
(annual) 
 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.  
Note: Each line shows a projection of non-tradables inflation from the Reserve Bank’s February Monetary Policy 
Statements from 2023 to 2026. The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI 
inflation over the medium term. 
Figure 9: Estimates of the factors contributing to annual non-tradables inflation based  
on past relationships 
 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: This decomposition provides an indication of the factors contributing to movements in annual non-tradables 
inflation relative to its long-term trend, based on historical relationships. It is a simplified representation based on the 
‘Phillips curve’ equation used to model non-tradables inflation in our core macroeconomic model NZSIM. ‘Other factors’ 
is the component of inflation that cannot be explained by the historical relationships embedded in the model, and may 
include both persistent and temporary factors.  
 


 
Eyes on the horizon: Looking ahead in a volatile world 
10 
Figure 10: Inflation expectations of professional forecasters and business leaders 
(annual, years ahead)  
 
 
Source: RBNZ Survey of Expectations. 
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI inflation over the medium term. 
 
Another key reason why non-tradables inflation has been higher than expected over recent 
quarters is that prices for some categories of non-tradables products have continued to increase 
even though demand in the economy has been weak (figure 11).12 Eventually, prices for these 
products will respond to the lower inflation environment. 
Lastly, administered prices – which are prices more directly influenced by central and local 
government policies – have been increasing strongly over recent quarters, adding persistence to 
non-tradables inflation (figure 12).  
For example, council rates have been increasing more quickly than overall inflation, and it is 
unclear how long this will persist. But other recent drivers of administered price inflation – like 
those from increased electricity lines charges and changes to fees free education – are expected to 
exert less upward pressure on inflation over 2026.  
 
 
____________ 
12 Categories of the CPI that tend to be slower to respond to monetary policy include products such as household energy, 
telecommunication services, and transport supplies and services (e.g. vehicle maintenance). 


 
Eyes on the horizon: Looking ahead in a volatile world 
11 
Figure 11: Non-tradables inflation categories, grouped by how fast they respond to monetary policy 
(annual)  
 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: This split is based on the approach outlined in Astebol and Patel (2025), which categorises subgroups of the 
consumers price index based on their sensitivity to monetary policy over a three-year horizon. ‘Slowest to respond 
categories’ represents the ‘less sensitive’ subgroups in that analysis. 
 
Figure 12: Inflation for administered prices  
(annual)  
 
Source: Stats NZ. 
 
 
 


 
Eyes on the horizon: Looking ahead in a volatile world 
12 
Underlying inflationary pressures are lower than headline CPI inflation 
There are always various factors influencing inflation, making it harder to discern the underlying 
trends. We need to look into the details. We also have tools that help us to step back from the 
details to get a feel for underlying inflationary pressures in the economy. These tools produce 
measures of ‘core inflation’ that strip out or put less weight on prices that tend to be volatile. 
Currently, our measures of core inflation are telling us that underlying inflationary pressure in 
New Zealand is not as high as the headline CPI suggests (figure 13). 
Core inflation being stable and within the target band is consistent with our forecast for inflation to 
fall over 2026.  
Figure 13: Headline and core inflation measures 
(annual) 
 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates 
Note: The beige shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for inflation over the medium term. The 
blue shaded area shows the range of core inflation measures. The core inflation measures include the sectoral factor 
model, factor model, trimmed mean (30%), weighted median, and CPI excluding food and energy.  
Summary 
New Zealand’s economy has room to recover while inflation heads towards  
2 percent 
What does all this mean for 2026? We expect declining tradables inflation to bring New Zealand’s 
inflation rate back within our target range, while the more persistent inflation pressures continue 
on their gradual path lower. This will provide the New Zealand economy with room to further 
recover, without a lift-off in inflation.  
That is a positive outlook for 2026. But it doesn’t mean we can put our feet up. Forecasting 
inflation is never easy – we have thought of many ways in which we might be wrong. And today’s 
volatile world only promises to deliver more curve balls. You only have to look at the growth in 
artificial intelligence and the major shifts in geopolitical relationships to know that the world is 
changing. The transition is unlikely to be a smooth one.  


 
Eyes on the horizon: Looking ahead in a volatile world 
13 
Risks to the inflation outlook are balanced, but monetary policy is not  
on a preset course 
Importantly, being forward focused, as I’ve discussed, does not imply that monetary policy is on a 
pre-set course. We will adjust our plans as we get new information, and always with a focus on the 
future.  
I recently learned a Māori whakataukī: Kia whakatōmuri te haere whakamua. It’s about looking 
back and reflecting so you can move forward.  And that’s exactly what we do. Our experience of 
the past – of economic cycles, of unexpected shocks, and of volatility in the data – helps us to 
understand what each new piece of data might tell us about the future.  
We know that the economy will never evolve exactly as we expect. But we should strive to set 
policy for the future, to stay focused on the goal, and to not overreact to volatility in the data. 
The Monetary Policy Committee has a clear mandate, to guide inflation back to target in all sorts 
of conditions. We will continue to look ahead and respond to what the world delivers.  
Thank you. 
 
 


 
Eyes on the horizon: Looking ahead in a volatile world 
14 
References 
Astebol, M. and Patel, N. (2025) Sectoral heterogeneity in monetary policy pass-through in New 
Zealand. Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Note AN2025-05, June 2025.   
Barro, R. (1995) Inflation and economic growth. NBER Working Paper No. 5326, October 1995.  
Barro, R. and Gordon, D. (1983) Rules, discretion, and reputation in a model of monetary policy. 
Journal of Monetary Economics, Vol. 12(1), pp. 101-121.   
Blinder, A., Ehrmann, M., Fratzscher, M., De Haan, J., and Jansen, D. (2008) Central bank 
communication and monetary policy: A survey of theory and evidence. Journal of Economic 
Literature, Vol. 46(4), pp. 910-945, December 2008.  
Bohm, T. and Sing, M. (2022). Evaluating the Reserve Bank’s forecasting performance. Reserve 
Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, Vol. 85(4), November 2022.  
Breman, A. (2025). Daring to think differently – on the Riksbank’s monetary policy communication. 
Speech delivered at the Centre for Central Banking Studies, Bank of England. 
Buckle, R. (2023) Distinguished fellow lecture: Monetary policy and the benefits and limits of central 
bank independence. New Zealand Economic Papers, Vol. 57(3), 263-289. 
Feldstein, M. (1997) The Costs and Benefits of Going from Low Inflation to Price Stability. In: 
Reducing Inflation: Motivation and Strategy (eds. C. D. Romer and D. H. Romer), pp. 123-166, 
January 1997. 
Friedman, M. (1969) The Optimum Quantity of Money. In: The Optimum Quantity of Money and 
Other Essays. Chicago: Aldine Publishing Company. 
Graham, J. and Smith, C. (2012) A brief history of monetary policy objectives and independence in 
New Zealand. Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, Vol 75(1), March 2012.  
Knowles, J. and Patel, N. (2025) Forecasting performance in the post-COVID-19 disinflation period. 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Bulletin, Vol. 88(8), September 2025. 
Kydland, F. and Prescott, E. (1977) Rules rather than discretion: The inconsistency of optimal plans. 
Journal of Political Economy, Vol. 85(3), pp. 473-491, June 1977.  
Lucas, R. (2000) Inflation and welfare. Econometrica, Vol. 68(2), pp. 247-274, March 2000.  
RBNZ (2023) Monetary policy transmission lags. Reserve Bank of New Zealand Monetary Policy 
Statement November 2023, Chapter 4.2.  
Richardson, A. and Williams, R. (2025) The role of forecasting in monetary policy. Reserve Bank of 
New Zealand Bulletin, Vol. 88(1), April 2025.  
Rogoff, K. (1985) The optimal degree of commitment to an intermediate monetary target. 
Quarterly Journal of Economics, Vol. 100(4), pp. 1169-1189, November 1985. 
Schnabel, I. (2022) Monetary policy and the great volatility. Speech at the Jackson Hole Economic 
Policy Symposium, Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole, Wyoming, 27 August 2022. 
Woodford, M. (2003) Interest and Prices: Foundations of a Theory of Monetary Policy. Princeton 
and Oxford: Princeton University Press.
