BANK: RBNZ
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Purchasing power and the real cost of living in New Zealand
DATE: 25/03/2026
SPEAKER: By Paul Conway
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/speeches/2026/purchasing-power-and-the-real-cost-of-living-in-new-zealand.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

We  
 
Purchasing power 
and the real 
cost of living 
in New Zealand 
 
A speech delivered to the National Advisors Conference, 
Financial Advice New Zealand 
On the 25th of March 2026 
 
By Paul Conway, Chief Economist, Director of Economics,  
Member of the Monetary Policy Committee * 
 
* With thanks to Ben Harris who worked with me on this speech. 


 
 
 
Purchasing power and the real cost of living in New Zealand 
2 
 
Purchasing power and the real cost of living in New Zealand 
Introduction 
Kia ora koutou. 
I want to acknowledge up front that it has been a rollercoaster few years for New Zealanders. Our 
economy was severely disrupted by the COVID-19 pandemic, with the economic shockwaves only 
now fully receding. Conflict in the Middle East has added yet another layer of disruption – pushing 
up global energy and shipping costs – with potential macroeconomic impacts here at home. This 
has been a period of economic upheaval and uncertainty for Kiwis.  
Perhaps one of the most obvious economic disruptions for many over the past few years has been 
high inflation. During the pandemic, demand roared back while supply chains stayed broken. As 
the pandemic progressed, people were ready to spend, jobs were plentiful, and house prices 
soared. But goods were scarce and shipping costs spiked. That imbalance started the sharpest 
inflation surge seen in decades.  
Inflation peaked above 7 percent in mid-2022, bringing the ‘cost-of-living crisis’ into sharp focus. 
With the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) lifting interest rates to rein in excess demand in the 
economy, inflation fell to 2.2 percent in 2024. It edged up to 3.1 percent late last year, slightly 
above the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range. In our February Monetary Policy Statement, we 
expected inflation to return to the target midpoint over the coming year. However, we will be 
revisiting that projection in our April Monetary Policy Review in light of conflict in the Middle East.  
Even with inflation significantly below where it was in the pandemic, people are asking ‘why does 
everything feel so expensive?’ In this speech, I’ll explain why prices remain high and how the cost 
of living in New Zealand has changed over the pandemic and compares internationally. I’ll also 
outline the role and limits of monetary policy in addressing the ‘cost-of-living crisis’ and touch on 
what else could be done to improve the purchasing power of our incomes.  
Key messages I would like to get across include: 
 
The cost of living isn’t just about inflation or how high prices are. It’s ultimately about the 
purchasing power of incomes – what people can buy with their incomes after accounting for 
prices.  
 
New Zealand is an expensive country, with prices for many products well above the OECD 
average. Some products – including construction services, household utilities, and some food 
items – are among the most expensive in the OECD.  
 
Since the start of the pandemic, prices overall have risen by 26%, with prices for some 
household essentials increasing by much more. Over the same period, income per person – 
including from wages, profits, and investment returns – has increased by slightly more than 
inflation, suggesting little change in purchasing power.  
 
Wages, which matter most for household purchasing power, have increased by 32% since the 
start of the pandemic, leaving real wages roughly 6% above pre-COVID-19 levels. Workers 
who switched jobs tended to receive larger wage increases.  


 
 
 
Purchasing power and the real cost of living in New Zealand 
3 
 
 
Before 2020, the purchasing power of wages in New Zealand grew faster than the OECD 
average, supported by strong employment growth and favourable terms of trade. Today, while 
wage purchasing power is around average across all 38 OECD members countries, it is about 
20% below the average of the more advanced OECD economies that we typically compare 
ourselves to.  
 
Low and stable inflation matters for the cost of living. But it is not the whole story. Monetary 
policy can anchor prices, but it cannot make New Zealand more affordable on its own. 
Sustained gains in purchasing power require higher productivity driven by structural reforms. 
Indicators suggest that the quality of structural policies in parts of New Zealand’s framework 
now lag behind OECD best practice.  
The cost of living in New Zealand 
Let’s start with some definitions. Inflation measures how fast prices change. So, annual inflation of 
2% means prices, on average, are 2% higher over a year. The price level is where prices sit at a 
point in time. Even if inflation slows, the price level stays elevated. It just increases less quickly.  
The cost of living is all about purchasing power – what we can buy with our incomes. For example, 
if prices increase by 2% while incomes rise by 4%, then real incomes – purchasing power – 
improves by 2%. If incomes grow faster than prices, then purchasing power improves; if inflation 
outpaces income growth, then purchasing power declines.  
Inflation and the price level 
Over the pandemic 
Inflation over the pandemic in New Zealand peaked below the OECD average but was more 
persistent than in some other countries (Figure 1).  
Inflation at the end of 2025 – at 3.1 percent – was slightly above the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target 
band. It was expected to fall to around the 2% midpoint over the next 12 months but is now likely 
to persist at more elevated levels because of the conflict in the Middle East. The MPC will be 
assessing the impacts for monetary policy at our April Monetary Policy Review two weeks from 
today.  
The inflation surge means prices are now much higher than they were before the pandemic 
(Figure 2). Compared to the beginning of 2020, overall prices are up 26%, meaning one New 
Zealand dollar now buys 26% fewer goods and services than it did five years ago. Inflation erodes 
the value of money.  
As well as high generalised inflation, prices for one or more everyday household essentials have 
been increasing strongly at almost every point over the past five years (Figure 2). This includes 
prices for council rates, construction services, some foods (including meat and butter), and 
insurance. Because households cannot easily avoid some of these costs, this has no doubt added 
to the sense of a ‘cost-of-living crisis’.  


 
 
 
Purchasing power and the real cost of living in New Zealand 
4 
 
Figure 1 – CPI inflation in selected OECD economies 
 
Note: Countries included in the OECD average include 37 of the current OECD countries, with Türkiye excluded due to 
its significantly higher inflation. OECD member countries can be found here.  
Source: OECD. 
Figure 2 – Change in price level of selected New Zealand CPI categories 
 
Note: This figure shows the change in price level of selected CPI categories relative to the December 2019 quarter. Home 
ownership includes property rates, house insurance, construction of new dwellings, and maintenance and repairs of 
housing. 
Source: Stats NZ. 
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Annual %
New Zealand
Australia
Canada
United Kingdom
United States
Euro area (20 countries)
OECD
CPI
Fruit and vegetables
Home ownership 
Property rates
Insurance
Electricity
Gas
95
100
105
110
115
120
125
130
135
140
145
150
155
160
2019Q4
2020Q4
2021Q4
2022Q4
2023Q4
2024Q4
2025Q4
Index (2019Q4=100)


 
 
 
Purchasing power and the real cost of living in New Zealand 
5 
 
Compared to other countries 
How do prices here compare with prices in other countries? Let’s start with a Big Mac. Because Big 
Macs are the same everywhere, its price offers a like-for-like cross-country comparison. On this 
measure, a Big Mac in New Zealand is about the 13th most expensive across Big Macs in 20 OECD 
economies.1 
Our spending should hopefully extend well beyond Big Macs. So, let’s look at prices for a broader 
collection of goods and services across countries.  
According to OECD and World Bank data, overall prices in New Zealand are 12% and 22% above 
average and the 8th and 11th highest across 38 OECD countries respectively.2 This indicates that 
New Zealand is a relatively expensive country – a remark often heard from tourists and consistent 
with local concerns about the cost of living.  
Using the World Bank data, we can compare prices across countries for different types of goods 
and services (Figures 3a and 3b). There are 41 different product categories in this dataset and 
prices in New Zealand are above the OECD average in 31 of those categories.  
For goods, tobacco products here are among the most expensive in the OECD, no doubt partly 
reflecting high excise taxes. Prices for some foods – milk, cheese, eggs, and fruit – are also well 
above the OECD average whereas prices for seafood, clothing, and meat are slightly below 
average.  
For services, the price of construction in New Zealand is the highest in the OECD and more than 
double the average. This is undoubtedly a handbrake on housing and infrastructure development 
here.3 In fact, the price of ‘capital formation’ – which covers machinery, equipment and 
construction – is 70% above average in New Zealand and also the highest in the OECD.4 The price 
of housing services and utilities in New Zealand is also assessed as being the most expensive in the 
OECD.5  
 
 
____________ 
1  Based on data from The Economist for 2025. 
2  These results are based on the relative prices for goods and services in New Zealand compared with the OECD average. OECD 
rankings use the OECD’s 2024 price level indices. World Bank rankings use International Comparison Program data for individual 
consumption, with 2024 data referenced to a 2021 benchmark year.  
3  The ICP measures construction input prices paid by contractors, including materials, equipment hire, and labour. Analysis by the 
Productivity Commission highlights persistently low productivity growth in New Zealand’s construction sector because of low capital 
intensity and slow technological adoption. For example, see Case study: Construction industry and migration. 
4  Based on ‘gross fixed capital formation’ in the ICP database. 
5  In the ICP database, ‘housing services’ includes rent paid by tenants as well as imputed rents for owner-occupiers. 


 
 
 
Purchasing power and the real cost of living in New Zealand 
6 
 
Figure 3 – Price levels across OECD countries  
a. Goods  
b. Services 
 
Note: These charts show the relative price level of different goods and services across OECD countries. The boxes show 
the minimum, maximum and median across OECD countries. The simple average across OECD countries is 100. 
Construction is generally considered a ‘goods-producing’ sector but has been included in services for simplicity. 
Source: World Bank International Comparison Program database. 
0
50
100
150
200
250
Price level (OECD 
average = 100)
New Zealand
Max = 307
Minimum
Median
Maximum
Max 
Median 
Min 
0
50
100
150
200
250
Price level (OECD 
average = 100)
New Zealand
Max = 363, New Zealand = 304 
Minimum
Median
Maximum


 
 
 
Purchasing power and the real cost of living in New Zealand 
7 
 
Purchasing power 
High prices in New Zealand would matter less if our incomes were also high.6 So, to assess 
purchasing power, let’s look at how Kiwi incomes tracked over the inflation surge and stack up 
internationally.  
In doing this, I’m going to distinguish between wages and income. ‘Wages’ are obviously what 
people earn at work and matter most for household purchasing power. ‘Income’ includes wages 
plus other revenues, such as the return on savings and investments and business profits.7  
Over the pandemic 
Let’s start with broader income. Did income growth in New Zealand offset the surge in inflation 
over the pandemic? The short answer is “yes, just, but it was bumpy”.  
Real national income per person fell sharply at the onset of the pandemic, then rebounded under 
very strong fiscal and monetary stimulus, and then dipped again as interest rates rose (Figure 4). 
Overall, income growth just kept pace with inflation, suggesting little change in purchasing power.  
But real income growth has been much weaker than in the past. In the two decades before the 
pandemic, real income grew by around 2 percent per year, supported by an increasing share of 
the population in employment and favourable terms of trade. Since 2020, growth has averaged 
only about 0.6 percent a year. Clearly, recent years have been challenging on the income front.  
Let’s turn to wages, which make up the bulk of Kiwi household income.  
Before the pandemic, wages for someone in the same job – excluding promotions and 
productivity gains – barely kept pace with inflation (Figure 5, LCI). Broader measures of real wages 
that capture the effects of job switching and promotions, and better reflect take-home pay, grew 
about 1% a year leading up to 2020 (Figure 5, QES).8  
As inflation surged over the pandemic, real wage growth for workers who stayed in the same job 
fell sharply to a trough of more than -3%. The broader measure of wages that accounts for job 
changes also turned negative in 2022, but by less than the narrow same-job measure. For part of 
this period, closed borders and strong demand created acute labour shortages, driving a surge in 
job switching for better pay (Figure 6).  
As I mentioned earlier, overall prices have increased by 26% since 2020. The broader measure of 
wages increased by 32%, leaving real wages roughly 6% above pre-COVID-19 levels.  
____________ 
6 Prices tend to be higher in high-income countries because productivity is strongest in their tradable sectors, where international 
competition supports higher wages. Those wages spill over into local, non-tradable services with lower productivity, pushing up prices – 
a mechanism known as the Balassa-Samuelson effect.  
7 Income is measured as Gross National Income (GNI) per person. This captures all income earned by New Zealanders – wages, profits, 
and investment returns. Unlike GDP, GNI adjusts for international income flows and terms of trade effects. 
8 The Labour Cost Index (LCI) measures changes in wage rates for a fixed set of jobs, holding job quality, hours, and workforce 
composition constant. Quarterly Employment Survey (QES) average hourly earnings measure actual pay per hour across the workforce 
and are influenced by shifts in industries, occupations, hours worked, and worker turnover. The gap between LCI and QES wage growth 
is consistent with evidence that a significant share of recent wage growth in New Zealand reflects workers moving between jobs and 
firms rather than pay increases for workers in the same job. For example, see The Greying Job Ladder: The Role of Ageing for 
Reallocation and Growth (forthcoming).  


 
 
 
Purchasing power and the real cost of living in New Zealand 
8 
 
Figure 4 – Growth in real per-capita incomes 
 
Note: This chart shows an index of real Gross National Income (GNI) per capita, seasonally adjusted, where 1992Q1 is 100. 
The green trend line is a linear trend from 1992Q1 to 2007Q4, and the blue trend line is a linear trend from 2008Q1 to 
2019Q4. The shaded areas show the Global Financial Crisis (GFC) recession and New Zealand’s border closure.  
Source: Stats NZ 
Figure 5 – Real wage growth 
 
Note: This chart shows the four-quarter moving average year-on-year change in the labour cost index (all industries) 
and average hourly earnings from the quarterly employment survey, adjusted for CPI inflation. The dotted lines 
represent the decade average of real wage growth for each measure. The shaded areas show the Global Financial Crisis 
(GFC) recession and New Zealand’s border closure. 
Source: Haver Analytics, Stats NZ 
95
115
135
155
175
195
215
1992
1995
1998
2001
2004
2007
2010
2013
2016
2019
2022
2025
Real GNI per capita 
(1992Q1=100)
Real GNI per capita
Trend (1992Q1 - 2007Q4)
Trend (2008Q1 - 2019Q4)
GFC
Borders 
closed
-4%
-3%
-2%
-1%
0%
1%
2%
3%
1995
2000
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
Annual %
Labour cost index (LCI)
Average hourly earnings (QES)
Period average (LCI)
Period average (QES)
GFC
Borders
closed


 
 
 
Purchasing power and the real cost of living in New Zealand 
9 
 
Figure 6 – Churn in the NZ labour market over COVID  
 
Note: Job transitions are the share of jobs created in a given period that are filled by people transitioning from one 
primary employer to a different primary employer, based on deidentified unit record tax data.9 The last data point is 
December 2025 (but may be subject to revision due to lags in tax data).  
Source: Stats NZ IDI, RBNZ estimates. 
Compared to other countries 
How does purchasing power in New Zealand – measured as real per capita incomes and wages – 
compare with other OECD counties?  
Real per capita income in New Zealand is below the OECD average. It hovered around 80% of the 
average until the mid-2000s, then increased to over 95% by 2020, before falling back to 90% of 
the average over the pandemic (Figure 7).  
As I mentioned earlier, strong real income growth in New Zealand up until 2020 was supported by 
an increasing share of the population in employment and favourable terms of trade. These 
tailwinds more than offset weak productivity growth, lifting real income growth above the OECD 
average.10  
In some years before 2020, income growth in New Zealand was stronger than in Australia, 
narrowing the trans-Tasman income gap. In some emerging economies – such as Poland – 
income growth was faster still, consistent with strong ‘catch-up’ in productivity. This illustrates how 
____________ 
9  These results are not official statistics. They have been created for research purposes from the Integrated Data Infrastructure is 
carefully managed by Stats NZ. For more information about the IDI please visit www.stats.govt.nz/integrated-data. The results are based 
in part on tax data supplied by Inland Revenue to Stats NZ under the Tax Administration Act 1994 for statistical purposes. Any 
discussion of data limitations or weaknesses is in the context of using the IDI for statistical purposes and is not related to the data’s 
ability to support Inland Revenue’s core operational requirements. 
10  Galt (2023) shows that, between the late 1990s and 2019 New Zealand’s net national income growth was supported by terms of trade 
impacts (higher export prices and a changing import mix), more of the population being employment, and a reduction in our net 
international income deficit. 
35%
40%
45%
50%
55%
60%
2000
2005
2010
2015
2020
2025
Job Transition Rate
Job Transition Rate (3-month rolling mean)
GFC
Borders
closed


 
 
 
Purchasing power and the real cost of living in New Zealand 
10 
 
income convergence can occur relatively quickly when regulatory conditions and institutional 
settings are supportive of growth.  
Since 2020, real income in New Zealand has fallen back to around 90% of the OECD average and 
the income gap vis-à-vis Australia has widened. Purchasing power, as measured by real income, 
has not kept pace with the rest of the OECD nor Australia since the beginning of the pandemic.  
It’s a different story with wages (Figure 7). Real wages nudged above the OECD average in the 
early years of the pandemic when fiscal and monetary policy settings were highly stimulatory. 
Since then, real wages have been broadly around the OECD average. Again, the fact real wages in 
New Zealand have not declined relative to the OECD average is consistent with acute labour 
shortages in the economy when the border was closed.  
The fact remains, however, that purchasing power in New Zealand is, at best, average compared 
to the rest of the OECD. Importantly, this is compared to all 38 current OECD member countries, 
which includes several emerging economies. Compared to the 30 OECD member countries in 
2010, average incomes in New Zealand sits around 20% below the average.  
Figure 7 – Income and wages as a percentage of the OECD average 
 
Note: This chart shows the real Gross National Income (GNI) per capita (PPP-converted) in the solid line and average 
annual wage (PPP-converted) in the dotted line relative to the OECD average.  
Source: OECD, World Bank. 
How to improve purchasing power 
Improving purchasing power is all about lifting real income growth. Improving productivity lies at 
the heart of this challenge. Increasing the value created by workers per hour of work allows 
businesses to pay higher wages without increasing their prices. We clearly see this across countries 
in that real wages increase more quickly in countries with better productivity growth. And we see it 
NZ - GNI
Australia - GNI
Poland - GNI
OECD members
NZ - Wages
Australia - Wages
Poland - Wages
40
50
60
70
80
90
100
110
120
130
1995 1997 1999 2001 2003 2005 2007 2009 2011 2013 2015 2017 2019 2021 2023
% of OECD


 
 
 
Purchasing power and the real cost of living in New Zealand 
11 
 
in New Zealand in that workers in industries with stronger productivity growth get better pay 
rises.11  
It is no exaggeration to say that productivity growth is the single most powerful determinant of 
higher real incomes, and therefore purchasing power, over the long run. Unfortunately, as I 
detailed in a speech last year, New Zealand’s productivity performance leaves much to be desired 
and has lagged other OECD economies (Figure 8).12 Further, productivity growth in the New 
Zealand economy fell significantly following the Global Financial Crisis and has been negative in 
the wake of the pandemic.  
While increases in the terms of trade and in the share of the population in employment improved 
purchasing power before the pandemic, there are limits to this as a growth strategy. So, how do 
we improve purchasing power through better productivity and what is the role of monetary policy 
in that? 
Figure 8 – Labour productivity in New Zealand (index) 
 
Note: This chart shows labour productivity (GDP per paid hour worked, seasonally adjusted) based on paid hours worked 
from the Quarterly Employment Survey. The trend lines are exponential trends from 1989Q1 to 2009Q4 in blue, and 
2010Q1 to 2019Q4 in orange. 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ calculations. 
The role of monetary policy in improving purchasing power 
The most important contribution monetary policy can make to improving long-run growth and 
purchasing power is to deliver low and stable inflation.  
____________ 
11  See New Zealand Productivity Commission (2021). 
12  See Beyond the cycle: Growth and interest rates in the long run. 
 700
 750
 800
 850
 900
 950
1,000
1,050
 1,100
 1,150
1989
1993
1997
2001
2005
2009
2013
2017
2021
2025
Labour 
productivity
Labour productivity (quarterly, sa)
Trend (1989Q1 - 2009Q4)
Trend (2010Q1 - 2019Q4)


 
 
 
Purchasing power and the real cost of living in New Zealand 
12 
 
New Zealanders have keenly felt the costs of high inflation in recent years. Inflation creates 
uncertainty – when prices are unstable, it becomes harder to distinguish genuine changes in 
demand and scarcity in markets from inflation noise. Businesses focus more on managing rising 
costs and less on investing and expanding. Households become more cautious.  
Inflation surprises also redistribute wealth – savers lose wealth as the purchasing power of their 
savings falls while borrowers eventually gain as inflation reduces their real debt burden. Inflation 
can also interact with the tax system in ways that lead to resource misallocation.  
While nominal incomes do adjust to an inflation surprise, the process can be slow and costly. It 
takes time for the economy to return to a new equilibrium of more stable and predictable price 
changes. This increases the risk of resources being poorly allocated in the economy, undermining 
productivity and income growth.  
While low and stable inflation is a key ingredient in lifting productivity and improving purchasing 
power, it is insufficient on its own. By anchoring prices, monetary policy creates the conditions for 
growth. But sustained gains in purchasing power require structural improvements in the economy. 
Structural policies are key 
Structural policies shape the economy’s long-run potential growth. They influence how 
competitive markets are, how easily resources shift from low- to high-productivity firms and 
sectors, and how quickly new technologies diffuse across businesses. These settings matter not just 
for long-run growth, but also for how resilient the economy is when shocks hit. 
The unique features of New Zealand’s economy – small scale, low population density, and extreme 
geographic isolation – mean that getting structural policy settings right is both challenging and 
critically important. Our persistent productivity underperformance suggests scope to improve 
structural policies. Reasons for that underperformance include limited international engagement 
by Kiwi firms, persistent gaps in innovation and skills, weak investment that constrains capital 
deepening, and a slow diffusion of productivity-enhancing technologies across the economy.  
Cross-country evidence also points to scope to improve New Zealand’s structural policy settings. 
The OECD’s indicators of Product Market Regulation show that New Zealand was a global leader in 
pro-competition regulation in the early 2000s. Since then, regulatory reform has been much 
weaker than in most other countries, and our regulatory settings are now rated below the OECD 
average (Figure 10). This pattern suggests more of a “one and done” approach to regulation here, 
in contrast to continuous regulatory upgrading elsewhere.  
A more fragmented and unpredictable global economy raises the stakes for ensuring that 
New Zealand’s structural policy settings are resilient, adaptive, and fit for purpose. We are in a new 
era of heightened geopolitical risk and persistent uncertainty, with the conflict in the Middle East a 
timely reminder of how quickly geopolitics can disrupt the global economy. At the same time, 
cross-country flows of trade, capital, and people are shifting, governments are becoming more 
interventionist, and the rules-based order that once underpinned global integration has weakened 
considerably.  
This is not a temporary shock that we can simply wait out. It’s a durable shift that makes the global 
economy more difficult and dangerous for small economies like New Zealand. We are more 


 
 
 
Purchasing power and the real cost of living in New Zealand 
13 
 
exposed to external shocks, fragile global supply chains, and shifts in global rules and norms over 
which we have little control.  
Sustaining living standards in this environment increasingly depends on structural policy settings 
that build resilience into the structure of the economy by encouraging flexibility, investment, and 
adaptation. A more resilient and flexible economy would mean monetary policy does not have to 
work as hard, or be as aggressive, to stabilise inflation as shocks wash through the economy.  
Figure 10 – Economy-wide pro-competition regulatory settings 
Note: This chart shows the most recent values of the OECD’s product market regulation indicator score on a scale from 
0 (most competition-friendly regulatory set-up) to 6 (least competition-friendly regulatory set-up). 
Source: OECD 
Concluding remarks 
New Zealand has weathered significant economic turbulence in recent years that has stoked 
concerns around the cost of living. The scale and intensity of the inflation surge following COVID-
19, coming after decades of stable prices, has proven very challenging. That surge in inflation 
permanently lifted the price level. Conflict in the Middle East has added fresh disruption - lifting 
global energy and shipping costs in the first instance and adding to economic uncertainty for 
Kiwis. 
Ultimately, purchasing power and the cost of living depend on what people can buy with their 
incomes, after accounting for prices. Prices overall in New Zealand are relatively high and prices 
for some goods and services are the highest in the OECD. The purchasing power of incomes and 
wages in New Zealand is, at best, average compared to the rest of the OECD and below average 
compared to the 30 higher-income OECD member countries we typically compare ourselves with.  
 
 
0
1
2
3
Sweden
Lithuania
United Kingdom
Ireland
Estonia
Netherlands
Norway
Finland
Denmark
Poland
Slovenia
France
Spain
Germany
Latvia
Czechia
Italy
Slovak Republic
Chile
OECD
Australia
Korea
Switzerland
Greece
New Zealand
Belgium
Canada
Austria
Iceland
Portugal
Israel
United States
Hungary
Japan
Mexico
Colombia
Luxembourg
Costa Rica
Türkiye
2023 PMR
2003 PMR
More 
competition 
friendly
Less 
competition
friendly


 
 
 
Purchasing power and the real cost of living in New Zealand 
14 
 
The role of monetary policy in improving purchasing power is to deliver low and stable inflation, 
which can be challenging in a world of more frequent shocks and greater volatility. The conflict in 
the Middle East is the latest example. However, as the Governor highlighted in her speech 
yesterday, we are well placed to respond. The research and experience we have gained through 
COVID-19 and the imposition of tariffs by the United States in 2025 have strengthened our ability 
to assess, understand, and respond to supply shocks, and these lessons remain front of mind.  
While monetary policy plays a critical role in responding to shocks, it cannot solve New Zealand’s 
‘cost-of-living crisis’. Low and stable inflation underpins economic stability and is critical for 
sustained gains in purchasing power. But monetary policy does not create prosperity directly. It 
creates the conditions in which prosperity can endure.  
Improving the purchasing power of New Zealand households requires improved productivity. 
Productivity gains support stronger real wage growth, while competitive markets help keep price 
increases in check. For example, higher productivity in the construction sector would mean more 
affordable housing, lower infrastructure costs, and reduced pressure on council rates.  
As I argued in a speech last year, stronger productivity raises the economy’s speed limit – allowing 
faster growth without inflation. A more resilient and flexible economy also means monetary policy 
doesn’t need to be as aggressive to keep inflation stable when shocks hit. 
New Zealand was once at the frontier of structural reform. That edge has faded over recent 
decades. While our structural policies differ in some ways from those in many advanced 
economies, those differences have not produced better outcomes. In a world of rapid 
technological change and rising global uncertainty, structural policies cannot be “set and forget”. 
To sustain living standards, policy must continuously evolve to improve competition, innovation, 
investment, and global engagement. That is the structural foundation for lowering the cost of 
living in New Zealand.
