BANK: BOE
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: Monetary Policy Report - February 2022
DATE: 01/06/2022
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/monetary-policy-report/2022/february/monetary-policy-report-february-2022.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Monetary Policy Committee
Monetary Policy Report 
February 2022


Monetary Policy Report
February 2022
Monetary policy at the Bank of England
The objectives of monetary policy
The Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) sets monetary policy to keep inflation low and stable, which supports 
growth and jobs. Subject to maintaining price stability, the MPC is also required to support the Government’s 
economic policy.
The Government has set the MPC a target for the 12-month increase in the Consumer Prices Index of 2%.
The 2% inflation target is symmetric and applies at all times.
The MPC’s remit recognises, however, that the actual inflation rate will depart from its target as a result of shocks and 
disturbances, and that attempts to keep inflation at target in these circumstances may cause undesirable volatility in 
output. In exceptional circumstances, the appropriate horizon for returning inflation to target can vary. The MPC will 
communicate how and when it intends to return inflation to the target.
The instruments of monetary policy
The MPC currently uses two main monetary policy tools. First, we set the interest rate that banks and building societies 
earn on deposits, or ‘reserves’, placed with the Bank of England – this is Bank Rate. Second, we can buy government 
and corporate bonds, financed by the issuance of central bank reserves – this is asset purchases or quantitative easing.
The Monetary Policy Report
The MPC is committed to clear, transparent communication. The Monetary Policy Report (MPR) is a key part of that. It 
allows the MPC to share its thinking and explain the reasons for its decisions.
The Report is produced quarterly by Bank staff under the guidance of the members of the MPC. 
This Report has been prepared and published by the Bank of England in accordance with section 18 of the Bank of 
England Act 1998.
The Monetary Policy Committee
Andrew Bailey, Chair	
Huw Pill
Ben Broadbent	
Dave Ramsden
Jon Cunliffe	
Michael Saunders
Jonathan Haskel	
Silvana Tenreyro
Catherine L Mann
PowerPoint™ versions of the Monetary Policy Report charts and Excel spreadsheets of the data underlying most of them are 
available at www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetary-policy-report/2022/february-2022
© Bank of England 2022
ISSN 2633-7819


	
Monetary Policy Summary	
i
1:	
The economic outlook	
1
1.1:	
Recent developments	
2
1.2:	
The MPC’s projections	
3
1.3:	
Key judgements and risks	
9
Box A:	Monetary policy since the November 2021 Report	
13
2:	
Current economic conditions	
14
2.1:	
Global developments and financial conditions	
15
2.2:	
Domestic activity	
18
2.3:	
The labour market	
21
2.4:	
Inflation	
23
Box B:	How are global bottlenecks in goods markets evolving, and what might that
mean for inflation?	
28
Box C:	How do changes in Bank Rate affect the interest rates facing households
and firms?	
31
Box D:	Agents’ update on business conditions	
34
3: In focus – Wages and inflation	
37
3.1:	
What do the latest data tell us about wage growth?	
38
3.2:	
What factors might have driven underlying wage growth above pre-pandemic
rates?		
38
3.3:	
How are underlying wage growth and inflation expected to evolve over the
forecast period?	
40
Annex: Other forecasters’ expectations	
43
Glossary and other information	
44
Contents


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Monetary Policy Summary   i
Monetary Policy Summary
The Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) sets monetary policy to meet 
the 2% inflation target, and in a way that helps to sustain growth and employment. At its 
meeting ending on 2 February 2022, the MPC voted by a majority of 5–4 to increase 
Bank Rate by 0.25 percentage points, to 0.5%. Those members in the minority preferred to 
increase Bank Rate by 0.5 percentage points, to 0.75%. The Committee voted unanimously 
for the Bank of England to begin to reduce the stock of UK government bond purchases, 
financed by the issuance of central bank reserves, by ceasing to reinvest maturing assets. 
The Committee also voted unanimously for the Bank of England to begin to reduce the 
stock of sterling non‑financial investment‑grade corporate bond purchases, financed by the 
issuance of central bank reserves, by ceasing to reinvest maturing assets and by a 
programme of corporate bond sales to be completed no earlier than towards the end of 
2023 that should unwind fully the stock of corporate bond purchases.
The Committee’s updated central projections for activity and inflation are set out in the accompanying February 
Monetary Policy Report. The projections are conditioned on a market‑implied path for Bank Rate that rises to around 
1½% by the middle of 2023. Wholesale energy prices are assumed to follow their respective futures curves for the 
first six months of the projections and remain constant beyond that, in contrast to futures curves, which are 
downward sloping over coming years. There are material risks around this assumption.
Global and UK activity returned to their pre‑Covid‑19 (Covid) levels towards the end of last year. The emergence of 
the Omicron variant is expected to have depressed activity somewhat in December and January. But its economic 
impact is likely to be limited and of short duration, and UK GDP is expected to recover in February and March such 
that output returns to its pre‑pandemic level once again by the end of the first quarter. The Labour Force Survey 
unemployment rate fell to 4.1% in the three months to November, and is expected to fall further in the near term, 
to 3.8% in 2022 Q1.
Beyond the near term, UK GDP growth is expected to slow to subdued rates. The main reason for that is the adverse 
impact of higher global energy and tradable goods prices on UK real aggregate income and spending. As a result, the 
unemployment rate is expected to rise to 5% and excess supply builds to around 1% by the end of the forecast period.
Underlying earnings growth is estimated to have remained above pre‑pandemic rates, and is expected to strengthen 
over the coming year, to around 4¾%. This is consistent with the results of the Bank’s Agents’ annual pay survey, with 
the tight labour market, and with some temporary upward pressure on wage settlements from higher price inflation.
Twelve‑month CPI inflation rose from 5.1% in November to 5.4% in December, almost 1 percentage point higher than 
expected at the time of the November Report. Inflation is expected to increase further in coming months, to close to 
6% in February and March, before peaking at around 7¼% in April. This projected peak is around 2 percentage points 
higher than expected in the November Report. The projected overshoot of inflation relative to the 2% target mainly 
reflects global energy and tradable goods prices. The further rise in energy futures prices meant that Ofgem’s utility 
price caps were expected to be substantially higher at the reset in April 2022. Core goods CPI inflation is also expected 
to rise further, due to the impact of global bottlenecks on tradable goods prices.


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Monetary Policy Summary   ii
In the February Report central projection, upward pressures on CPI inflation are expected to dissipate over time, as 
global energy prices are assumed to remain constant after six months, and as global bottlenecks ease and tradable 
goods prices fall back a little. Underlying wage growth is also projected to ease from 2023, as the labour market 
loosens gradually and inflation declines. Conditioned on the rising market‑implied path for Bank Rate and the MPC’s 
current forecasting convention for future energy prices, CPI inflation is projected to fall back to a little above the 
2% target in two years’ time and to below the target by a greater margin in three years.
In an alternative scenario that is conditioned on energy prices following forward curves throughout the forecast period 
and as set out in the February Report, excess supply is around ½ percentage point lower in the medium term than in 
the MPC’s central projection, and CPI inflation is around ¾ percentage point below the 2% target in two and 
three years’ time.
The MPC’s remit is clear that the inflation target applies at all times, reflecting the primacy of price stability in the 
UK monetary policy framework. The framework also recognises that there will be occasions when inflation will depart 
from the target as a result of shocks and disturbances. In the recent unprecedented circumstances, the economy has 
been subject to very large and repeated shocks. In particular, should recent movements prove persistent, the sharp 
rises in prices of global energy and tradable goods of which the United Kingdom is a net importer will necessarily 
weigh on UK real aggregate income and spending. This is something monetary policy is unable to prevent. The role of 
monetary policy is to ensure that, as such a real economic adjustment occurs, it does so consistent with achieving the 
2% inflation target sustainably in the medium term, while minimising undesirable volatility in output.
Given the current tightness of the labour market and continuing signs of greater persistence in domestic cost and price 
pressures, the Committee judges that an increase in Bank Rate of 0.25 percentage points is warranted at this meeting.
Consistent with the MPC’s guidance set out in the August 2021 Report, the Committee agrees at this meeting that the 
Bank of England should cease to reinvest any future maturities falling due from its stock of UK government bond 
purchases. This reflects the MPC’s intention to reduce its holdings of government bonds in a gradual and predictable 
manner.
In addition, the Committee agrees that the Bank of England should cease to reinvest any maturities falling due from 
its stock of sterling non‑financial investment‑grade corporate bond purchases, and that it should initiate a programme 
of corporate bond sales to be completed no earlier than towards the end of 2023 that should unwind fully the stock of 
corporate bond purchases.
The decision to initiate the programme of corporate bond sales reflects the specific characteristics of the corporate 
bond market and the MPC’s involvement in it, and should not be taken as a signal regarding the commencement, scale 
or duration of any potential future UK government bond sales programme.
The Committee reaffirms that it will consider beginning the process of actively selling UK government bonds only 
once Bank Rate has risen to at least 1%, and depending on economic circumstances at the time. The Committee also 
reaffirms its preference in most circumstances to use Bank Rate as its active policy tool when adjusting the stance of 
monetary policy.
The extent of any further tightening in monetary policy will depend on the medium‑term prospects for inflation. The 
MPC judges that, if the economy develops broadly in line with the February Report central projections, some further 
modest tightening in monetary policy is likely to be appropriate in the coming months. The Committee continues to 
judge that there are two‑sided risks around the medium‑term inflation outlook, primarily from wage developments on 
the upside and from energy and global tradable goods prices on the downside. The Committee will update its 
assessment on the balance of the risks to medium‑term inflation in light of the relevant data as they emerge.


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 1: The economic outlook   1
1:	 The economic outlook
Consumer price inflation has risen markedly in many countries including the UK. This mainly 
reflects the sharp increases in global energy and tradable goods prices, the latter due to 
global bottlenecks. UK CPI inflation rose to 5.4% in December, and in the Monetary Policy 
Committee’s (MPC’s) central projection peaks at 7¼% in April 2022. Three quarters of that 
further increase reflects higher contributions from energy and goods prices. UK domestic 
cost pressures are also rising and firms’ expectations for the increase in their selling prices 
are robust. Underlying wage growth has picked up and is expected to strengthen over 2022, 
given the recent tightening in the labour market and some temporary upward pressure from 
higher price inflation. 
Global and UK activity returned to pre-pandemic levels towards the end of 2021. The 
economic impact of Omicron is expected to be limited and of short duration. In line with 
the MPC’s conventions, the forecast is conditioned on the path of Bank Rate implied by 
financial markets, which rises to nearly 1½% by mid-2023, and energy prices remaining 
constant beyond six months. On this basis, UK GDP growth slows to subdued rates. The 
main reason for that is the adverse impact of higher global energy and tradable goods 
prices on UK real aggregate income and spending. As a result, unemployment rises to 
5% and excess supply builds to around 1% by the end of the forecast period.
After the peak in April, the upward pressure on CPI inflation is expected to dissipate over 
time, as global energy prices are assumed to remain constant beyond six months, global 
bottlenecks ease, and domestic cost pressures lessen somewhat as demand growth weakens 
and unemployment rises. CPI inflation is projected to fall to a little above the 2% target in 
two years’ time and below the target by a greater margin in three years. 
The degree of uncertainty around the outlook, including for energy prices, remains unusually 
high. The futures curves for energy prices are downward sloping, in contrast to the MPC’s 
conditioning assumptions. In an alternative scenario where energy prices follow their futures 
curves throughout the forecast period, CPI inflation would fall back towards the target more 
rapidly and be around ¾ percentage points below the target in two and three years’ time.
Abstracting from the uncertainties around the path of energy prices, the risks to the 
inflation projection are judged to be skewed slightly to the upside, given risks to wage 
growth. 
In projections conditioned on the alternative assumption of constant interest rates at 0.5%, 
activity is projected to be somewhat stronger than in the MPC’s forecasts conditioned on 
market rates. As a result, unemployment remains close to its current rate over the forecast 
period, instead of rising by around 1 percentage point. CPI inflation is forecast to be higher, 
with inflation projected to be 2.6% and 2.1% in two years and three years’ time respectively.


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 1: The economic outlook   2
1.1:	 Recent developments
Global GDP rose further in Q4, although Covid and global bottlenecks weighed on growth.
UK-weighted world GDP returned to its pre-Covid peak in 2021 Q3. Bank staff estimate that it grew by 0.8% in 2021 
Q4, broadly as expected in the November 2021 Report but lower than in Q3. Activity in many countries was affected 
by an increase in Covid cases (Section 2.1). Supply chain disruption in global goods markets also appears to have 
continued to constrain output in some sectors (Box B).
UK GDP also grew in the three months to November, although many businesses were affected by supply 
constraints.
UK GDP grew by 1.1% in the three months to November and the level of activity was around 1% higher than projected 
at the time of the last Report. Monthly GDP regained its pre-Covid level, which partly reflected government sector 
output being around 6% above its pre-pandemic peak. Private sector activity remained slightly below its pre-Covid 
level, with many businesses reporting that shortages of materials, components or labour were limiting their output 
(Section 2.2). 
UK GDP is expected to have fallen in December and January reflecting the effect of Omicron on activity. The 
impact is expected to be limited and of short duration, such that the level of GDP in Q1 is similar to Q4.
UK GDP is expected to have fallen in December and January as a result of the emergence of Omicron. Measures to 
control the spread of the virus and voluntary social distancing are thought to have lowered consumer spending, 
especially in retail and recreational venues. This is consistent with the evidence from high-frequency spending 
indicators. There has also been some impact on labour supply, with some staff unable to work because of sickness or 
self-isolation.
The economic impact of Omicron is expected to be limited and of short duration. Covid cases in the UK have fallen 
from their peak and many measures to control its spread have subsequently been ended. Bank staff expect GDP to 
recover in February and March, such that the average level of GDP over Q1 is likely to be similar to Q4. 
Unemployment has continued to fall, despite the closure of the furlough scheme. The labour market is expected 
to tighten further in the very near term.
UK unemployment has continued to fall since the last Report, despite the closure of the Government’s 
furlough scheme in September (Section 2.3). Unemployment fell to 4.1% in the three months to November, 
0.4 percentage points lower than expected in the November Report. Demand for workers remains robust, with 
vacancies at a record high in the three months to December. Bank staff expect unemployment to fall a little further 
in the very near term.
The tightening labour market has put upward pressure on salaries for new staff and pay settlements for existing staff. 
Respondents to the Bank Agents’ pay survey expect wage settlements to increase significantly in 2022 (Section 3).
CPI inflation rose to 5.4% in December, up from 0.6% a year earlier. The rise over the past year largely reflects 
increases in global energy and tradable goods prices.
CPI inflation was 5.4% in December, up from 3.1% in September and 0.6% a year earlier. Almost half of the rise in 
inflation over 2021 reflected the direct impact of higher energy prices (Section 2.4). Inflation rates for goods have also 
increased, due to the bottlenecks in supply. Services price inflation has also risen, though to a much lesser extent than 
goods price inflation. Its increase partly reflects changes to VAT for the hospitality sector, although services price 
inflation has risen in other sectors too. 
CPI inflation is expected to rise further in the coming months.
CPI inflation is expected to increase to and peak at around 7¼% in April, much higher than expected at the time of the 
November Report. Three quarters of the rise between December and April reflects higher contributions from energy 
and goods prices. Based on Ofgem’s published method for calculating energy price caps, recent developments mean 
that household gas and electricity prices will rise materially in April and by more than expected in the November 
Report. 


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 1: The economic outlook   3
1.2:	 The MPC’s projections 
Table 1.A: Forecast summary(a)(b)
Projections
2022 Q1
2023 Q1
2024 Q1
2025 Q1
GDP(c)
7.8 (9.5)
1.8 (2.1)
1.1 (1.0)
0.9
CPI inflation(d)
5.7 (4.6)
5.2 (3.3)
2.1 (2.1)
1.6
LFS unemployment rate
3.8 (4.2)
4.2 (4.0)
4.6 (4.2)
5.0
Excess supply/Excess demand(e)
+½ (+½)
-¼ (+¼)
-½ (0)
-1
Bank Rate(f)
0.4 (0.5)
1.3 (1.0)
1.4 (1.0)
1.3
(a)	 Modal projections for GDP, CPI inflation, LFS unemployment and excess supply/excess demand. Figures in parentheses show the corresponding projections in the November 2021 Monetary Policy Report.
(b)	 Unless otherwise stated, the projections shown in this section are conditioned on: Bank Rate following a path implied by market yields; the Term Funding Scheme and Term Funding Scheme with additional 
incentives for Small and Medium-sized Enterprises; the Recommendations of the Financial Policy Committee and the current regulatory plans of the Prudential Regulation Authority; the Office for Budget 
Responsibility’s assessment of the Government’s tax and spending plans as set out in Autumn Budget and Spending Review 2021; commodity prices following market paths for six months, then held flat; the 
sterling exchange rate remaining broadly flat; and the prevailing prices of a broad range of other assets, which embody market expectations of the future stocks of purchased gilts and corporate bonds. The 
main assumptions are set out in the ‘Download the chart slides and data’ link at Monetary Policy Report – February 2022.
(c)	 Four-quarter growth in real GDP. The growth rates reported in the table exclude the backcast for GDP. Including the backcast 2022 Q1 growth is 7.8%, 2023 Q1 growth is 1.8%, 2024 Q1 growth is 1.1% and 
2025 Q1 growth is 0.9%. 
(d)	 Four-quarter inflation rate. 
(e)	 Per cent of potential GDP. A negative figure implies output is below potential and a positive figure that it is above.
(f)	 Per cent. The path for Bank Rate implied by forward market interest rates. The curves are based on overnight index swap rates. 
The conditioning assumptions underlying the MPC’s projections
The MPC’s projections assume that the economic impact of Omicron is limited and of short duration and that 
significant measures to control the pandemic are not re-imposed following this wave. 
The economic outlook continues to be affected by the evolution of the pandemic. The economic impact of the 
Omicron variant on UK and global activity is expected to be limited and of short duration and many of the measures 
to restrict its spread have been lifted across the UK over the past few weeks (Section 2). The MPC’s projections are 
conditioned on the assumptions that no material measures to control the pandemic that might lower economic 
activity are reimposed and there is no further widespread voluntary social distancing following this wave. 
Fiscal policy continues to support demand especially in the near term, with that support waning over time.
The fiscal stance is assumed to evolve in line with announced policies. In its Autumn Budget and Spending Review in 
October 2021, the Government announced a higher path for government consumption, particularly over the next 
couple of years. When combined with the estimated effects of the measures announced since the beginning of the 
pandemic, fiscal policy in aggregate is projected to continue to support UK demand, especially in the near term. The 
policy stance gradually tightens over time in line with announced government policy, so the support from fiscal policy 
wanes.
The market path for UK interest rates suggests that Bank Rate is expected to reach 1.4% in mid-2023, higher 
than in the November Report. 
In line with the MPC’s convention, the forecast is conditioned on the paths for policy rates implied by financial 
markets. Over the past three months, market rates have increased in a number of advanced economies, particularly 
the US and UK (Chart 2.5). In the UK, the market path as shown by the 15-day average to 26 January suggests that 
Bank Rate was expected to reach nearly 1.5% in mid-2023, around 25 basis points higher, on average, than in 
November (Table 1.A). 
Wholesale energy and futures prices have risen sharply over the past year. 
Also in line with the MPC’s convention, the forecast is conditioned on an assumption that energy prices remain 
constant beyond six months. Energy prices have been volatile recently, and remain much higher than a year earlier. 
Based on the 15-day average to 26 January, sterling oil prices were almost 90% above their 2020 Q4 level, and 
UK wholesale gas prices almost 400% higher. Higher gas prices have also led to a sharp pickup in wholesale electricity 
prices, which rose by over 300% over this period. Energy futures curves are also higher over the next year than in 
November. The rises in energy prices and futures curves reflect strong demand and rising geopolitical tensions.
In its projections, the MPC’s conditioning assumption is that oil, gas and electricity prices follow their respective 
futures curves for the first six months of the forecast period, and beyond that remain constant (as set out in Box 5 of 
the August 2019 Report). These assumptions for wholesale energy prices feed into Bank staff forecasts for retail gas 
and electricity prices, based on the current method used by the UK’s energy regulator, Ofgem, to set tariff caps. Those 


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 1: The economic outlook   4
caps are updated twice a year in April and October. Based on Ofgem’s published method for calculating the price caps, 
the latest developments suggest that household utility prices will rise by close to 50% in April.
The global outlook
The economic impact of Omicron is expected to be limited and of short duration. 
UK-weighted world GDP is estimated to have surpassed its pre-pandemic level in the second half of last year as the 
global economy recovered from the effects of Covid. Evidence from countries furthest ahead in the Omicron wave 
suggests that case rates are likely to fall sooner and faster than in previous waves (Section 2.1). The economic impact 
of Omicron is therefore expected to be limited and to have largely dissipated in Q2, though the effects will vary across 
countries, in part reflecting progress on vaccinations.
But global activity is constrained by higher energy prices and supply chain constraints for tradable goods.   
In the MPC’s projections, global activity continues to grow thereafter, but is restrained by higher global energy prices 
over the forecast period. Activity is also held back by the impact of ongoing supply chain constraints for tradable 
goods (Box B). These constraints are expected to ease gradually over the next year, so their downward impact on 
activity fades over this period, as does the upward pressure on global tradable goods prices a little later. 
World GDP growth is projected to return to around pre-Covid rates towards the end of the forecast period.
Annual UK-weighted world GDP growth is projected to slow from around 5% in 2021 to 3¼% in 2022. It slows further 
to around pre-Covid rates towards the end of the forecast period, with growth in 2024 around 2¼% (Table 1.C). 
Global inflationary pressures are forecast to build further in the near term, before falling back sharply.
Global inflationary pressures have continued to build significantly, largely driven by the sharp increases in energy 
prices and the upward impact of the imbalance between the supply of and demand for tradable goods on their prices. 
On a UK-weighted basis, four-quarter world export price inflation, including energy, is expected to have risen to 
around 11% in 2021 Q4. These global pressures are the primary reason why consumer price inflation is elevated in 
many countries. World export prices are projected to rise a little further in the near term, given further upward 
pressure from global bottlenecks. Demand, particularly in the US, is then expected to shift gradually away from 
durable goods to services. Together with an expected increase in the supply of these goods, global bottlenecks ease 
and tradable goods prices fall a little over the forecast period, though the latter remain well above their pre-pandemic 
levels.
Together with the assumption that global energy prices remain constant beyond six months, four-quarter world 
export price inflation, including energy, is expected to fall sharply and turn negative early next year. This takes time to 
feed through to global consumer price inflation, which falls back more slowly.
UK growth 
UK GDP growth slows over the forecast period, mainly driven by lower growth in demand. 
Four-quarter UK GDP growth is estimated to have been 6.4% in 2021 Q4, with monthly output regaining its 
pre‑pandemic level in November, as the impact of Covid continued to dissipate and spending was supported by 
monetary and fiscal policy (Chart 1.1). The pace of expansion eases over the projection, driven mainly by slower 
growth in demand. Four-quarter GDP growth slows to around 1% in the second and third years of the forecast 
period (Chart 1.2).


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 1: The economic outlook   5
Chart 1.1: GDP projection based on market interest rate 
expectations, other policy measures as announced
(1)	 The assumption is that Bank Rate remains at 0.5% throughout the three years of the forecast period, before moving towards the market path over the subsequent 
three years.
Chart 1.2: GDP growth projection based on market interest 
rate expectations, other policy measures as announced
The fan charts depict the probability of various outcomes for GDP and GDP growth. They have been conditioned on the assumptions in Table 1.A footnote (b). To the left of the vertical dashed line, the 
distribution reflects uncertainty around revisions to the data over the past. To aid comparability with the official data, it does not include the backcast for expected revisions, which is available from the 
‘Download the chart slides and data’ link at Monetary Policy Report – February 2022. To the right of the vertical line, the distribution reflects uncertainty over the evolution of GDP and GDP growth in the 
future. If economic circumstances identical to today’s were to prevail on 100 occasions, the MPC’s best collective judgement is that the mature estimate of GDP (in Chart 1.1) or GDP growth (in Chart 1.2) 
would lie within the darkest central band on only 30 of those occasions. The fan chart is constructed so that outturns are also expected to lie within each pair of the lighter green areas on 30 occasions. In any 
particular quarter of the forecast period, GDP or GDP growth is therefore expected to lie somewhere within the fan on 90 out of 100 occasions. And on the remaining 10 out of 100 occasions GDP or GDP 
growth can fall anywhere outside the green area of the fan chart. Over the forecast period, this has been depicted by the light grey background. See the box on page 39 of the November 2007 Inflation Report 
for a fuller description of the fan chart and what it represents.
In projections conditioned on the alternative assumption of constant interest rates at 0.5%,(1) GDP growth is 
somewhat stronger than in the MPC’s forecasts conditioned on market rates (Chart 1.3).
Chart 1.3: GDP projection based on constant interest rates 
at 0.5%, other policy measures as announced
This fan chart depicts the probability of various outcomes for GDP, conditioned on the assumptions 
in Table 1.A footnote (b), apart from for Bank Rate, with this chart conditioned on constant interest 
rates at 0.5%. The fan chart has the same interpretation as Chart 1.1.
Chart 1.4: Unemployment projection based on market 
interest rate expectations, other policy measures as 
announced 
The fan chart depicts the probability of various outcomes for LFS unemployment. It has been 
conditioned on the assumptions in Table 1.A footnote (b). The coloured bands have the same 
interpretation as in Charts 1.1 and 1.2, and portray 90% of the probability distribution. The 
calibration of this fan chart takes account of the likely path dependency of the economy, where, for 
example, it is judged that shocks to unemployment in one quarter will continue to have some 
effect on unemployment in successive quarters. The fan begins in 2021 Q4, a quarter earlier than 
for CPI inflation. That is because Q4 is a staff projection for the unemployment rate, based in part 
on data for October and November. The unemployment rate was 4.1% in the three months to 
November, and is projected to be 4.0% in Q4 as a whole. A significant proportion of this 
distribution lies below Bank staff’s current estimate of the long-term equilibrium unemployment 
rate. There is therefore uncertainty about the precise calibration of this fan chart.
Demand growth slows over the projection, driven mainly by the sharp increases in global energy and tradable 
goods prices.
The prices of global energy and tradable goods have risen sharply. The UK is a net importer of energy and tradable 
goods, so overall, under the assumption that global energy prices remain constant beyond six months, this will lower 
UK real aggregate income and spending.


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 1: The economic outlook   6
Over the forecast period, consumption growth slows, as households cut back on spending in the face of the material 
adverse effects on their real incomes from the sharp rises in global energy and tradable goods prices, and the planned 
increase in national insurance contributions in April 2022. Four-quarter household real labour income growth is 
expected to have slowed sharply at the end of 2021 and is projected to be negative in 2022 and 2023 (Table 1.C). 
Although consumption growth therefore slows materially over the first two years of the forecast period, it does so by 
less than income growth. That reflects the assumption, similar to previous projections, that households spend some of 
the significant additional savings they have accumulated, in aggregate, during the pandemic. As a result, the 
household saving rate falls from 8.3% in 2021 Q3 to below 4% at the turn of this year (Table 1.C).
Business investment picks up over the next year and then falls back in the second half of the forecast period, as some 
spending is brought forward, given the support from the Government’s capital allowance super-deduction in the near 
term. Contacts of the Bank’s Agents have reported that their capital spending is currently below their relatively strong 
investment intentions as firms postpone projects given the sharp rises in global energy and goods prices and as global 
bottlenecks continue to limit supplies of their inputs (Box D).  
Demand growth also slows over the projection as the support from fiscal and monetary policy wanes gradually as both 
evolve in line with their conditioning assumptions (Section 1.1).
Supply growth also slows, settling at around 1½% in the second half of the forecast.
Temporary supply disruptions for certain tradable goods weigh on UK output over the next year, contributing to a 
slowing in supply growth in 2022. As set out in the November Report, thereafter supply growth is projected to settle 
at around 1½% – similar to the rates seen before Covid. Within that, labour supply growth is modest, while 
productivity growth settles at around 1%. 
Excess supply/demand
There is a lot of uncertainty about the degree of slack in the economy, although it is judged likely that there is a 
small margin of excess demand at present.
As the economy has recovered from the effects of Covid, both demand and supply have picked up rapidly, and it is 
difficult to judge the balance between them. Moreover, there have been material differences in the paths of the 
recovery between sectors of the economy, which can make the aggregate picture hard to assess. Those different paths 
have resulted in supply bottlenecks arising in some industries, while activity in other sectors has been less constrained. 
Most indicators of the balance of demand and supply in the economy suggest that there is currently a small margin of 
excess demand across the economy as a whole. The labour market has tightened rapidly, with the unemployment rate 
having fallen below the MPC’s assessment of the medium-term equilibrium rate of unemployment, despite the end of 
the furlough scheme in September 2021. Firms also continue to report significant recruitment difficulties and elevated 
levels of vacancies, and some surveys suggest above-average levels of capacity utilisation. On balance, the MPC judges 
that there is a small margin of excess demand in the economy at present, with some differences across sectors.
Excess supply is projected to emerge later this year and build over the forecast period.
The MPC expects demand to grow more slowly than potential supply over the projection, particularly in the near term. 
As a result, unemployment is expected to start to rise in 2022 Q2 (Chart 1.4). Conditioned on the assumptions above, 
including the market path for interest rates, a margin of excess supply emerges at the end of 2022 and builds over the 
forecast period to around 1% (Table 1.A). In part, that is accounted for by some slack in the labour market, with 
unemployment rising to around 5% by the end of the projection.
In projections conditioned on the alternative assumption of constant interest rates at 0.5%, unemployment remains 
close to its current rate over the forecast period, instead of rising by around 1 precentage point, as in the MPC’s 
forecast conditional on market rates (Chart 1.5).


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 1: The economic outlook   7
Chart 1.5: Unemployment projection based on constant 
interest rates at 0.5%, other policy measures as 
announced
The fan chart depicts the probability of various outcomes for LFS unemployment. It has been 
conditioned on the assumptions in Table 1.A footnote (b), apart from for Bank Rate, with this chart 
conditioned on constant interest rates at 0.5%. The coloured bands have the same interpretation 
as in Charts 1.1 and 1.2, and portray 90% of the probability distribution. The calibration of this fan 
chart takes account of the likely path dependency of the economy, where, for example, it is judged 
that shocks to unemployment in one quarter will continue to have some effect on unemployment 
in successive quarters. The fan begins in 2021 Q4, a quarter earlier than for CPI inflation. That is 
because Q4 is a staff projection for the unemployment rate, based in part on data for October and 
November. The unemployment rate was 4.1% in the three months to November, and is projected 
to be 4.0% in Q4 as a whole. A significant proportion of this distribution lies below Bank staff’s 
current estimate of the long-term equilibrium unemployment rate. There is therefore uncertainty 
about the precise calibration of this fan chart.
Chart 1.6: CPI inflation and CPI inflation excluding 
energy(a)
(a)	 Energy prices include fuels and lubricants, electricity, gas and other fuels.
CPI inflation
CPI inflation is projected to peak at 7¼% in April 2022, with the further increase driven largely by energy and 
goods prices and, to a lesser extent, domestic cost pressures.
CPI inflation is projected to rise further in the near term from 5.4% in December to a peak of 7¼% in April 2022. That, 
and the overshoot of inflation relative to the 2% inflation target, mainly reflects the sharp increases in global prices, 
with around three quarters of the rise in inflation between December and April due to higher contributions from 
energy and goods prices. The further rise in energy futures prices since the utility tariff caps were last set by Ofgem in 
October 2021 means that the caps are likely to be substantially higher when they are reset in April 2022. Food price 
inflation is also expected to increase in coming months, given higher input costs.
Informed by evidence from the Agents’ pay survey that wage settlements are expected to be much higher in 2022 
than in 2021 (Section 3), underlying private sector wage growth is projected to rise somewhat further to around 4¾% 
over the next year, given the recent tightening in the labour market. Consistent with the Agents’ survey, higher 
inflation is also assumed to put some upward pressure on wage growth over this period but the effects do not persist 
thereafter. These stronger underlying domestic cost pressures put further upward pressure on CPI inflation this year. 
That is consistent with evidence from the Agents’ survey that some firms have started to pass through part of the rise 
in their labour costs to their prices and that they and other firms will try to do so over the next year to rebuild their 
margins. Whole-economy average weekly earnings (AWE) growth is expected to be somewhat lower than underlying 
wage growth over the next year (Table 1.C), given an expected drag from compositional effects (Section 3).
CPI inflation is projected to fall back to a little above the 2% target in two years’ time, and below the target by a 
greater margin in three years.
The direct contribution from energy prices to CPI inflation is expected to peak at around 2¼ percentage points in 
2022 Q2 and to fall to zero by the end of 2023 (Chart 1.6). Goods price inflation is also expected to fall back reflecting 
an easing of global imbalances between demand and supply for tradable goods (Box B). 
Four-quarter whole-economy AWE growth falls back from 3¾% at the end of this year to 2¼% at the end of the 
forecast period, as unemployment rises and CPI inflation falls back. 
In line with the MPC’s conventions, the forecast is conditioned on the path of Bank Rate implied by financial markets, 
which rises to nearly 1½% by mid-2023, and energy prices remaining constant beyond six months. On this basis, after 
the peak in April, CPI inflation is projected to fall back as the contribution from energy prices fades, global bottlenecks 


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 1: The economic outlook   8
ease, and domestic cost pressures lessen somewhat as demand weakens and unemployment rises. CPI inflation is a 
little above the 2% target in two years’ time, and is below the target by a greater margin in three years (Chart 1.7).  
Chart 1.7: CPI inflation projection based on market 
interest rate expectations, other policy measures as 
announced 
The fan chart depicts the probability of various outcomes for CPI inflation in the future. It has been 
conditioned on the assumptions in Table 1.A footnote (b). If economic circumstances identical to 
today’s were to prevail on 100 occasions, the MPC’s best collective judgement is that inflation in 
any particular quarter would lie within the darkest central band on only 30 of those occasions. The 
fan chart is constructed so that outturns of inflation are also expected to lie within each pair of the 
lighter red areas on 30 occasions. In any particular quarter of the forecast period, inflation is 
therefore expected to lie somewhere within the fans on 90 out of 100 occasions. And on the 
remaining 10 out of 100 occasions inflation can fall anywhere outside the red area of the fan chart. 
Over the forecast period, this has been depicted by the light grey background. See the box on 
pages 48–49 of the May 2002 Inflation Report for a fuller description of the fan chart and what it 
represents.
Chart 1.8: CPI inflation projection based on constant 
interest rates at 0.5%, other policy measures as 
announced
This fan chart depicts the probability of various outcomes for CPI inflation in the future, 
conditioned on the assumptions in Table 1.A footnote (b), apart from for Bank Rate, with this 
chart conditioned on constant interest rates at 0.5%. The fan chart has the same interpretation 
as Chart 1.7.
In projections conditioned on the alternative assumption of constant interest rates at 0.5%, CPI inflation is projected 
to be 2.6% and 2.1% in two years and three years’ time respectively, higher than in the Committee’s forecast 
conditioned on market rates (Chart 1.8).
Comparison with the November Report projections
UK GDP is projected to be lower than in November throughout the forecast period.
The level of UK GDP is expected to be around ¾% lower than in November, on average, over the forecast period. That 
mainly reflects the adverse impact on UK real aggregate income and spending of the further increases in global energy 
and tradable goods prices. To a lesser extent, the lower expected path of GDP also reflects the impact of the higher 
market path for interest rates. 
Unemployment has fallen and the labour market has tightened by more than expected in November. But 
unemployment is higher from the start of 2023, reflecting the weaker outlook for demand. As a result, excess 
supply builds by more over the forecast period than in November.
The projection for CPI inflation is materially stronger than in November over the first two years of the forecast 
period, but slightly lower in the third year.
The further recent rises in enrgy futures curves account for much of the upward revision to the projection for 
CPI inflation over the first year of the forecast period. In particular, the sharp rise in forward wholesale gas prices since 
November has resulted in a higher projection for retail energy prices from 2022 Q2, when tariff caps are next updated 
by Ofgem. 
The MPC’s projections are also based on an assumption that global bottlenecks will put more upward pressure on 
global tradable goods prices in the near term than in November. This also exerts some further upward pressure on 
CPI inflation over the next year. Global tradable goods prices put some downward pressure on CPI inflation further 
ahead, as the MPC now judges that they will fall back a little over the projection. 


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 1: The economic outlook   9
Underlying wage growth is materially stronger than in November over the coming year, given the greater tightening in 
the labour market than expected, higher inflation and the evidence on expected pay settlements in 2022 from the 
Agents’ pay survey (Section 3). 
As a result of these factors, the projection for CPI inflation is materially stronger than in November over the first 
two years of the forecast period, and slightly lower in the third year.
Policy decision
At its meeting ending on 2 February 2022, the MPC voted to increase Bank Rate by 0.25 percentage points, to 0.5%.  
The Committee voted for the Bank of England to begin to reduce the stock of UK government bond purchases, 
financed by the issuance of central bank reserves, by ceasing to reinvest maturing assets. The Committee also voted 
for the Bank of England to begin to reduce the stock of sterling non-financial investment-grade corporate bond 
purchases, financed by the issuance of central bank reserves, by ceasing to reinvest maturing assets and by a 
programme of corporate bond sales to be completed no earlier than towards the end of 2023 that should unwind fully 
the stock of corporate bond purchases. The factors behind these decisions are set out in the Monetary Policy Summary 
on pages i–ii of this Report and in more detail in the Minutes of the meeting.
1.3:	 Key judgements and risks
Key judgement 1: higher global energy prices and supply chain constraints in the production of tradable 
goods hold back growth in world and UK activity and, together with strong demand for durable goods, 
push up on consumer price inflation over the next 18 months or so before their effects on growth and 
inflation dissipate.
As set out in Box 5 of the August 2019 Report, the MPC’s forecasts are conditioned on paths for oil, gas and electricity 
prices which follow their respective futures curves for the first six months of the projection, and beyond that remain 
constant. Given the shape of those futures curves beyond the six-month point (Chart 2.20) this implies that the 
assumed paths of wholesale energy prices are significantly above the futures curves.
There are significant risks around these paths. The risks around global energy prices are broadly balanced in the near 
term. There are upside risks if there is a greater escalation of geopolitical tensions and downside risks if these are 
resolved more quickly. Higher energy prices would further restrain growth in global and UK activity and put more 
upward pressure on consumer price inflation over the next year or so, and vice versa if energy prices are lower. 
Further ahead, there are downside risks to energy prices, if prices fall back to the more normal levels implied by futures 
curves. In that case, the level of GDP would be ¾% higher by the end of the forecast period and excess supply and 
unemployment around ½ percentage point lower. CPI inflation would fall back towards the target more rapidly than 
in the central projection and would be around ¾ percentage points below the target in two and three years’ time 
(Table 1.B).   
Table 1.B: GDP growth, excess supply/demand and CPI inflation in the MPC’s central projection and in the alternative 
scenario in which energy prices follow their futures curves throughout the forecast period(a)
Per cent
2022 Q1
2023 Q1
2024 Q1
2025 Q1
Central projection
GDP
7.8
1.8
1.1
0.9
Excess supply/Excess demand
+½
-¼
-½
-1 
CPI inflation
5.7
5.2
2.1
1.6
Alternative scenario
GDP
7.8
1.8
1.6
1.2
Excess supply/Excess demand
+½
-¼
0 
-½
CPI inflation
5.7
5.1
1.2
1.2
(a)	 The table shows projections for: four-quarter growth in real GDP, excluding the backcast for GDP; four-quarter inflation rates; and excess supply/demand as per cent of potential GDP. The projections have 
been conditioned on the assumptions in Table 1.A footnote (b) unless otherwise specified.


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 1: The economic outlook   10
In the MPC’s central projection, world export prices rise a little further in 2022 H1, reflecting upward pressure from 
global bottlenecks. World export prices then fall back a little as these effects fade, though prices remain well above 
their pre-pandemic levels at the end of the forecast period. There are risks around this judgement.
In the near term, global bottlenecks could persist for longer if the impact of the Omicron variant is bigger and more 
persistent in some countries than expected. That could delay the demand rotation away from goods and back towards 
services and cause greater supply chain disruption. In its central projection, the MPC has assumed localised restrictions 
are sufficient for China to implement its zero-Covid policy. If more widespread restrictions are necessary, that would 
disrupt global supply chains to a greater extent than assumed. This would further constrain global and UK GDP growth 
and put more upward pressure on world export and consumer price inflation over the next year.  
There are indications that some global bottlenecks may be stabilising, for example from measures of delivery times 
and shipping costs (Box B). If they ease by more than expected, for example if supply adjusts by more than assumed to 
stronger demand for durable goods, global goods prices could fall closer to their pre-pandemic levels over the forecast 
period. This could mean UK import and consumer price inflation fall and GDP, including business investment, increase 
to a greater extent than projected.
Key judgement 2: demand growth in the UK slows over the forecast period, reflecting the impact of 
higher global energy and goods prices on UK real aggregate income and waning support from fiscal and 
monetary policy. 
UK demand growth slows over the forecast period, largely reflecting lower growth in real aggregate income and 
spending following the large rises in global energy and tradable goods prices and, to a lesser extent, fading support 
from fiscal and monetary policy, as both evolve in line with their conditioning assumptions. There are risks around 
those conditioning assumptions and around the expected path of demand more generally.
Demand growth could slow by more than expected if households cut back on their spending by more than assumed in 
the face of the squeeze in their real incomes. In aggregate, households have accumulated significant additional savings 
during the pandemic, which should support their ability to temporarily smooth consumption as real incomes decline. 
But this increase in savings has not occurred evenly across households and so not all of them may be able to do this. 
Energy bills form a larger share of lower-income households’ spending, so their ability to use savings to support their 
consumption may be limited. In addition, the associated deterioration in the economic outlook may increase 
households’ and firms’ uncertainty about the future, leading them to increase their precautionary saving and lower 
their spending further.
If energy prices fall by more than is assumed in the MPC’s central projections, demand growth will be stronger 
(Key judgement 1). Consumer spending could also be stronger than projected if households believe that the rises in 
global energy and tradable goods prices are likely to reverse quickly or they spend more of the additional savings they 
have accumulated, in aggregate, during the pandemic. 
Labour participation is below its pre-Covid levels. So another upside risk is that some of those who have recently left 
the labour market return to work to support their income in the face of the real income squeeze. This would also 
increase the supply capacity of the economy and moderate the impact on inflation.
Key judgement 3: having increased rapidly over the past year, labour demand falls back, so 
unemployment rises somewhat and a degree of excess supply builds over the projection.
From the middle of this year, demand grows by less in the central projection than the MPC’s assumed growth in 
supply, such that unemployment starts to rise in 2022 Q2 and picks up to 5%, the labour market gradually loosens 
and excess supply builds to 1% by the end of the projection (Table 1.A).
Unemployment would be higher, the labour market looser and excess supply greater than expected if the downside 
risks to the demand outlook set out in Key judgement 2 materialised, and vice versa if the upside risks crystallised.


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 1: The economic outlook   11
As set out in Key judgement 1, there are downside risks to the UK’s supply capacity in the near term from global 
bottlenecks and upside risks to supply from them further ahead. After growing rapidly as the economy recovered from 
the effects of Covid, supply growth is projected to slow to around 1½% in the second half of the forecast period. That 
is similar to the rates seen before Covid. As set out in the November Report, there are significant risks around the 
paths for labour supply and productivity growth underpinning this projection in both directions. Any changes in supply 
growth would be likely to feed through to demand growth over time, through their effects on household incomes, for 
example.
The degree of uncertainty around the outlook remains unusually high. Overall, the risks to the MPC’s UK GDP growth 
projection are judged to be slightly to the upside, given upside risks to wage and household consumption growth 
(Key judgement 4).
Key judgement 4: although underlying wage inflation picks up a little this year, and companies seek to 
rebuild their margins, domestic price pressures moderate sufficiently to return inflation close to the 
2% target by the end of the projection.
There are significant risks around the central projection for CPI inflation from both global factors, set out in 
Key judgement 1, and domestic cost pressures, set out here. 
In the MPC’s central projection, underlying wage growth initially remains strong given the recent tightening in the 
labour market and some temporary upward pressure from higher price inflation. Thereafter wage growth moderates, 
in part, as demand weakens due to the squeeze in real incomes from higher energy and tradable goods prices. 
Unemployment rises and firms’ ability to raise prices lessens. CPI inflation falls back to a little above the 2% target in 
two years’ time and below the target by a greater margin in three years.
Over the past few months, indicators of people’s short-term inflation expectations have risen as inflation has picked 
up. The Agents’ survey of expected pay settlements suggests that, in addition to labour market tightness, higher 
CPI inflation is a reason for the material pickup in pay settlements in 2022. Some firms report that they have started 
passing on their higher labour costs to their prices and will seek to do more so over the next year. An upside risk to the 
inflation outlook is that these effects are greater or more persistent than assumed in the MPC’s central projection.
Measures of inflation expectations two to three years ahead, as well as some longer-term measures derived from 
household surveys and financial markets, have also increased in recent months, but by less than short-term measures. 
Professional forecasters continue to expect CPI inflation to be close to target two and three years ahead. A risk to the 
inflation outlook is that longer-term inflation expectations evolve such that wage and price setting are not consistent 
with inflation returning to the 2% target in the medium term. Overall, the MPC judges that inflation expectations 
remain well anchored at present. The Committee will, nevertheless, continue to monitor measures of inflation 
expectations very closely. 
The degree of uncertainty around the outlook remains unusually high. Overall, and conditional on the paths for energy 
prices set out in Section 1.2, the risks, set out in Key judgements 1 and 4, to the MPC’s inflation projection are judged 
to be slightly to the upside, as upside risks to wage growth outweigh downside risks to global tradable goods prices 
beyond the near term.


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 1: The economic outlook   12
Table 1.C: Indicative projections consistent with the MPC’s forecast(a)(b)
Averages
Projections
1998–2007
2010–19
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
World GDP (UK-weighted)(c)
3
2½
-4¼
5¼ (5)
3¼ (3¾)
3 (3)
2¼ (2¼)
World GDP (PPP-weighted)(d)
4
3¾
-3½
5¾ (5½)
4¼ (4½)
4 (4¼)
3½ (3½)
Euro-area GDP(e)
2¼
1½
-6½
5¼ (5)
3 (3¾)
2½ (2¼)
1½ (1½)
US GDP(f)
3
2¼
-3½
5½ (5½)
4 (4¾)
2¾ (3)
2 (2)
Emerging market GDP
  (PPP‑weighted)(g)
5½
5
-2½
6¼ (6)
5 (5¼)
5 (5½)
4¾ (4¾)
    of which, China GDP(h)
10
7¾
2¼
8 (8)
4¾ (5)
5¾ (5¾)
5¼ (5½)
UK GDP(i)
2¾
2
-9½
7¼ (7)
3¾ (5)
1¼ (1½)
1 (1)
Household consumption(j)
3¼
2
-10½
5¾ (4¾)
5½ (7¾)
1½ (1½)
1¼ (1)
Business investment(k)
3
3¾
-11¼
0 (¾)
13¾ (16¾)
2 (1)
-4¾ (-4)
Housing investment(l)
3¼
3¾
-12½
14¼ (12½)
5½ (6¼)
3¾ (4)
½ (¼)
Exports(m)
4½
3½
-14
-¾ (-2)
3 (6)
5¾ (6)
3¼ (3½)
Imports(n)
6¼
3¾
-16
2¾ (1 ½)
8¾ (12½)
7¾ (6 ¼)
2 (2)
Contribution of net trade to GDP(o)
-½
0
¾
-1 (-1)
-1¾ (-2)
-¾ (-¼)
¼ (¼)
Real post-tax labour income(p)
3¼
1½
1¾
1¼ (¾)
-2 (-1¼)
-½ (-¾)
¾ (¾)
Household saving ratio(q)
7¼
7½
13¾
10¾ (11¼)
4¾ (4½)
4 (3½)
4¼ (3¾)
Credit spreads(r)
¾
2½
2
1½ (1½)
1¼ (1½)
1½ (1½)
1½ (1¾)
Excess supply/Excess demand(s)
0
-1¾
-1¾
-¼ (-¼)
0 (¼)
-½ (¼)
-¾ (-¼)
Hourly labour productivity(t)
2
¾
1¼
1 (¼)
-½ (¼)
1 (1)
1 (1)
Employment(u)
1
1¼
-2½
1 (1½)
1 (1¼)
¼ (½)
0 (¼)
Average weekly hours worked(v)
32¼
32
30¼
31½ (31¾)
31¾ (32)
31¾ (31¾)
31¾ (31¾)
Unemployment rate(w)
5¼
6
5¼
4 (4½)
4 (4)
4½ (4¼)
5 (4½)
Participation rate(x)
63
63½
63½
63¼ (63½) 63½ (63¾) 63½ (63¾) 63½ (63½)
CPI inflation(y)
1½
2¼
½
5 (4¼)
5¾ (3½)
2½ (2¼)
1¾ (2)
UK import prices(z)
-½
1¼
2¾
1¼ (0)
1½ (½)
-1 (-¼)
-1 (¼)
Energy prices – direct contribution 
  to CPI inflation(aa)
¼
¼
-½
1½ (1¼)
2 (¾)
0 (0)
0 (0)
Average weekly earnings(ab)
4¼
2¼
4½
4 (3½)
3¾ (1¼)
3 (2¼)
2¼ (2¾)
Unit labour costs(ac)
3
1¼
11¾
-1½ (-2¼)
2¾ (-½)
2 (1¼)
1½ (2)
Private sector regular pay-based 
unit wage costs(ad)
1¾
1¾
8¾
-1½ (-1¾)
3 (-¾)
2½ (1¾)
1½ (2)
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg Finance L.P., Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, Eurostat, IMF World Economic Outlook (WEO), National Bureau of Statistics of China, ONS, US Bureau 
of Economic Analysis and Bank calculations.
(a)	 The profiles in this table should be viewed as broadly consistent with the MPC’s projections for GDP growth, CPI inflation and unemployment (as presented in the fan charts).
(b)	 Figures show annual average growth rates unless otherwise stated. Figures in parentheses show the corresponding projections in the November 2021 Monetary Policy Report. Calculations for back data based 
on ONS data are shown using ONS series identifiers.
(c)	 Chained-volume measure. Constructed using real GDP growth rates of 188 countries weighted according to their shares in UK exports.
(d)	 Chained-volume measure. Constructed using real GDP growth rates of 189 countries weighted according to their shares in world GDP using the IMF’s purchasing power parity (PPP) weights.
(e)	 Chained-volume measure. Forecast was finalised before the release of the preliminary flash estimate of euro-area GDP for Q4, so that has not been incorporated.
(f)	
Chained-volume measure. Forecast was finalised before the release of the advance estimate of US GDP for Q4, so that has not been incorporated.
(g)	 Chained-volume measure. Constructed using real GDP growth rates of 155 emerging market economy (EME) countries, as defined by the IMF WEO, weighted according to their relative shares in world GDP 
using the IMF’s PPP weights.
(h)	 Chained-volume measure. 
(i)	
Excludes the backcast for GDP.
(j)	
Chained-volume measure. Includes non-profit institutions serving households. Based on ABJR+HAYO.
(k)	 Chained-volume measure. Based on GAN8. 
(l)	
Chained-volume measure. Whole-economy measure. Includes new dwellings, improvements and spending on services associated with the sale and purchase of property. Based on DFEG+L635+L637.
(m)	 Chained-volume measure. The historical data exclude the impact of missing trader intra‑community (MTIC) fraud. Since 1998 based on IKBK-OFNN/(BOKH/BQKO). Prior to 1998 based on IKBK.
(n)	 Chained-volume measure. The historical data exclude the impact of MTIC fraud. Since 1998 based on IKBL-OFNN/(BOKH/BQKO). Prior to 1998 based on IKBL.
(o)	 Chained-volume measure. Exports less imports. GDP data based on the mode of the MPC’s GDP backcast.
(p)	 Wages and salaries plus mixed income and general government benefits less income taxes and employees’ National Insurance contributions, deflated by the consumer expenditure deflator. Based on 
[ROYJ+ROYH-(RPHS+AIIV-CUCT)+GZVX]/[(ABJQ+HAYE)/(ABJR+HAYO)].
(q)	 Annual average. Percentage of total available household resources. Based on NRJS.
(r)	
Level in Q4. Percentage point spread over reference rates. Based on a weighted average of household and corporate loan and deposit spreads over appropriate risk-free rates. Indexed to equal zero in 
2007 Q3.
(s)	 Annual average. Per cent of potential GDP. A negative figure implies output is below potential and a positive figure that it is above.
(t)	
GDP per hour worked. GDP data based on the mode of the MPC’s GDP backcast. Hours worked based on YBUS.  
(u)	 Four-quarter growth in LFS employment in Q4. Based on MGRZ.
(v)	 Level in Q4. Average weekly hours worked, in main job and second job. Based on YBUS/MGRZ. 
(w)	 LFS unemployment rate in Q4. Based on MGSX.
(x)	 Level in Q4. Percentage of the 16+ population. Based on MGWG. 
(y)	 Four-quarter inflation rate in Q4.
(z)	 Four-quarter inflation rate in Q4 excluding fuel and the impact of MTIC fraud.
(aa)	 Contribution of fuels and lubricants and gas and electricity prices to four-quarter CPI inflation in Q4.
(ab)	 Four-quarter growth in whole‑economy total pay in Q4. Growth rate since 2001 based on KAB9. Prior to 2001, growth rates are based on historical estimates of AWE, with ONS series identifier MD9M.
(ac)	 Four-quarter growth in unit labour costs in Q4. Whole‑economy total labour costs divided by GDP at constant prices, based on the mode of the MPC’s GDP backcast. Total labour costs comprise 
compensation of employees and the labour share multiplied by mixed income.
(ad)	 Four-quarter growth in private sector regular pay-based unit wage costs in Q4. Private sector wage costs divided by private sector output at constant prices, based on the mode of the MPC’s GDP backcast. 


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 1: The economic outlook   13
Box A: Monetary policy since the November 2021 Report
At its meeting on 15 December 2021, the MPC voted by a majority of 8–1 to increase Bank Rate by 
0.15 percentage points, to 0.25%. The Committee voted unanimously for the Bank of England to maintain the stock 
of sterling non-financial investment-grade corporate bond purchases, financed by the issuance of central bank 
reserves, at £20 billion. The Committee also voted unanimously to maintain the stock of UK government bond 
purchases, financed by the issuance of central bank reserves, at £875 billion, and so the total target stock of asset 
purchases at £895 billion.
Since the November 2021 MPC meeting, the Omicron Covid variant had emerged. It appeared to be spreading rapidly 
within the United Kingdom and around the world. The new variant appeared to be much more transmissible than the 
Delta variant and pose new risks to public health. Global risky asset prices had fallen in response but then largely 
recovered. Longer-term advanced-economy government bond yields had declined. 
The level of global GDP in 2021 Q4 was likely to be broadly in line with the November Report projection, but 
consumer price inflation in advanced economies had risen by more than expected. The Omicron variant posed 
downside risks to activity in early 2022, although the balance of its effects on demand and supply, and hence on 
medium-term global inflationary pressures, was unclear. Global cost pressures had remained strong. 
Bank staff had revised down their expectations for the level of UK GDP in 2021 Q4 by around ½% since the 
November Report, leaving GDP around 1½% below its pre-Covid level. Growth in many sectors had continued to be 
restrained by disruption in supply chains and shortages of labour. The impact of the Omicron variant, associated 
additional measures introduced by the UK Government and Devolved Administrations, and voluntary social distancing 
would push down on GDP in December and in 2022 Q1. The experience since March 2020 suggested that successive 
waves of Covid appeared to have had less impact on GDP, although there was uncertainty around the extent to which 
that would prove to be the case on this occasion.
The Labour Force Survey unemployment rate had fallen to 4.2% in the three months to October, while the number of 
payrolled employees continued to rise strongly in November. There was little sign in the available data that the 
closure of the Coronavirus Job Retention Scheme at the end of September had led to a weakening in the labour 
market. The LFS unemployment rate was now expected to fall to around 4% in 2021 Q4, compared with the 4½% 
projection in the November Report. Bank staff continued to estimate that underlying earnings growth had remained 
above pre-pandemic rates, and the Committee continued to see upside risks around the projection for pay in the 
November Report.
Twelve-month CPI inflation had risen from 3.1% in September to 5.1% in November. Relative to the November Report 
projection, there had been significant upside news in core goods and, to a lesser extent, services price inflation. Bank 
staff expected inflation to remain around 5% through the majority of the winter period, and to peak at around 6% in 
April 2022, with that further increase accounted for predominantly by the lagged impact on utility bills of 
developments in wholesale gas prices. Indicators of cost and price pressures had remained at historically elevated 
levels, and contacts of the Bank’s Agents expected further price increases driven in large part by pay and energy costs. 
CPI inflation was still expected to fall back in the second half of 2022.
At its November meeting, the Committee judged that, provided the incoming data, particularly on the labour market, 
were broadly in line with the central projections in the November Monetary Policy Report, it would be necessary over 
coming months to increase Bank Rate in order to return CPI inflation sustainably to the 2% target. Recent economic 
developments suggested that these conditions had been met. The labour market was tight and had continued to 
tighten, and there were some signs of greater persistence in domestic cost and price pressures. Although the Omicron 
variant was likely to weigh on near-term activity, its impact on medium‑term inflationary pressures was unclear at this 
stage. 
The Committee judged that an increase in Bank Rate of 0.15 percentage points was warranted at this meeting.


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 2: Current economic conditions   14
2:	Current economic conditions
The recovery in UK and global output continued in Q4, although growth slowed as Covid 
cases rose and supply chains were disrupted. Omicron is expected to weigh temporarily on 
activity early in 2022 Q1. Labour markets have continued to tighten, and inflationary 
pressures have continued to build and are starting to become more broad-based.
UK GDP is expected to be flat in 2022 Q1 due to the impact of the Omicron variant. The 
impact of that is judged to be temporary and GDP recovers quickly, but a squeeze in real 
incomes caused by the rise in global energy and tradable goods prices weighs on activity 
through the rest of the year. The unemployment rate has fallen despite the furlough 
scheme ending, and declines to 3.8% in Q1 as the labour market continues to tighten.
CPI inflation was 5.4% in December, in large part reflecting higher global energy and goods 
prices. It is expected to peak at around 7¼% in April. Around three quarters of that further 
rise is due to higher energy prices – as previous increases in wholesale prices pass through 
into utility bills – and higher goods prices. The remainder reflects higher services prices, 
consistent with the tightening labour market. 
Chart 2.1: GDP is expected to be flat in Q1, unemployment is projected to decline slightly, and inflation is expected to rise 
further above the target
Near-term projections(a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a)	 The lighter diamonds show Bank staff’s projections at the time of the November 2021 Monetary Policy Report. The darker diamonds show Bank staff’s current projections. Projections for GDP and the 
unemployment rate are quarterly and show Q4 and Q1 (November projections show Q3 and Q4). Projections for CPI inflation are monthly and show January to March (November projections show 
September to December).
(b)	 GDP and unemployment rate 2021 Q4 projections are based on official data to November. CPI inflation figure is an outturn.


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 2: Current economic conditions   15
2.1:	 Global developments and financial conditions
The global economy continued to recover…
The global economy continued to recover towards the end of 2021 (Chart 2.2). Continued progress on 
vaccination programmes in advanced economies enabled a return to pre-pandemic levels of mobility and activity. 
Vaccination rates in emerging markets remain significantly below advanced economies, however. Bank staff 
estimate that UK‑weighted world GDP rose by 0.8% in 2021 Q4, in line with the November Report, leaving 
it 2.0% above its 2019 Q4 level. Over 2021 as a whole, annual average global growth was 5.2%, after a 
4.3% contraction in 2020.
…although global growth is expected to have slowed in 2021 Q4.
Global growth is expected to have slowed in Q4 as Covid cases rose in advanced economies (Chart 2.3) and 
global supply chains were disrupted. Outbreaks of the Delta variant meant Covid cases increased across the 
euro area, resulting in more voluntary social distancing by consumers and some mandated restrictions. Local 
outbreaks also continued to weigh on consumer demand in China. Elsewhere in Asia, activity looks to have 
recovered as the easing of the Delta wave allowed a loosening of restrictions. Global supply chains continued 
to struggle to meet elevated global goods demand (see Box B). 
Chart 2.2: The global economy continued to recover…
GDP in selected countries and regions
Sources: IMF World Economic Outlook (WEO), National Bureau of Statistics of China, OECD, ONS, 
Refinitiv Eikon from LSEG and Bank calculations.
(a)	 See footnote (c) of Table 1.B for definition. Figure for 2021 Q4 is a Bank staff projection.
Chart 2.3: …despite rising Covid cases
Daily new confirmed Covid-19 cases(a)
Sources: COVID-19 Data Repository by the Centre for Systems Science and Engineering at 
John Hopkins University, Our World in Data and Bank calculations.
(a)	 Seven-day moving averages. Data are shown to 26 January 2022 and are not seasonally 
adjusted.
The Omicron variant has spread rapidly…
The Omicron variant, first identified in late November, has become the dominant variant globally. At first, cases rose 
most quickly in South Africa and the UK, and later rose sharply in the US and the rest of Europe (Chart 2.3). While 
evidence suggests that the risk of severe disease is lower than for previous variants, the high rate of transmission has 
led to new restrictions being imposed temporarily, some voluntary social distancing by households and many people 
off work.
…and is likely to weigh temporarily on activity in 2022 Q1, but by less than in previous waves.
Economic activity is expected to be less affected by increases in Covid cases than during the early part of the 
pandemic. For example, global GDP was 10% higher in 2021 Q1 than in 2020 Q2, even though there were broadly 
similar degrees of restrictions in place at the time (see Chart 2.3 in the May 2021 Report). Therefore it is likely that the 
restrictions imposed more recently will have weighed less on global activity than earlier in the pandemic. And 
vaccinations, including accelerated booster programmes, and access to testing are likely to result in less voluntary 
social distancing in advanced economies in particular. Nonetheless, sharp increases in the number of people unable to 
work due to self-isolation may restrict activity somewhat.
For 2022 Q1 as a whole, Bank staff estimate UK-weighted world GDP will be broadly flat. Evidence from countries 
furthest ahead in this wave, such as South Africa and the UK, suggests that case rates are likely to fall sooner and 
faster than in previous waves, so most of the economic impact is expected to be short-lived and have little effect on 
activity in Q2.


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 2: Current economic conditions   16
Labour markets have continued to tighten across countries.
As economies have approached pre-pandemic levels of output, employment rates have risen across countries 
(Chart 2.4). This reflects both a pickup in labour market participation – the number of people in employment or 
searching for work – and falling unemployment. On average across economies, employment rates are 0.2 percentage 
points below their 2019 Q4 level, compared to 3.6 percentage points at their lowest points during the pandemic. 
That tightening in labour markets has been reflected in a pickup in wage growth in some countries. In the US, the 
Atlanta Fed’s Wage Growth Tracker, which is less affected by compositional effects than headline measures, has risen 
over the second half of 2021 to above its pre-pandemic level, particularly for lower-income quartiles. But in the 
euro area, underlying wage growth has fallen over the same period and remains below its pre-pandemic level, despite 
unemployment falling to close to record lows.
Chart 2.4: Employment rates have recovered across 
countries
Change in employment rate since 2019 Q4(a)
Sources: OECD and Bank calculations.
(a)	 All OECD member countries, and the euro-area average, are shown, except Turkey. Age 15+ 
employment. For the UK, Iceland, Norway, Spain and US the lower age limit is 16.
Table 2.A: Inflation rates have risen further in advanced 
economies
Inflation in the UK, US and euro area
Per cent
Monthly 
averages
1998–
07
2010–
20
2021
Q1
Q2
Q3
Oct.
Nov.
Dec.
Annual headline consumer price inflation
United Kingdom
1.6
2.1
0.6
2.0
2.8
4.2
5.1
5.4
Euro area
2.0
1.3
1.1
1.8
2.8
4.1
4.9
5.0
United States(a)
2.1
1.5
1.8
3.9
4.3
5.1
5.7
5.8
Annual core consumer price inflation (excluding food and energy)(b)
United Kingdom
1.2
2.0
1.1
1.9
2.6
3.4
4.0
4.2
Euro area
1.6
1.0
1.2
0.9
1.4
2.0
2.6
2.6
United States(a)
1.8
1.6
1.7
3.4
3.6
4.2
4.7
4.9
Sources: Eurostat, ONS, Refinitiv Eikon from LSEG, US Bureau of Economic Analysis and 
Bank calculations.
(a)	 Personal consumption expenditure price index inflation.
(b)	 For the euro area and the UK, excludes energy, food, alcoholic beverages and tobacco. For the 
US, excludes food and energy.
Rates of consumer price inflation have risen further in many countries, with price pressures becoming more 
broad-based.
Global inflation rates have risen further. That in part reflects the rise in energy prices since the start of 2021 
(Chart 2.20), and the impact of global bottlenecks on goods inflation (Box B). But more recently, higher inflation has 
been more broad-based, with services inflation picking up in the UK and US. That is consistent with tightening labour 
markets. 
CPI inflation rose to 7.0% in December in the US. While autos and other durable goods accounted for much of the rise 
earlier in 2021, prices are now increasing in almost all components. Core CPI inflation, which excludes energy and 
other volatile items, was 5.5% in the same month. The Federal Reserve’s preferred measures of inflation – personal 
consumption expenditures (PCE) and core PCE inflation – were a little lower at 5.8% and 4.9% respectively 
(Table 2.A). 
Euro-area HICP inflation rose to 5.0% in December. Core HICP inflation was 2.6% in both November and December, 
the first time it has been over 2% since before the financial crisis. While inflation has picked up in the vast majority of 
countries, it remains subdued in China and Japan, at 1.5% and 0.8% respectively.
Central banks are reducing the pace of net asset purchases in the US and euro area, and market participants 
expect policy rates to increase.
Some central banks are reducing the pace of net asset purchases in response to tightening labour markets and higher 
inflation outturns. At its December meeting, the US Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) announced a reduction 
in the monthly pace of its net asset purchases from January 2022. In the euro area, the ECB Governing Council 
announced a reduction in the pace of net asset purchases under the Pandemic Emergency Purchase Programme at its 
December meeting, with an intention to discontinue such purchases at the end of March 2022.


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 2: Current economic conditions   17
Market participants continue to expect an increase in policy rates in many countries. In the UK, the expected path for 
Bank Rate is higher than in November (Chart 2.5), and remains higher in the near term than other countries. 
Consistent with that, the sterling exchange rate has strengthened, and is now around its highest level since the 
EU referendum in 2016. The results of the Bank’s new Market Participants Survey also suggest expectations for 
Bank Rate have shifted higher in recent months, and are closely aligned with financial market prices in the near term. 
Market participants’ expectations for the path of US policy rates have steepened since November, while euro-area 
expectations are slightly higher.
Chart 2.5: Market participants expect policy rates to 
increase, particularly in the UK and US
International forward interest rates(a)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and Bank calculations.
(a)	 All data as of 26 January 2022. The February and November curves are estimated using 
instantaneous forward overnight swap rates in the 15 working days to 26 January 2022 and 
27 October 2021 respectively. 
(b)	 Upper bound of the target range. 
(c)	 From 3 January 2022, the euro-area curve is based on €STR swaps, whereas previously it was 
based on EONIA swaps. Given the spread between EONIA and €STR, this change alone would 
have caused the curve to shift down by around 8 basis points.
Chart 2.6: Medium-term inflation expectations are around 
pre-crisis averages in the US and euro area
Financial market measures of inflation compensation(a)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and Bank calculations.
(a)	 Five‑year inflation, five years ahead and three‑year inflation, five years ahead, derived from 
swaps. The instruments are linked to the UK RPI, US CPI and euro‑area HICP measures of 
inflation respectively.  
(b)	 UK RPI is due to be aligned with CPIH from February 2030, which will affect the pricing of this 
measure. Since 2000, CPIH inflation has averaged 85 basis points lower than RPI inflation.
Long-term bond yields have increased…
Long-term government bond yields have risen sharply since December, as financial markets reacted to central bank 
communications, in particular the December FOMC minutes. Reduced concern about the severity of Omicron, and its 
likely short-lived economic impact, is also likely to have pushed up on bond yields recently. Ten-year government 
bond yields in the UK, US and euro area are all around their highest levels since the start of the pandemic.
…reflecting higher real rates, while financial market measures of medium-term inflation expectations are 
broadly unchanged since November.
The increase in long-term government bond yields is reflected in higher real interest rates: financial market measures 
of inflation expectations at those horizons are broadly unchanged since November (Chart 2.6). That perhaps reflects 
expectations around the policy response to higher inflation outturns, in particular as the downside risks around 
Omicron receded.
Financial market measures of medium-term inflation expectations remain around their long-term averages in the US 
and euro area, but above for the UK (Chart 2.6). Results from the Market Participants Survey suggest respondents 
place weight on higher inflation expectations, but also technical factors such as the use of UK inflation markets for 
hedging pension liabilities, as the drivers of the level of UK financial market measures. When assessing UK inflation 
expectations, the MPC monitors a range of measures (see Box C of the November Report). The latest data are 
discussed in Section 2.4.
Risky asset prices have fluctuated in response to Omicron developments and movements in bond yields.
Like government bond yields, global risky asset prices have been driven by Omicron and central bank communications. 
Equity prices fell as Omicron emerged, cases rose, and a degree of mandated and voluntary social distancing returned. 
As concern about its severity reduced, equity prices quickly recovered across countries. But the associated increase in 
long-term real government bond yields weighed on some equity indices with sectors more exposed to higher real 
interest rates. Despite this, the S&P 500 and Euro Stoxx are around 2% higher than in the run-up to the 
November Report, while the FTSE All-Share is 3% higher, in part due to its composition.


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 2: Current economic conditions   18
In aggregate, mortgage rates have risen a little since November.
Rates on low loan to value (LTV) mortgages have risen by around 30 basis points since November, reflecting the 
pass-through of higher risk-free rates, but rates on high LTV mortgages have continued to fall (Chart B in Box C). 
Box C outlines how changes in Bank Rate affect the interest rates facing households and businesses.
2.2:	 Domestic activity
In November, UK GDP recovered to around its pre-pandemic level.
UK GDP grew 1.1% in the three months to November compared to the previous three months. This left it around its 
2019 Q4 pre-pandemic level and, partly due to upward revisions to earlier quarters, around 1% higher than the 
projection in November. The output of the government and consumer-facing services sectors were above 
pre‑pandemic levels, while the output of other services and the production sector were below (Chart 2.7). 
Supply constraints weighed on activity, although they appear to have eased in some sectors. 
Disruptions to the supply of inputs have affected activity somewhat. They had been most evident in the 
manufacturing and construction sectors, although output in these sectors grew strongly in November. Nonetheless, 
over half of manufacturers responding to recent CBI Industrial Trends Surveys stated that material and component 
shortages were likely to limit production. These disruptions are global in nature, with other countries similarly affected 
(top panel of Chart 2.8).
Labour shortages have also weighed on activity: contacts of the Bank’s Agents have cited these as one of the biggest 
constraints on growth. Surveys suggest that such shortages, while widespread, have been most acute in the 
accommodation and food, health, construction and manufacturing sectors. Business surveys suggest that labour 
shortages in the manufacturing sector were somewhat more acute relative to other countries (bottom panel of 
Chart 2.8). 
Chart 2.7: GDP recovered to its pre-pandemic level in 
November…
Contributions to change in monthly GDP since 2019 Q4(a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a)	 Figures in parentheses are weights in gross value added in 2019. Weights and contributions may 
not sum to the total due to rounding.
(b)	 Other production includes agriculture, mining and quarrying, and utilities.
(c)	 Consumer‑facing services includes accommodation and food services, arts, entertainment and 
recreation, and wholesale and retail.
Chart 2.8: …despite supply constraints weighing on 
production
Factors affecting manufacturers’ production(a)
Sources: CBI, European Commission (EC) Business Climate Indicator and Bank calculations.
(a)	 Data are not seasonally adjusted. Standard deviations calculated between January 1995 and 
October 2021. European swathe includes France, Germany, Italy and Spain. EC question: 
‘Factors limiting production’. UK CBI question: ‘What main factors are limiting your production 
over the next 3 months?’.
(b)	 Refers to a shortage of materials and/or equipment for euro-area countries and the average of 
the plant capacity and materials or components series for the UK.
(c)	 Refers to a shortage of labour for euro-area countries and the average of skilled and other 
labour series for the UK.
Bank staff expect GDP to have declined in December and January due to the spread of the Omicron variant…
The recent path of GDP is likely to have been adversely affected by the spread of the Omicron variant. Action taken to 
control the spread of the virus and voluntary social distancing are expected to have reduced GDP in December and 
January. That decline in part reflects a fall in demand, as Omicron weighed on contact-intensive spending. Indicators 
for this type of spending declined in December (Chart 2.9), although some of that weakness may have been seasonal. 
They have since recovered somewhat as the Omicron wave eased. The decline in activity also reflects an impact on 
supply, as hours worked are likely to have declined due to sick or isolating staff (Section 2.3). 


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 2: Current economic conditions   19
…such that GDP is expected to be flat in Q1, although output recovers sharply during the quarter.  
Based on the evidence from high-frequency indicators, GDP is expected to be flat in Q1 on average, driven by a 
softening in consumption growth. This slowdown is less severe than during previous Covid waves, however. Measures 
were much less onerous, partly because of more widespread testing, the population having greater immunity to Covid 
due to prior infection or vaccination, and the lower severity of the Omicron variant. Spending indicators fell less 
sharply and recovered more quickly than earlier in the pandemic (Chart 2.9), which may suggest there has been less 
voluntary social distancing recently. While consumer confidence fell slightly in January and more people said they 
were worried about Covid, concerns about the virus remained lower than earlier in the pandemic (Chart 2.10).  
The effects of Omicron are expected to be temporary: GDP is expected to recover sharply during Q1. Weekly Covid 
cases and hospital admissions peaked in early January (Chart 2.3). The UK Government and devolved administrations 
have announced a number of relaxations to Covid measures, some of which had been put in place in response to the 
Omicron variant. The MPC’s projections are conditioned on the assumptions that no material restrictions on economic 
activity are reimposed and there is no further widespread voluntary social distancing following this wave (Section 1). 
Omicron has little impact on activity and slack from Q2 onwards. 
Chart 2.9: High-frequency indicators suggest that travel 
and high-contact activities declined in December before 
recovering more recently
High-frequency indicators of economic activity(a)
Sources: Department for Transport, Google Covid-19 Community Mobility Reports, OpenTable and 
Bank calculations.
(a)	 Seven-day moving averages to 25, 24 and 23 January for seated diners, transport and visitors 
respectively. Data are not seasonally adjusted. All data are shown relative to normal levels. 
(b)	 Seated diners from online, phone and walk-in reservations. To limit base effects, bank holidays 
and the two-week period from 22 December each year have been removed.
(c)	 Numbers of visitors to places such as restaurants, cafés, shopping centres and cinemas.
Chart 2.10: Consumer confidence has fallen, but is higher 
than earlier in the pandemic
Consumer confidence and worries about Covid(a)
Sources: GfK, ONS, Refinitiv Eikon from LSEG and Bank calculations.
(a)	 Data are not seasonally adjusted.
(b)	 GfK Consumer Confidence Index. Latest data point is for January, with the survey conducted 
between 4 and 12 January 2022.
(c)	 Percentage of adults not worried about the effect of Covid on their life right now according to 
the ONS Opinions and Lifestyle Survey. Latest data is for the period 6–16 January.
A sharp slowdown in real income growth, driven by the rise in global energy and tradable goods prices, is 
weighing on consumer spending, and this effect is expected to intensify.
The sharp rise in global energy and tradable goods prices, the latter in part reflecting global bottlenecks (Box B), has 
squeezed household real incomes and is weighing on consumer spending. Four-quarter real income growth turned 
negative in Q3 last year and is projected to contract even more sharply in the middle of 2022 (Chart 2.11). Another 
rise in retail energy prices in April is expected to increase inflation further (Section 2.4). Incomes will also be affected 
by the planned increase in National Insurance contributions in April.
In aggregate, households have accumulated savings during the pandemic, which should support their ability to smooth 
consumption as real incomes decline. The savings rate averaged around 14% over the first year and a half of the 
pandemic, although it has fallen back recently to around 8% in 2021 Q3 (Chart 2.12). But this increase in savings has 
not occurred evenly across the income distribution. As discussed in Box 3 of the August 2020 Report, surveys 
suggested that lower and middle-income households had built up less savings or run them down during the initial 
stages of the pandemic. Energy bills also form a larger share of lower-income households’ spending, so their ability to 
use savings will be limited. More generally, the scope for households to smooth consumption will depend on the 
extent to which the hit to real incomes associated with higher global energy and tradable goods prices is temporary or 
more persistent.    


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 2: Current economic conditions   20
Demand in the housing market remains robust. 
Housing market activity has been strong in recent months. The official UK house price index was around 16% higher 
than pre-pandemic levels in November 2021, while housing transactions and mortgage approvals remained robust 
in Q4 (see the December 2021 Financial Stability Report). This strength in house prices and activity has been reflected 
in housing investment, which was around 4% above pre-pandemic levels in 2021 Q3. Supply constraints in the 
construction sector may have weighed on growth somewhat since then, however. 
Chart 2.11: Household real labour income growth is 
expected to be negative in 2022
Contributions to four-quarter real income growth(a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a)	 Diamonds and light bars show Bank staff projections for 2021 Q4 and 2022 Q1 and Q2. Income 
include non‑profit institutions serving households.
(b)	 See footnote (p) in Table 1.B for the definition of real post-tax labour income.
Chart 2.12: In aggregate, households saved a larger part of 
their income during the pandemic
Saving ratio(a)
(a)	 Saving as a percentage of household post-tax income. Includes non‑profit institutions serving 
households. Data to 2021 Q3.
Business investment has lagged the wider recovery and is expected to remain subdued in Q1. 
Business investment has recovered more slowly through the pandemic compared to other expenditure components 
and previous MPC expectations. It fell by 2.5% in Q3 last year, leaving it nearly 12% below its pre-pandemic level. The 
decline over the quarter mainly reflected weaker transport investment, particularly in the air industry. 
Survey indicators suggest business investment has remained weak due to supply disruptions and Covid-related 
uncertainty. Since November, businesses have reported lower investment in the Decision Maker Panel (DMP) Survey, 
although expectations picked up in January relative to the December Survey (Chart 2.13). Contacts of the Bank’s 
Agents report that investment is being constrained by shortages of materials, components and machinery, increases in 
the cost of materials, and shortages of specific types of skilled labour. As a result, Bank staff expect investment to have 
been subdued in Q4, and to remain weak in 2022 Q1. Beyond Q1, investment growth picks up, as Covid uncertainty 
wanes and the capital allowance super-deduction provides support (Section 1).
UK trade flows remain below pre-pandemic levels.
Trade flows have been affected by pandemic‑related supply-chain disruption, as well as the new trading arrangements 
with the EU that came into force at the start of 2021. Trade in goods – the sum of exports and imports excluding 
unspecified goods – was around 8% below its pre-pandemic level in November 2021. Since then, new customs 
procedures applying to UK–EU goods trade were implemented at the start of 2022. This has increased checks and 
administration and may weigh on trade in the near term. Indicators such as the number of heavy goods vehicles 
around Dover suggest that freight volumes have been subdued in the early weeks of 2022, at similarly weak levels to 
last year.
The Government’s fiscal plans should support activity in the near term.
Government consumption was around 8% above pre-pandemic levels in Q3. The Government’s fiscal plans set out in 
its Autumn Budget and Spending Review last October, and the Covid support package for businesses announced in 
December, should support UK demand in the near term. Fiscal policy gradually tightens over the forecast period 
(Section 1).


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 2: Current economic conditions   21
Chart 2.13: Firms expect Covid to weigh on investment by 
more than expected in November
Impact of Covid on investment(a)
Sources: DMP Survey and Bank calculations.
(a)	 Question: ‘Relative to what would have otherwise happened, what is your best estimate for the 
impact of the spread of coronavirus (Covid‑19) on the capital expenditure of your business in 
the following quarters?’. Months refer to survey waves. The January survey was conducted 
between 7 and 21 January 2022.
Chart 2.14: The number of employees continues to rise
Number of employees
Sources: HMRC, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a)	 Three-month moving averages. Latest data point from the Labour Force Survey is for the three 
months to November 2021. Latest data point for PAYE Real Time Information is the flash 
estimate for the three months to December 2021.
(b)	 Data are quarterly. Latest data point is for 2021 Q3.
2.3:	 The labour market
Despite the end of the furlough scheme, the unemployment rate has declined further.  
The Labour Force Survey (LFS) unemployment rate has continued to decline, despite the closure of the furlough 
scheme at the end of September. It fell to 4.1% in the three months to November, lower than the 4.5% expected in 
the November Report. 
Employment has continued to increase. According to the LFS, there were 116,000 more employees in the three 
months to November compared to the three months to August. Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs (HMRC) data 
pointed to a further rise in the number of employees in December (Chart 2.14), although these data are prone to 
revision. While the number of employees is estimated to be above its 2019 Q4 level, the total level of employment is 
still around 460,000 lower (Chart 2.15), owing to a decline in self-employment. The private sector more than 
accounted for this shortfall; public sector employment was around 260,000 higher than pre-pandemic levels in Q3, 
with the NHS accounting for nearly half of the increase. 
There are over 500,000 more people inactive in the labour market – those without a job and not actively searching for 
one – compared to before the pandemic (Chart 2.15). The majority of this increase reflects people leaving the labour 
force due to sickness or to study. Some of these people may return over time. But Bank staff estimate that around a 
third of the rise is related to the ageing of the UK population, where the effect on participation is likely to persist. The 
participation rate of those aged 65 and over is just over 10%, compared to just under 80% for those aged 16–64.
Surveys suggest that labour demand remains robust…
The temporary slowdown in activity associated with the spread of the Omicron variant seems to have had little 
impact on labour demand. PMIs suggest employment growth remained robust in December and January (Chart 2.16). 
…redundancy indicators remain subdued… 
Despite the slowdown in activity over December and January, redundancies and redundancy notifications have 
remained low (Chart 2.17). Contacts of the Bank’s Agents also report that there have not been widespread 
redundancies. That is consistent with the latest ONS BICS which has not shown a notable rise in the share of 
businesses seeking to make redundancies over the next three months. 
…and the unemployment rate is expected to decline to 3.8% in Q1.
Bank staff expect the unemployment rate to decline to 3.8% in Q1 (Chart 2.1). Employment growth is expected to 
slow a little as it approaches pre-pandemic levels. Contacts of the Bank’s Agents have reported a modest slowing in 


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 2: Current economic conditions   22
employment growth as companies’ rehiring and expansion plans neared completion (Box D). But firms are expected 
largely to look through the contraction in activity early in the quarter and not make widespread redundancies. 
Nonetheless, total hours worked are expected to fall temporarily: the Bank’s Agents and the latest BICS suggest that 
there were around double the number of staff on sick leave over the Christmas period relative to the previous year. 
The unemployment rate is expected to rise beyond Q1. 
The unemployment rate is expected to rise beyond Q1 (Section 1). This primarily reflects demand growing by less than 
the economy’s supply potential, driven in turn by the increase in global energy and tradable goods prices squeezing 
real incomes. That typically affects employment growth with a lag. 
Chart 2.15: Unemployment is only a little above 
pre‑pandemic levels, but inactivity remains markedly 
higher
Changes in employment, unemployment and inactivity since 
2019 Q4(a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a)	 Data from the Labour Force Survey and employment includes employees and self-employed. 
Changes do not sum to 0 as the population is estimated to have increased during the period.
Chart 2.16: Survey indicators pointed to robust 
employment growth in January
Surveys of employment growth(a)
Source: IHS Markit/CIPS.
(a)	 A reading of above 50 indicates positive growth on the previous month while a reading below 
50 indicates negative growth.
The labour market has tightened sharply…
The labour market is tight and has tightened further recently. Job vacancies hit a record high in Q4 and the 
unemployment rate fell close to pre-pandemic levels. This meant their ratio – an indicator of labour market tightness 
– has also risen to a series high (Chart 2.18). Survey indicators point to increasing recruitment difficulties and labour 
shortages across the economy (Chart 3.3). 
…and the high number of vacancies could also indicate mismatch, although these effects may have abated.  
The elevated number of vacancies could in part indicate frictions in the labour market that are making it harder to 
match workers to jobs. However, hiring flows have kept pace with vacancies and some estimates of mismatch that 
rose during the pandemic have since fallen. That might suggest little deterioration in the labour market matching 
process. The scale of recruitment difficulties might point to frictions at a more granular level of the labour market 
though, such as a shortage of workers with particular skills. This may be one factor behind the rise in wage growth. 
The tightness of the labour market has put upward pressure on wages.
Consistent with a tight and tightening labour market, firms have had to offer higher levels of pay to attract and retain 
workers. The pay of new hires in the KPMG/REC UK Report on Jobs was near record highs for much of the second half 
of 2021. Annual growth in private sector regular average weekly earnings was around 4% in the three months to 
November, while Bank staff estimate that underlying pay growth has been between 4% and 4½% over recent 
months (Chart 3.1). The outlook for wage growth and the implications for inflation are discussed in more detail in 
Sections 1 and 3. 


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 2: Current economic conditions   23
Chart 2.17: Redundancies have remained low
Redundancies and HR1 redundancy notifications(a)
Sources: Insolvency Service Redundancy Payment Services Database, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a)	 Three-month rolling sums. Latest redundancies data point is for November 2021; latest 
HR1 notifications data point is for December 2021. Both series are not seasonally adjusted.
(b)	 HR1 advance notices of redundancy are only required when employers propose to dismiss 20 or 
more employees at a single establishment. Not all employees given such notice will go on to be 
made redundant. The figures may also include some submissions relating to company 
restructures or changes in employee terms of contract. Great Britain only.
Chart 2.18: The number of vacancies has increased to a 
series high
Vacancies(a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a)	 Three-month moving averages. Latest vacancy data are for December 2021, latest 
unemployment data for November 2021.
2.4:	 Inflation
CPI inflation rose to 5.4% in December.
CPI inflation was 5.4% in December, a 2¼ percentage point rise since September (Chart 2.19). That is almost 
1 percentage point higher than expected at the time of the November Report. Core inflation – which strips out energy 
and other volatile items – also picked up to 4.2% in December, a 1¼ percentage point rise since September. 
Chart 2.19: CPI inflation was 5.4% in December and is 
expected to rise to around 7¼% in April
Contributions to CPI inflation(a)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, ONS 
and Bank calculations.
(a)	 Contributions to annual CPI inflation. Figures in parentheses are basket weights in 2021 and do 
not sum to 100 due to rounding.
(b)	 Bank staff’s projection. Fuels and lubricants estimates use Department for Business, Energy and 
Industrial Strategy petrol price data for January 2022 and then are based on the sterling oil 
futures curve.
(c)	 The difference between CPI inflation and the other contributions identified in the chart.
Chart 2.20: Gas prices remain much higher than in the 
past, and the futures curve has risen since November
Wholesale gas spot price and futures curves
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and Bank calculations. 
(a)	 One-day forward price of UK natural gas.
(b)	 February 2022 curve is the 15 working day average to 26 January 2022 and the November 2021 
curve is the 15 working day average to 27 October 2021. 
Higher global energy prices explain almost 1 percentage point of the recent rise in inflation… 
Energy prices increased markedly during 2021 and explain almost 1 percentage point of the rise in inflation since 
September. Household utilities and fuel prices were both pulling down on inflation at the start of the year, but since 
then gas prices in particular have risen sharply (Chart 2.20). In October, the retail energy price caps set by Ofgem 
increased by 17% for gas and 9% for electricity, reflecting higher futures prices (see Box A of the November 2021 
Report). 


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 2: Current economic conditions   24
…with a slightly larger share explained by higher inflation among tradable goods.
The production of many goods relies on global supply chains. Strong global demand for particular goods – particularly 
in the US – as well as some disruption to supply have created bottlenecks in those supply chains. That has put upward 
pressure on prices globally (Section 2.1) and has also affected UK prices. The price of UK household appliances rose by 
over 9% in the year to December, for example, compared with negative inflation on average during 2020. Core goods 
inflation – which strips out volatile components such as food and energy – picked up to 5.2% in December, more than 
1¾ percentage points higher than in September (Chart 2.21). 
Higher inflation also appears to be broadening to services…
Consumer services inflation has picked up recently. This is partly due to the change in VAT rate in the hospitality 
sector, but services inflation has risen outside that sector too. Core services inflation, which focuses on a subset of the 
CPI basket that is largely domestically produced, averaged close to 3% over Q4. That is high relative to recent years 
(Chart 2.21), but broadly in line with its post-2000 average. Overall, with energy and goods inflation together 
accounting for a large part of the 2¼ percentage point rise in CPI inflation since September, the contribution to the 
increase from services was much smaller at 0.3 percentage points. 
…which may have implications for the persistence of the current overshoot.
Tradable goods prices tend to be more volatile than other items in the CPI basket (Broadbent (2021)). For some goods, 
such as non-oil commodities, price increases have tended to be followed by below-average rates of inflation 
(Winkelried (2021)). Services inflation tends to be less volatile and more persistent than goods inflation (Chart 2.22). 
That extra persistence could reflect the role of domestic factors such as labour market tightness in determining 
services prices, which tend to evolve relatively slowly. 
Chart 2.21: Core goods inflation has risen well above 
previous peaks, while core services inflation has also 
increased
Core goods and core services CPI inflation, excluding VAT(a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a)	 Core services CPI excludes airfares, package holidays and education. Core goods CPI excludes 
energy, food, non-alcoholic beverages, alcoholic beverages and tobacco. Bank staff have 
adjusted for the estimated direct impact of changes in VAT and there is uncertainty around the 
precise impact of that adjustment. 
Chart 2.22: Services inflation tends to be less volatile and 
more persistent than goods inflation
Volatility and persistence of goods and services inflation(a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations. 
(a)	 Volatility is measured as the standard deviation over the sample (annual data from 2001 to 
2021). Persistence is measured as the lagged coefficient in a first-order autoregression.
CPI inflation is expected to rise almost 2 percentage points further by April, peaking at around 7¼%…
Inflation is expected to rise to around 7¼% in April, an increase of almost 2 percentage points from December. It is 
then expected to fall back somewhat in May and June (Chart 2.19).
…with around half of that rise owing to a further increase in energy prices.
Wholesale gas and electricity prices have been volatile over recent months, but remain significantly higher than in the 
past. Gas futures prices over the next three years are 30% higher than in the run up to the November Report, although 
the curve is still downward sloping (Chart 2.20). Based on Ofgem’s published method for calculating the price caps, 
the latest developments suggest that household utilities prices will rise by close to 50% in April. Higher utilities prices 
alone directly account for around two thirds of the rise in inflation between December and April. But fuel prices 
partially offset that, such that energy prices overall account for around half of the expected rise. These estimates also 


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 2: Current economic conditions   25
reflect upcoming changes to CPI weights, where energy prices are expected to account for a higher share of the CPI 
basket in 2022.
The rest of the expected rise in inflation to April is evenly split between higher goods prices…
Non-energy UK goods inflation is expected to increase further in the near term. Contacts of the Bank’s Agents report 
that food price inflation is likely to rise a little further in the coming months, for example, reflecting cost increases 
among suppliers. It is expected to average 4½% over 2022 H1. There may be downside risks to some goods prices, 
however. Similar to gas prices, the futures curves for some agricultural goods are downward sloping. That could point 
to price falls among some of those goods. Core goods inflation is also expected to rise further in the coming months, 
peaking at around 6½%, before falling back somewhat during the rest of 2022 Q2 (Chart 2.21).
…and higher services prices.
Agency intelligence and a range of survey indicators point to a further increase in services inflation in the near term. 
That is also consistent with the tight and tightening labour market (Section 2.3). Private rents inflation is expected to 
increase further, in part reflecting the wider strength in the housing market. Overall, services inflation accounts for 
around 0.5 percentage points of the almost 2 percentage point rise in CPI inflation expected by April, similar to the 
expected contribution from non-energy goods prices. 
There is uncertainty around the extent to which firms will raise prices in response to higher input costs… 
The path of inflation will be affected by the extent to which firms pass on higher input costs by raising their own 
prices. Margins are difficult to measure accurately, but contacts of the Bank’s Agents report that they were squeezed 
during the early part of the pandemic when firms in some sectors were facing particularly weak demand, with some 
normalisation since. Some firms may look to rebuild margins further, or maintain existing margins in the face of 
further cost increases. Agency contacts report that many firms are doing this by raising prices. Consistent with that, 
survey indicators of input and output prices have remained well above the 50 ‘no-change’ mark recently. 
…and the global spread of Omicron creates additional uncertainty around the inflation forecast.
The effect of the Omicron variant on prices is uncertain. It could weigh on inflation somewhat via weaker demand, 
although before the emergence of the latest variant the pandemic appeared to have been less deflationary than 
previously expected (Broadbent (2021)). Omicron could also add to global supply bottlenecks by hampering 
production if restrictions have to be introduced to curb its spread, which would have the opposite effect on prices 
(Box B). 
As CPI inflation has picked up, indicators of short-term inflation expectations have also increased… 
According to both the Bank/Kantar and YouGov/Citigroup surveys, household inflation expectations at the one-year 
horizon have picked up as CPI inflation and the MPC’s near-term projections have increased. Past evidence suggests 
that should be expected (Rowe (2016)). These moves are broadly consistent with previous periods of above-target 
inflation.
Short-term inflation expectations among businesses and financial market participants also picked up during Q4. In the 
CBI survey of the distribution sector, which includes some firms that sell directly to consumers, companies’ one year 
ahead expectations rose above their 2010–19 average. The Decision Maker Panel (DMP) Survey, which covers a 
broader range of sectors, also suggests that firms expect to raise prices further over the coming year (Chart 2.23), 
although there have been significant differences between expected and realised price changes recently. Short-term 
indicators derived from financial market prices also picked up in Q4. The one-year spot inflation swap rate fell back a 
little in January, however (Table 2.B). 
…while inflation expectations at the two to three-year horizon have also risen, albeit by a little less. 
Looking two to three years ahead, inflation expectations also picked up, albeit by less than at the one-year horizon. 
Surveys of households and businesses at that horizon reported higher expectations in Q4, for example. Financial 
market prices were also consistent with higher inflation expectations in Q4, although some of that has unwound since 
late December. A question in the new Market Participants Survey suggests that respondents expect CPI inflation to fall 
back to 2% in three years’ time. The expectations of professional forecasters are similar, on average.


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 2: Current economic conditions   26
Chart 2.23: Firms in the DMP Survey raised prices by 5% 
over the past year, and expect to raise them by a similar 
amount over the next 12 months
Realised and expected annual firm-level price growth(a)
Sources: DMP Survey and Bank calculations. 
(a)	 Based on the questions: ‘Looking back, from 12 months ago to now, what was the approximate 
% change in the average price you charge, considering all products and services?’ and ‘Looking 
ahead, from now to 12 months from now, what approximate % change in your average price 
would you expect in each of the following scenarios?’. The latest data point is January 2022 for 
realised price growth and January 2023 for expected price growth.
(1)	 See ‘Bank of England/TNS Inflation Attitudes Survey – May 2020’ for more details.
Table 2.B: Some measures of inflation expectations 
remain higher than past averages
Measures of inflation expectations(a)
Per cent
2000– 2010– 2020
       2021
2022
07(b)
19
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Jan.
One year ahead inflation expectations
Households(c)
Bank/Kantar
2.4
3.0
2.9
2.7
2.4
2.7
3.2
n.a.
YouGov/Citigroup
2.5
2.5
3.1
3.0
2.8
3.4
4.1
4.8
Companies(d)
n.a.
1.7
1.1
0.5
1.1
1.5
2.6
n.a.
Financial markets(e)
2.8
3.0
2.5
3.4
3.6
4.4
6.3
6.2
Two to three year ahead expectations
Households(c)
Bank/Kantar
n.a.
2.8
2.3
2.2
1.9
2.2
2.4
n.a.
Companies(d)
n.a.
n.a.
1.4
0.6
0.9
1.3
2.3
n.a.
External 
forecasters(f)
2.0
2.1
2.0
1.9
2.0
2.2
1.9
2.0
Financial markets(g)
2.8
3.1
3.5
3.5
3.7
3.8
4.3
4.2
Five to ten year ahead expectations
Households(c)
Bank/Kantar
n.a.
3.3
2.9
2.9
2.7
3.0
3.1
n.a.
YouGov/Citigroup
3.5
3.2
3.2
3.3
3.4
3.6
3.7
3.8
Financial markets(g)
Five-year, three year
3.0
3.4
3.6
3.7
3.8
3.9
4.1
4.1
Five-year, five year
3.1
3.4
3.6
3.6
3.7
3.8
3.9
4.0
Memo: CPI inflation
1.6
2.2
0.9
0.6
2.1
2.8
4.9
n.a.
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg Finance L.P., CBI, Citigroup, Kantar, ONS, YouGov and Bank 
calculations.
(a)	 Data are not seasonally adjusted.
(b)	 Averages from 2000, or start of series, to 2007. Financial market data start in October 2004, 
YouGov/Citigroup data start in November 2005 and external forecasters’ data start in 
2006 Q2.
(c)	 The household surveys ask about expected changes in prices but do not reference a specific 
price index. Summarised as a weighted median.
(d)	 CBI data for the distributive trades sector. Companies are asked about the expected percentage 
price change over the coming 12 months and the following 12 months in the markets in which 
they compete.
(e)	 One year spot RPI inflation, derived from swaps. This includes a slight lag and can be prone to 
volatility, particularly on RPI release days. Given those issues, past Reports have quoted 
one-year instantaneous rates, but volatility in the front end of the inflation curve means those 
have been misleading recently. Spot rates will be quoted in these tables while those issues 
persist.
(f)	 Bank’s survey of external forecasters, CPI inflation rate three years ahead. January figure refers 
to expectations for three year ahead inflation in the 2022 Q1 survey.
(g)	 Instantaneous RPI inflation three years ahead, three‑year RPI inflation, five years ahead and 
five‑year RPI inflation, five years ahead, derived from swaps. UK RPI is due to be aligned with 
CPIH from February 2030, which will affect the pricing of longer-dated measures.
Medium-term indicators have generally been more stable, although some remain above past averages.
The latest Bank/Kantar and YouGov/Citigroup surveys suggest household inflation expectations five to ten years 
ahead have picked up slightly. While the most recent moves have been relatively small, some of these indicators 
remain elevated compared with the past. The YouGov/Citigroup five to ten year ahead measure, which has a relatively 
long time series measured on a consistent basis, remains above its historical average. The Bank/Kantar measure is 
below its 2010–19 average, although recent results may have been affected by a change in survey method in 
mid‑2020.(1) 
Financial market indicators of medium-term inflation expectations are little changed from their November levels. 
Three‑year inflation expectations, five years ahead, which are unaffected by the alignment of RPI and CPIH in 2030, 
remain above their 2010–19 average (Chart 2.6). The use of UK inflation markets for hedging large pension liabilities 
can at times cause these to move even in the absence of changes in inflation expectations or perceived inflation risks, 
but market intelligence suggests that recent moves in part reflect higher central expectations for inflation.


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 2: Current economic conditions   27
Overall, these moves are consistent with inflation expectations remaining well anchored. 
The MPC considers a range of evidence on inflation expectations, based on a number of metrics across various sources. 
For the survey measures, for example, the distribution of responses can be informative, as well as the headline levels 
(Reis (2020)). Taking all the evidence together, recent moves appear consistent with inflation expectations remaining 
well anchored. The MPC will continue to monitor closely the risk that domestic and global demand and cost pressures 
could affect medium-term inflation expectations, and so wage and price-setting. 


Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 2: Current economic conditions   28
Box B: How are global bottlenecks in goods markets evolving, and what might that 
mean for inflation?
Bottlenecks occur when demand suddenly and significantly exceeds the maximum amount that can be supplied, 
constraining output and raising prices. As economies have recovered from the pandemic, these have emerged in 
goods, labour, and energy markets. This box covers bottlenecks in global goods markets, which reflect households 
having changed the composition of their spending, as well as disruptions to business supply chains (Broadbent (2021)). 
How these global bottlenecks evolve will be important for the inflation outlook both in the UK and abroad. 
Consumer spending has rotated towards goods and away from services during the pandemic…
As of 2021 Q3, G7 goods consumption was 8% higher relative to 2019 Q4 (Chart A), but services consumption had 
yet to recover its fall in 2020. That was largely driven by three factors. First, measures taken to control the spread of 
Covid globally have limited opportunities for spending on certain services. Second, households appear to have shifted 
their preferences towards goods consumption, aided by the accelerated rise of online commerce. And third, a variety 
of policy measures have supported household incomes across countries to help finance this spending. 
…driven in large part by the US.
Almost all of the increase in G7 goods consumption can be attributed to the US, and around half to US durable goods 
spending alone (Chart A). That is likely to reflect both a significant shift in consumer preferences towards durables, 
like household appliances and motor vehicles, and the scale of income support. In 2020, US disposable personal 
incomes rose 7½%, the largest annual increase for 20 years. A model estimated by Bank staff suggests that around 
one third of the increase in US durable goods spending since 2019 Q4 can be attributed to higher incomes.
Chart A: Goods consumption has increased sharply, driven 
by spending in the US on durables
Contributions to change in G7 goods consumption since 2019 Q4(a)
Sources: OECD, Refinitiv Eikon from LSEG and Bank calculations.
(a)	 G7 countries are Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, United Kingdom and United States.
Chart B: Supply constraints have tightened materially
Indicators of supply constraints(a)
Sources: IHS Markit, JPMorgan, Refinitiv Eikon from LSEG and Bank calculations.
(a)	 Indicators are estimated by Bank staff using principal component analysis on a range of 
PMI indicators for supply constraints in the manufacturing sector (supplier delivery times, 
stocks of purchases, stocks of finished goods, input prices and backlogs of work). Before 
principal components are estimated, these indicators are regressed on the new orders PMI 
to control for movements in demand. Latest data are for December 2021.
This rotation in demand has put pressure on supply chains, which have also been disrupted by Covid outbreaks.
The scale of this rotation has put pressure on supply chains. Although supply has increased in response, it tends to be 
able to respond less quickly than demand over short periods of time. In addition, supply chains have been disrupted by 
Covid outbreaks in China and other Asian economies that continued to impose local restrictions. An estimate of 
supply constraints, derived from a range of purchasing managers’ indices, rose across advanced economies over 2021, 
despite less of an impact on China itself (Chart B).
Taken together, supply and demand imbalances have increased costs markedly.
The combination of heightened goods demand and disrupted supply chains has significantly increased costs and prices. 
Purchasing managers’ indices of manufacturing input and output prices reached record highs in September. Consumer 


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 2: Current economic conditions   29
price inflation has also picked up sharply across countries (see Section 2.1) driven, in part, by sub-components of 
CPI baskets that rely on global supply chains. For example, these sub-components account for a large part of the 
overshoot of UK inflation relative to the MPC’s 2% target (Chart 2.19). In particular, durable goods prices have tended 
to fall in the past in the UK and US, aside from some increases linked to currency depreciations, for example, after 
2016 in the UK. But since 2020, durable goods prices in both countries have picked up very sharply and reversed the 
deflation over the past 20 years, despite no significant fall in the dollar or sterling exchange rates (Chart C).  
Chart C: Durable goods prices have risen sharply, reversing 
several years of decline
UK and US durable goods price indices
Sources: Federal Reserve Economic Data, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a)	 Consumer Price Index: Durables.
(b)	 Consumer Price Index for All Urban Consumers: Durables in U.S. City Average.
Chart D: Measures of shipping costs have stabilised, and in 
some cases have fallen from recent peaks
Shipping costs and forward freight agreement prices
Sources: Baltic Exchange, Freightos Baltic Index, Harper Petersen, Refinitiv Eikon from LSEG, 
Shanghai Shipping Exchange and Bank calculations.
(a)	 Freightos Baltic Container Index: a global measure of the cost of container transport.
(b)	 Harpex Charter Rates Index: a measure of the cost of chartering container ships.
(c)	 China Containerized Freight Index: a measure of the cost of container transport from China.
(d)	 Baltic Exchange Panamax Index: an index of average prices paid for the transport of dry bulk 
cargo around the world on Panamax-sized carriers.
(e)	 Baltic Exchange Panamax futures: forward freight agreements indicating market expectations 
of future dry bulk shipping costs on 26 January 2022 for Panamax-sized carriers.
Towards the end of 2021 it appeared that demand was starting to rotate back towards services…
Services consumption picked up markedly over the second half of 2021 across countries. Consumer spending appeared 
to have tilted back towards more contact-intensive services, as confidence increased with continued vaccination 
rollouts and mobility returned to around pre-pandemic levels. With services spending picking up, global goods 
consumption had started to stabilise. For the US, fiscal measures that supported incomes largely ended in 2021 Q3. 
Durable goods consumption fell by around 7% in that quarter, while services consumption increased despite rising 
Covid cases. And data for 2021 Q4 showed that services consumption in the US grew at a faster rate than goods 
consumption for a second consecutive quarter. The MPC’s projections in the November Report were consistent with 
this stalling in global goods demand, and signs of a rotation back towards services.
…and supply chains were beginning to adapt…
Some businesses in global supply chains had begun to adapt to the rotation in demand and disruptions at ports and 
factories abroad. For example, car manufacturers increased their inventories of unfinished goods. This shift away from 
‘just-in-time’ to ‘just-in-case’ production may allow backlogs to clear up faster. Indeed, manufacturing inventories of 
finished goods had been recovering in the US. However, intelligence from the Bank’s Agency network in the UK 
suggests that this period of adjustment is likely to take some time, and in some cases require increased investment. 
And some adjustments, like building inventories, may actually exacerbate bottlenecks in the short term, even though 
it could make supply chains more robust going forward.
…such that global bottlenecks appeared to be stabilising, and starting to ease in places.
There were some signs that global bottlenecks had been stabilising and beginning to ease. The latest data from 
purchasing managers’ indices for manufacturers input and output prices appeared to be flattening off. Some measures 
of shipping costs had also plateaued (Chart D), meaning price inflation would fall naturally, and some had fallen from 
their heightened levels earlier in 2021, putting further downward pressure on headline inflation. Prices in futures 


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 2: Current economic conditions   30
markets suggested some shipping costs and commodity prices were expected to fall further too. Collectively, the 
evidence from late 2021 appeared to be consistent with the MPC’s judgement in the November Report that the effects 
of global bottlenecks would fade over 2022.
The emergence of the Omicron variant may mean that global bottlenecks temporarily worsen, but the effects 
may be more limited.
The emergence of the Omicron variant and the associated increase in cases (Chart 2.3) could intensify some aspects 
of global bottlenecks. Consumers may return to limiting spending on high-contact services, and substitute back into 
goods spending. Further disruptions may occur in those factories and ports in China and other Asian economies that 
are important for global supply chains, pushing up costs and prices. Indeed, some measures of shipping costs have 
begun to increase again more recently (Chart D).
But the effects may be more short-lived than previous waves, with less of an effect on inflation. Evidence from 
countries furthest ahead in this wave suggests that it is likely to last for less time. Accelerated rollouts of booster 
vaccination programmes and widespread testing may limit any rotation back towards goods spending and away from 
services. And households have already increased their share of spending on durable goods, such that any further 
increase from here is perhaps less likely. Supply chains may also be better able to handle disruption at key factories 
and ports in China and other Asian economies, having adjusted their production processes over the past year.
Global bottlenecks are expected to fade over the next 12 months, a little longer than in the MPC’s previous 
forecast.
The MPC judges that global bottlenecks will last a little longer than in the November Report. The MPC’s forecast is 
consistent with some delay in the rotation of spending back towards services from goods, and some further disruption 
to global supply chains, due to the spread of the Omicron variant. As such, the MPC expects the level of world export 
prices to rise a little further, and stay a little higher, than in the November Report. But world export prices are not 
expected to keep on rising beyond the near term. As case rates fall, global goods demand is likely to normalise, and 
supply disruptions lessen, in line with evidence from late 2021. That means world export prices fall back a little over 
the forecast, exerting downward pressure on UK inflation, but remain well above their pre-pandemic levels.
There remains uncertainty around this judgement, as it depends on how the pandemic evolves and how these 
bottlenecks interact with other price pressures. On the one hand, domestic supply constraints, such as shortages of 
workers (Chart 2.8), might mean that the cost of importing goods remains high even if global bottlenecks ease. On 
the other hand, were energy prices to follow paths implied by financial markets, UK inflation could fall more quickly 
than projected (see Section 1).


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 2: Current economic conditions   31
Box C: How do changes in Bank Rate affect the interest rates facing households 
and firms?
Since November, the MPC has raised Bank Rate modestly. Changes in the current and expected level of Bank Rate 
influence spending through a number of channels, including via the exchange rate and asset prices. A more direct 
channel operates via the interest rates that banks and building societies charge households and firms for borrowing, 
and the interest rates they pay for deposits. This box examines the impact of changes in Bank Rate on these retail 
interest rates. 
Mortgages account for the majority of household debt. 
Although only 30% of households have a mortgage, mortgage debt represents around three quarters of the overall 
stock of household debt. The effects of a change in Bank Rate on mortgage rates depend on whether the mortgage has 
a ‘floating rate’ – linked to Bank Rate or similar market interest rates – or a ‘fixed rate’. 
The minority of mortgagors with floating-rate mortgages will face higher interest rates relatively quickly.
Around 20% of the stock of mortgages, by value, have a floating interest rate (Chart A). Interest rates on these 
mortgages tend to change one-for-one with Bank Rate. A borrower with an average outstanding mortgage debt of 
£140,000 with a remaining repayment term of 17 years could expect to pay around £10 more in interest a month as a 
result of the increase in Bank Rate from 0.1% to 0.25% in December.
Chart A: A growing majority of the stock of mortgages by 
value are fixed rate
Distribution of mortgages by type of interest rate(a)
(a)	 Share of value of outstanding mortgages. Data from January 2016 are for individuals and 
individual trusts only. Latest data point is November 2021.
Chart B: Many mortgagors renewing a fixed-rate 
mortgage will get a similar or lower interest rate 
Two-year and five-year fixed-rate mortgage interest rates at 
selected loan to value ratios(a)
(a)	 The Bank’s quoted rates series are weighted monthly average rates advertised by all UK banks 
and building societies with products meeting the specific criteria. Latest quoted rates data are 
flash estimates for January using data to 26 January and are subject to change until publication 
on 7 February. 
Most mortgages have a fixed interest rate, so borrowers will not experience any changes until the end of the 
fixed period.
Around 80% of the stock of mortgages, by value, have an interest rate that is fixed for an initial period – usually two 
or five years. At the end of the fixed period, mortgagors can move onto a variable ‘revert-to’ rate, although they often 
remortgage with a new fixed-rate deal. 
New fixed-rate mortgage rates are based on longer-term funding costs, which are influenced by expectations of 
Bank Rate. Expectations for the path of Bank Rate have risen in recent months (Chart 2.5), and longer-term risk-free 
reference rates have increased accordingly. Over time, these increases tend to be mostly passed through to new 
mortgage rates. As a result, remortgagors will face higher interest rates than they otherwise would have done had 
expectations for Bank Rate remained unchanged.


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 2: Current economic conditions   32
However, other factors also influence new fixed-rate mortgage rates, including bank funding costs, competition in the 
mortgage market, and the riskiness of the economic outlook. Developments in these factors have caused some 
mortgage rates to fall over the past year – particularly those for riskier, high loan to value mortgages (see Box B in the 
May 2021 Report). 
Many mortgagors renewing a fixed-rate mortgage will currently get a similar or lower interest rate.
Overall, developments in recent years mean the rates on many new two-year fixed-rate mortgages are broadly similar 
to what they were two years ago (left-hand panel of Chart B), so a borrower remortgaging on similar terms will 
probably see little change in their interest rate. Five-year fixed rates are actually lower than they were five years ago 
(right-hand panel of Chart B), so someone moving from an expiring five-year deal to a new one could see their 
interest rate fall. 
The increased share of longer fixed-rate mortgages mean that the average interest rate on the stock of 
mortgages will adjust more slowly to a change in Bank Rate than in the past. 
The share of mortgages with a fixed rate has increased in recent years, and the average fixed period has lengthened 
(Chart A). As a result, changes in the interest rates on new mortgages will take a little longer to pass through into the 
average interest rate paid on the stock of mortgages than in the past. Nevertheless, over half of the outstanding stock 
of fixed-rate mortgages will still reach the end of a fixed-rate period within the MPC’s three-year forecast horizon.
The cost of other forms of household borrowing is less sensitive to Bank Rate.
Other components of household borrowing such as credit cards and personal loans are less sensitive to Bank Rate. The 
interest rates on these products are often fixed, or driven predominantly by factors other than Bank Rate. Some 
households also have student loans, although the monthly repayments on these are determined by borrower income.
Household savings accounts often have variable interest rates, although changes to Bank Rate may not be 
passed through in full.
Over 60% of all household deposits are interest-bearing sight deposits, such as those in instant access savings 
accounts. These accounts typically have a variable interest rate. In recent years, changes in Bank Rate have tended to 
be followed by smaller changes in instant access savings rates. That is probably because the spreads between Bank 
Rate and savings rates have been unusually compressed while Bank Rate has been close to zero (see Box 2 in the 
February 2018 Inflation Report). How changes in Bank Rate pass through into deposit rates will also depend on banks’ 
desire to attract deposits.
Interest rates on fixed-rate products where there is a penalty for early withdrawal, such as fixed-rate bonds, are 
generally higher than for instant access savings accounts. As with fixed-rate mortgages, the interest rates on fixed-rate 
savings products are influenced more by the expected level of Bank Rate in the future, rather than its current level. The 
average interest rate on a new five-year fixed-rate bond was 1.16% in January, around 30 basis points higher than 
six months ago.
Lower debt and higher savings mean the effect of a change in Bank Rate on net incomes may be somewhat 
smaller than before the global financial crisis.
As a rise in Bank Rate is passed through to retail interest rates, the sizes of household debt and deposits will determine 
the direct impact on households’ net incomes. UK household indebtedness is lower today than before the global 
financial crisis (Chart C). In aggregate, household deposits increased relative to incomes over the same period, with a 
particularly large increase as a result of saving during the pandemic. These changes mean the impact on net incomes 
of a rise in Bank Rate may be somewhat smaller than before the financial crisis. 
The impact of any changes in net income on spending will depend on how households respond. Historically, the 
spending of highly indebted households has been more sensitive to changes in interest rates. The proportion of highly 
indebted households has fallen in recent years. For example, the share of households with a mortgage debt-servicing 
ratio at or above 40% is significantly lower than in the past (Chart 1.2 in the December 2021 Financial Stability Report). 
However, many factors other than indebtedness will determine households’ responses to changes in their net incomes. 


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 2: Current economic conditions   33
Corporate bank debt is often linked to Bank Rate, although the interest rate on Bounce Bank Loans will be 
unaffected.
Around three quarters of corporate bank debt has a floating interest rate, so changes in Bank Rate tend to feed 
through fairly quickly to the cost of bank borrowing. Small and medium-sized firms are often more reliant on bank 
funding, as they are less likely than large firms to issue bonds and equity. However, many of these businesses made 
use of the Government’s Bounce Back Loan Scheme during the pandemic: around one quarter of all UK businesses are 
thought to have used the scheme, with over 90% of the loans going to ‘micro-businesses’.(1) Bounce Back Loans have a 
low, fixed interest rate of 2.5%, so are unaffected by changes in Bank Rate. The increase in borrowing during the 
pandemic may also mean firms have less demand for new loans in the near term. In recent quarters, firms have been 
repaying more finance than they raised.
Debt service remains affordable for most UK businesses.
The UK’s corporate debt to earnings ratio is now close to its pre-pandemic level, having fallen to around 330% in 
2021 Q3 (Chart D). The available data suggest that debt service remains affordable for most UK businesses (Chart 1.4 
in the December 2021 Financial Stability Report). 
(1)	 Firms with an annual turnover below £632,000.
Chart C: Aggregate household debt has fallen, and 
deposits have risen, relative to income
Aggregate household deposit and debt to income ratios
Sources: Bank of England, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a)	 Household financial liabilities as a percentage of the four‑quarter moving sum of household 
post‑tax income. Financial liabilities exclude unfunded pension liabilities and financial 
derivatives of the non‑profit sector, and are not seasonally adjusted. Household income 
excludes the effects of Financial Intermediation Services Indirectly Measured (FISIM). Latest 
data point is 2021 Q3.
(b)	 Deposits with UK Monetary Financial Institutions, as a percentage of the four‑quarter moving 
sum of nominal household post‑tax income. Deposits data are not seasonally adjusted. 
Household income excludes the effects of FISIM.
Chart D: The UK corporate sector’s debt to earnings ratio 
has fallen in recent quarters
UK businesses’ debt to earnings ratio(a)
Sources: Association of British Insurers, Bank of England, Bayes CRE Lending Report (Bayes Business 
School (formerly Cass)), Deloitte, Eikon from Refinitiv, Financing & Leasing Association, firm public 
disclosures, Integer Advisors, LCD, an offering of S&P Global Market Intelligence, London Stock 
Exchange, ONS, Peer-to-Peer Finance Association and Bank calculations.
(a)	 Data are for private non-financial corporates. Earnings are defined as businesses’ aggregate 
gross operating surplus, excluding the effects of FISIM. Latest data point is 2021 Q3.


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 2: Current economic conditions   34
Box D: Agents’ update on business conditions
The key information from Agents’ contacts considered by the Monetary Policy Committee at its February meeting is 
highlighted in this box, which summarises information gathered in the six weeks to mid-January. 
Based on information obtained from contacts, the Agents’ assessment is that economic growth will be modest in the 
coming few months as pressure on household incomes weighs on consumer spending, and supply shortages continue 
to constrain output. Many companies expect these shortages to persist for most of this year and in some cases 
beyond. As a result, input costs are expected to remain high and pay settlements are expected to pick up markedly this 
year. Increased costs are being passed through to consumer prices to a greater extent since the November Report.
Annual growth in consumer spending eased at the end of 2021, as Omicron dampened demand for consumer 
services, and supply-chain issues held back some goods sales.
Contacts reported that Omicron weighed on customer footfall in December 2021, following some months of buoyant 
demand. Spending on non-food goods increased only modestly, in part due to supply-chain issues, which constrained 
the availability of some items: in particular electrical goods containing microchips. By contrast, supermarket contacts 
reported a pickup in food sales as consumers cut back on dining out. Contacts in the leisure and hospitality sectors 
reported widespread cancellations, resulting in steep declines in revenues. Staff shortages, exacerbated by absences 
due to sickness or self-isolation, also curtailed activity. Looking ahead, many retail contacts said that they expected 
pressure on household disposable incomes to dampen consumer spending in the coming months. 
Shortages of labour and goods weighed on output growth for some business services and in manufacturing and 
construction in particular. 
In aggregate, business services contacts continued to report robust annual growth in turnover, but activity in some 
sectors, such as logistics, telecoms and IT was constrained by recruitment difficulties, staff absences due to sickness or 
self-isolation, and shortages of some goods. 
Contacts in professional and financial services continued to report strong growth, supported by corporate 
transactions. Work relating to corporate restructuring and voluntary liquidations also picked up, though insolvencies 
remained low overall. Demand for engineering, architectural and advertising services also increased. By contrast, 
airport and airline revenues remained significantly below pre-Covid levels, and some contacts estimated that Omicron 
had delayed further recovery by a few months. 
Manufacturing output grew at a modest pace, constrained by ongoing shortages of goods and labour. This was 
particularly the case for automotive and electronics manufacturers where semiconductor shortages persisted, leading 
to some production stoppages. Contacts also reported shortages of a range of other materials and products, as lead 
times for imported goods from Asia were reported to have lengthened significantly due to shipping delays. Production 
was also held back by shortages of workers with engineering skills. 
Contacts expected only slow improvement in supply-chain disruption through 2022 and some thought problems 
might persist into 2023, in particular for semiconductors. Some companies had built, and were planning to maintain, 
higher levels of inventory to mitigate the effects of supply-chain disruption. 
In construction, contacts continued to report strong activity in private and social housebuilding, publicly funded 
infrastructure projects and industrial developments. However, output growth had weakened due to shortages of 
materials and labour, as well as rising costs, which had caused delays to some projects being started. There were also a 
few signs of increased costs weighing on demand, for example for some types of commercial property development 
and home improvements. As a result, cash-flow pressures have increased, and the availability of credit and trade credit 
insurance were reported to have tightened for some companies. 
Demand in the housing market and for some types of commercial property remained strong.
Demand in the housing market remained robust, though there were a few reports that Omicron may have dampened 
confidence. Activity was constrained by limited supply. Demand for rental properties remained strong, with supply 
shortages contributing to higher rents.


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 2: Current economic conditions   35
In commercial real estate, investor appetite for industrial properties remained strong, with high demand for 
warehousing, logistics and research facilities around the UK. Contacts generally reported downsizing office space when 
leases came up for renewal. For those seeking office space, demand was mostly concentrated on new or newly 
refurbished premises in city centre locations, offering improved energy efficiency and better amenities than older 
premises. Demand for retail property generally remained weak, with some premises being repurposed for leisure or 
other uses.
Investment intentions remained strong, although investment projects were increasingly held back by shortages 
of goods and labour; demand for bank credit was subdued.
There was widespread strength in investment intentions, with contacts reporting the reinstatement of projects that 
had been paused during the pandemic, and increasing capacity to meet demand. However, there were increasing 
reports of growth in investment activity being slowed due to shortages of goods, machinery and labour. And delays 
and increases in costs, in particular for building and construction, led to some slowing or postponement of investment. 
Companies typically reported investing in IT-related projects, machinery upgrades, energy efficiency, product 
development or refurbishment of premises. Contacts in sectors that had been most affected by the pandemic, such as 
some retailers, entertainment and transport, were generally more cautious about investment.
Bank credit was available on the whole, though it was reported to remain tight for sectors most exposed to the 
pandemic, including construction. Demand for new bank credit was subdued among companies of all sizes. Large 
companies said they were able to raise funds from financial markets, whereas smaller firms generally reported that 
they had high cash balances and a limited appetite to take on more debt. However, rising input costs led to increased 
demand for working capital finance among some smaller companies.
Employment intentions eased slightly but recruitment difficulties remained intense; as a result, contacts 
expected average pay settlements to increase this year.
Employment growth slowed modestly as companies’ rehiring and expansion plans neared completion. Employment 
growth was also held back by tight labour supply. Contacts in a wide range of sectors said recruitment difficulties 
remained a challenge, particularly for more experienced workers. The most acute shortages continued to be in 
logistics, hospitality, engineering, construction, professional services, IT and health and social care.  
Omicron caused staff absences to increase sharply – in some cases to double those reported during previous waves of 
Covid-19 – but companies generally viewed it as a temporary issue. 
Contacts also attributed labour shortages to: lower availability of migrant workers from the European Union; lower 
labour market participation by older workers and students; and people wanting to work fewer hours to achieve a 
better work/life balance. Contacts said that some of these shortages could take many years to be resolved. Most 
contacts expected labour market tightness to persist throughout 2022 at least. 
Companies said they were taking a variety of actions to address skills shortages, including: launching or expanding 
apprenticeship programmes; hiring remote workers in other parts of the UK or overseas; providing in-house training; 
redeploying existing staff; increasing automation; and improving non-pay benefits. 
Reflecting the tight labour market, pay settlements continued to rise and companies reported significant upward pay 
pressure to recruit and retain skills in short supply – for example in construction, hospitality, IT, and some professional 
services. Companies in these sectors commonly reported offering ad hoc bonuses to retain staff. A survey conducted 
by the Agents showed that pay settlements were higher than expected in 2021 and were anticipated to increase 
further in 2022 (Section 3). 
Energy and wage costs were expected to put further upwards pressure on inflation in the coming months. 
Input costs remained elevated overall, although the cost of some raw materials, and shipping rates on some routes 
appeared to be stabilising. Many contacts expected supply-chain issues to persist, which would keep input costs high 
over the coming year. Contacts said that energy and wage costs were now driving further inflationary pressure.


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 2: Current economic conditions   36
Manufacturing and construction firms continued to pass through materials and labour cost increases to prices. In 
business services, strong demand in some sectors, such as software and digital services, generally allowed high levels 
of pass-through into prices, with less pass-through in sectors where competition was greater.  
Increased costs were also being passed through to consumer prices to a greater extent since the November Report. 
Supermarkets reported food price inflation continuing to rise, with further increases expected in the coming months. 
In non-food retail, discounting was lower and less widespread than normal during the post-Christmas sales as supply 
issues constrained the availability of some goods. Used-car prices continued to climb amid the ongoing supply 
shortages that affected the availability of new cars. And in consumer services, contacts reported passing higher wage 
costs through to prices, for example in veterinary clinics and hairdressers. Visitor attractions reported increasing ticket 
prices by 5%–10% and passing through higher food and beverage costs to customers. 


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 3: In focus – Wages and inflation   37
3:	In focus – Wages and inflation
Firms are adjusting wages and prices in the context of a sharp rise in global energy and 
tradable goods prices, and a tightening domestic labour market. Bank staff estimate that 
annual growth in underlying pay remains somewhat above its rate prior to the pandemic, 
at around 4% to 4½%. This reflects a tightening in the labour market as the economy has 
recovered. It may also reflect a pickup in inflation and inflation expectations, and high rates 
of job churn. Prices are nonetheless rising faster than pay, such that households’ real 
incomes are being squeezed. Underlying wage growth is expected to rise to just under 5% 
over the next year – higher than projected in November – due to a tighter than expected 
labour market and higher rates of inflation. Wage growth is expected to fall to around 
2.5% over the medium term as the labour market loosens and inflation falls back.
Firms are adjusting prices and wages in the context of two key economic developments. First, there has been a rise in 
global energy and tradable goods prices, the latter in part reflecting bottlenecks (Box B). This external cost shock is the 
primary reason why inflation has risen well above the target (Section 2.4). Second, the labour market has tightened as 
the economy has recovered. This has pushed underlying wage growth above pre-pandemic rates (Chart 3.1), 
increasing domestic cost pressures. But pay has risen by less than prices, such that households’ real incomes are being 
squeezed (Chart 3.2).
How firms and households respond to the rise in global energy and goods prices, the tightening labour market, and the 
squeeze on real incomes will be a key influence on the inflation outlook. This section focuses on the labour market, 
and wage growth in particular. Section 3.1 briefly recaps the latest data. Section 3.2 looks at the factors that have 
driven underlying wage growth above pre-pandemic rates. Section 3.3 sets out how underlying wage growth and 
inflation are expected to evolve over the MPC’s forecast period.
Chart 3.1: Underlying pay growth is somewhat above 
pre-pandemic rates at around 4% to 4½%…
Contributions to private sector regular pay growth(a)
Sources: HMRC, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a)	 Growth in three-month average pay relative to the same period a year earlier. Furlough effects, 
compositional effects and underlying pay growth are Bank staff estimates. Latest data are for 
November 2021. 
Chart 3.2: …and is expected to pick up to just under 
5% over the next year, before softening
Annual growth in private sector regular pay
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a)	 Private sector AWE excluding bonuses and arrears. 
(b)	 Bank staff estimates of private sector regular pay adjusted for furlough and compositional 
effects. 
(c)	 Bank staff estimates of headline pay adjusted for price changes using CPI.


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 3: In focus – Wages and inflation   38
3.1:	 What do the latest data tell us about wage growth? 
As discussed in Box C of the August 2021 Report, headline measures of private sector average weekly earnings (AWE) 
have been affected by furlough and compositional effects since the onset of Covid. While the furlough scheme was in 
place, it helped workers stay in their jobs at generally lower pay than usual, which led to a drag on average wages (the 
green bars in Chart 3.1). As the furlough scheme drew to a close, this effect began to reverse during 2021. Changes in 
the mix of jobs acted to push up average wages over much of 2020–21, as job losses were skewed towards lower-paid 
roles. In recent months, these compositional effects (the red bars in Chart 3.1) appear to have been unwinding, 
alongside the recovery in employment, such that these effects were estimated to be dragging on headline annual pay 
growth.
In the latest data, the impact of furlough and compositional effects on headline annual pay growth are estimated to 
be broadly offsetting, such that Bank staff estimates for underlying pay growth (the blue bars in Chart 3.1) are now 
broadly in line with the headline measure, at around 4% in November. Underlying pay growth remains somewhat 
above its pre-pandemic rate of around 3½%. Given the difficulties in precisely measuring furlough and compositional 
effects, there is uncertainty around these estimates.
3.2:	 What factors might have driven underlying wage growth above pre-pandemic 
rates? 
The pickup in pay growth during 2021 in part reflects a tightening in the labour market...
Wage growth is determined in part by labour market ‘tightness’: the balance between the demand for, and the supply 
of, workers. If demand increases, or supply falls, it makes it more difficult to recruit and retain staff and that can put 
upward pressure on wage growth. 
The UK labour market tightened over the past year. The unemployment rate fell from around 5% at the start of 2021 
to 4.1% in the three months to November (Chart 2.1), as the economy was recovering from the effects of Covid. The 
number of vacancies per person unemployed – another indicator of labour market tightness – has risen to new highs 
(Chart 2.18). And many firms continue to report significant recruitment difficulties (Chart 3.3).  
Chart 3.3: Firms still report recruitment difficulties 
Indicators of recruitment difficulties
Sources: Bank of England, KPMG/REC UK Report on Jobs and Bank calculations.
(a)	 Differences from averages since 2000. 
(b)	 KPMG/REC Staff Availability Index, inverted. Latest data point is for December 2021.
(c)	 Latest data point is for January 2022.  
Chart 3.4: Pay rates for new hires have picked up sharply
Pay rates for new staff(a)
Source: KPMG/REC UK Report on Jobs.
(a)	 Latest data points are for December 2021. 
This tightening contributed to a pickup in underlying wage growth. The KPMG/REC UK Report on Jobs attributed the 
strength in wage growth to demand for staff being greater than supply. A survey conducted by the Agents showed 
that pay settlements in 2021 were higher than expected. The tightness of the labour market also helps to explain the 
strength in pay of new hires: the KPMG/REC UK Report on Jobs permanent staff salaries index remained close to record 
highs in December (Chart 3.4). 


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 3: In focus – Wages and inflation   39
…and high rates of job churn may be playing a role. 
Flows of workers between jobs picked up to new highs in 2021 Q3 (Chart 3.5), largely reflecting an increasing number 
of people resigning from jobs to move to new ones. Those who change jobs have typically experienced higher wage 
growth than those staying in the same job (Chart 3.6). And if firms believe their workers could be offered higher pay 
elsewhere, they may respond by increasing the pay of existing staff in order to retain them.
Some evidence suggests that higher job-to-job flows can play a role in explaining wage growth (Moscarini and 
Postel-Vinay (2017); Faccini and Melosi (2019)), so it is possible that the recent increase in the rate of job churn is 
putting upward pressure on wage growth. However, it is difficult to distinguish between the effects of falling labour 
market slack and higher job churn, as they tend to move together.
Chart 3.5: Job-to-job flows have picked up markedly, 
alongside the rise in underlying pay growth
Job-to-job flows and underlying private sector annual pay growth
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a)	 Private sector regular pay adjusted for Bank staff estimates of furlough and compositional 
effects. Diamond shows the Bank staff estimate for the three months to November.
(b)	 Job-to-job flows are based on a percentage of total employment of people aged 16–69. Latest 
data point is for 2021 Q3. 
Chart 3.6: People moving jobs typically experience higher 
pay growth 
Median annual growth rates of pay(a)
Sources: Annual Survey of Hours and Earnings and Bank calculations.
(a)	 Annual data. Based on hourly pay for private sector employees where pay was not affected by 
absence or furlough. Workers moving jobs are defined as workers in employment in consecutive 
years but in a different job. Latest data point is for April 2021. 
The pickup in pay growth could also reflect the rise in inflation and inflation expectations…
The rise in inflation and inflation expectations over 2021 may also have put pressure on employers to increase pay. 
But so far, consumer prices have risen faster than pay growth due to higher energy and tradable goods prices 
(Section 2.4), such that households’ pay growth has slowed sharply in real terms (Chart 3.2). The extent to which 
this real income squeeze increases pressure on employers to increase pay further will affect the outlook for wages 
and prices (Section 3.3).
…as well as frictions in the labour market, although these appear to have fallen back. 
Models used by Bank staff suggest that underlying wage growth during 2021 was somewhat stronger than the usual 
predictors of wage growth, such as labour market slack, would imply (Chart 3.7). This ‘unexplained’ component of 
wage growth (the red bars in Chart 3.7) may reflect the impact of temporary frictions in the matching of workers to 
jobs. As discussed in the November Report, one estimate of sectoral mismatch increased in the early stages of the 
pandemic (Chart 3.8). This indicator has since declined, alongside the ‘unexplained’ component of wage growth, 
suggesting that these frictions may be abating. That said, the scale of ongoing recruitment difficulties might point 
to continuing frictions on more granular dimensions of the labour market, such as a shortage of workers with 
specific skills.


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 3: In focus – Wages and inflation   40
Chart 3.7: Underlying wage growth was stronger than 
implied by its usual predictors during 2021, which may 
reflect labour market frictions…
Contributions to annual private sector regular pay growth(a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a)	 Wage equation based on Yellen (2017). Inflation expectations are based on the Barclays Basix 
Index and the Citi one year ahead measure of household inflation expectations. Slack is based 
on the MPC’s estimate of the unemployment gap. Productivity growth is based on the long-run 
market sector productivity growth per head. The unexplained component is the residual. The 
diamond shows the Bank staff projection for 2021 Q4.
Chart 3.8: …but one indicator suggests these have fallen 
back recently
Sectoral mismatch index(a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a)	 Estimates of sectoral mismatch are based on the methodology set out in Şahin et al (2014). 
Data are quarterly to 2021 Q3; final data point is for the three months to November 2021. 
3.3: How are underlying wage growth and inflation expected to evolve over the 
forecast period?
The outlook for wages and prices will depend on how firms and workers respond to the increase in cost pressures 
and the tightness in the labour market.
Global energy prices have risen sharply (Section 2.4), and tradable goods prices are higher, the latter reflecting global 
bottlenecks (Box B). Other things equal, this means that the real purchasing power of the UK’s aggregate income is 
lower. The MPC cannot affect this change in relative prices and the associated impact on real aggregate income. Its 
role is to ensure that as the adjustment to this shock takes place, inflation returns sustainably to the 2% target in the 
medium term. 
Companies are adjusting their prices and the wages they pay their staff in the context of those external cost pressures, 
as well as the tightening domestic labour market. To limit the squeeze on their profit margins, they can try to reduce 
other costs such as wages, or pass on imported costs to consumer prices. However, employees may resist cost-cutting 
in the form of lower wages if the labour market is tight and consumer prices are rising sharply. 
Over 2021, part of the adjustment to the external cost shock appears to have come through higher prices rather than 
lower domestic costs. Inflation has risen to above 5%, largely driven by higher energy and goods prices. As a result, 
while underlying nominal wage growth has picked up as the labour market has tightened, real income growth has 
slowed sharply (Chart 2.11). Firms may also have borne some of the increase in imported costs through a compression 
in their profit margins. Margins are difficult to measure accurately, but contacts of the Bank’s Agents report that they 
were squeezed during the early part of pandemic when firms in some sectors were facing particularly weak demand, 
with some normalisation since.
In the MPC’s central projection, underlying wage growth picks up to just under 5% by the end of 2022, as the 
labour market remains tight and inflation increases further in the near term.
In the MPC’s central projection, headline average pay growth remains around 4% in 2022 as compositional effects 
continue to drag on the headline measure, while underlying wage growth picks up to just under 5% (Chart 3.2). That 
rise is consistent with a recent pay survey by the Bank’s Agents covering around 400 firms. In that survey, respondents 
expected average pay settlements to pick up to 4.8% in 2022 (Chart 3.9). Higher pay settlements were expected 
across small, medium and large firms, and across all major sectors in the economy. 


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 3: In focus – Wages and inflation   41
The tight labour market is an important reason why respondents to the Agents’ survey expected an increase in pay in 
2022. Contacts cited the ability to retain staff and the ability to recruit UK workers as key factors pushing up their 
expectations for pay (Chart 3.10). In the MPC’s central projection, the labour market remains tight in 2022, although 
the unemployment rate rises from 2022 Q2. 
The pickup in inflation is also expected to affect the outlook for wages. In the Agents’ survey, the increase in consumer 
price inflation was an important factor putting upwards pressure on pay in 2022 (Chart 3.10). In the MPC’s central 
projection, inflation rises to around 7¼% in April, with the majority of that further increase being driven by energy and 
goods prices (Section 2.4). 
Chart 3.9: Respondents to the Agents’ pay survey expect 
pay settlements to pick up sharply in 2022
Pay settlements(a)
Source: Bank of England, including the wage settlements database (which draws on information 
from the Bank’s Agents, Incomes Data Research, Incomes Data Services, Industrial Relations 
Services and the Labour Research Department).
(a)	 Companies were asked to state their average UK pay settlement for 2021 and their expected 
average UK pay settlement for 2022. 
(b)	 Data gathered from the 2022 Agents’ survey on pay and costs. 
(c)	 Average over the previous 12 months, based on monthly data.
Chart 3.10: The tight labour market and higher inflation 
are expected to push pay higher in 2022
Factors affecting pay decisions in 2022(a)
(a)	 Taken from responses to the Agents’ survey on pay and costs. Question: ‘When considering 
your 2022 pay increase, how much of an impact are the following factors having/expected to 
have on your pay decisions?’. Reports of ‘slight’ pressure were given a 50% weight relative to 
reports of ‘significant’ pressure when calculating these balances. 
Underlying wage growth then falls back to around 2.5% over the medium term as the labour market loosens 
and inflation falls back. 
Wage growth is expected to fall to around 2.5% over the medium term (Chart 3.2). The factors currently pushing up 
on wage growth are expected to dissipate over the MPC’s forecast horizon. The unemployment rate picks up over the 
forecast period as demand grows by less than the economy’s supply potential. Over time, the impact of the global 
cost shock on inflation is also expected to dissipate. Conditional on the market path for interest rates, inflation is 
expected to return to target in just over two years’ time (Section 1). 
 
These projections imply that the adjustment to the external cost shock occurs largely through households’ real 
incomes. The labour share – the share of national income that goes to workers – was a little above its longer-term 
average in 2021 Q2 according to ONS data (Chart 3.11). This is expected to decline a little over the forecast period to 
around its longer-term average, while firms rebuild profit margins. Over history, labour compensation and productivity 
in the UK and many other countries have generally grown at similar rates, such that the labour share has remained 
broadly stable. The US is a notable exception (Gutiérrez and Piton (2019)). 
There is a risk that wage growth is stronger if the labour market is tighter than expected…
One possible risk to the MPC’s central projection is that wage growth is stronger than expected. As discussed in 
Haskel (2021), there are various scenarios for how the labour market might develop. It could remain tighter than 
in the MPC’s central projection if the expected softening in labour demand does not occur, job churn continues at 
high levels, or recruitment difficulties persist. 


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Section 3: In focus – Wages and inflation   42
…or if elevated consumer price inflation leads to additional upward pressure on wages. 
There is a risk that elevated levels of inflation and the squeeze on real pay growth lead to more sustained pressure 
on nominal wages than incorporated in the central projection. That said, the expected decline in inflation over the 
forecast period should ease those pressures. And the structural characteristics of the UK labour market may also 
mitigate this risk: worker bargaining strength has generally declined over time as unionisation has fallen 
(Abel et al (2018)). 
If stronger growth in labour costs is not matched by increases in productivity, this would put upward pressure on 
inflation.
If higher labour costs are not matched by increases in productivity, this would put upward pressure on inflation. There 
is evidence to suggest that firms have already begun to pass on some of the increase in labour costs to consumer 
prices. In the Agents’ pay survey, around 20% of respondents reported that they had already increased prices to reflect 
at least some of the recent pay pressures (Chart 3.12). 
There is also evidence suggesting that firms will continue to pass through higher labour costs over the next 
12 months. In the Agents’ pay survey, respondents expected total labour costs to be 8% higher, on average, in 
2022 than in 2021. Many respondents expected to increase their prices over the next 12 months due to current 
wage pressures (Chart 3.12). There was some differentiation across sectors, however. Pass-through was expected to 
be stronger in business services and manufacturing, where almost half of respondents expected to fully pass through 
higher wage pressures. In contrast, just over half of respondents in consumer-facing firms expected not to be able to 
pass through any of their wage costs to prices. 
Chart 3.11: The labour share was a little above its 
longer-term average in 2021 H1
Labour share of income(a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations. 
(a)	 Latest data point is 2021 Q2.
Chart 3.12: Many firms expect to pass through at least 
some of the increase in wage costs to prices
Expected pass-through of higher wages to prices(a)
(a)	 Taken from responses to the Agents’ survey on pay and costs. Question: ‘To what extent are 
current wage pressures resulting in an increase in your prices?’. Firms were able to select more 
than one option. Answers may not add up to 100% due to non-responses. 


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022   Annex Other forecasters’ expectations   43
Annex: Other forecasters’ expectations
This annex reports the results of the Bank’s most recent survey of external forecasters. Expectations for the near term 
are summarised in Chart A, with those for further out shown in Chart B.(1) 
On average, external forecasters expected quarterly GDP growth to be 0.6% in 2022 Q1 (Chart A). External forecasts 
for the unemployment rate ranged from 4.0% to 4.7%, but most forecasts were towards the bottom of that 
distribution. The average unemployment rate forecast was 4.2%, higher than the MPC’s modal projection of 3.8%. 
CPI inflation was expected to be 5.2% in 2022 Q1, lower than the MPC’s projection of 5.7%.
Chart A: On average, external forecasters expect GDP to rise by 0.6% in 2022 Q1, the unemployment rate to be 4.2%, and 
CPI inflation to be 5.2%
Other forecasters’ central projections for GDP, the unemployment rate and CPI inflation in 2022 Q1(a)
(a)	 One outlier has been removed from the reported results for GDP. 
On average, respondents expected GDP growth of 2.5% in the four quarters to 2023 Q1 (left panel, Chart B). 
Four-quarter GDP growth is then expected to be 1.6% in 2024 Q1 and 2025 Q1. These projections are higher than the 
MPC’s modal projection. External forecasters expect the unemployment rate to rise by less than in the MPC’s modal 
projection over the next three years (middle panel, Chart B). CPI inflation is expected to fall to 3.1% in 2023 Q1, a 
faster decline than in the MPC’s projection (right panel, Chart B). Respondents expected inflation to be close to the 
MPC’s 2% target in 2024 Q1 and 2025 Q1.
(1)	 For detailed distributions, see ‘Monetary Policy Report chart slides and data – February 2022’ link at Monetary Policy Report – February 2022. External expectations for 
monetary policy are now covered in the Market Participants Survey.
Chart B: At the three-year horizon, external forecasters expect four-quarter GDP growth to be 1.6%, the unemployment rate 
to be 4.2%, and inflation to be in line with the MPC’s 2% target
Projections for GDP, the unemployment rate and CPI inflation


	
Monetary Policy Report February 2022  Glossary and other information   44
Glossary and other information
Glossary of selected data and instruments
AWE – average weekly earnings.
CPI – consumer prices index.
CPI inflation – inflation measured by the consumer 
prices index.
CPIH – consumer prices index including 
owner-occupiers’ housing costs.
DMP – Decision Maker Panel.
GDP – gross domestic product.
HICP – harmonised index of consumer prices.
LFS – Labour Force Survey.
PCE – personal consumption expenditure.
PMI – purchasing managers’ index.
RPI – retail prices index.
RPI inflation – inflation measured by the retail prices 
index.
Abbreviations
CBI – Confederation of British Industry.
CIPS – Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply.
EC – European Commission.
ECB – European Central Bank.
EONIA – euro overnight index average.
EME – emerging market economy.
EU – European Union.
FISIM – Financial Intermediation Services Indirectly 
Measured.
FOMC – Federal Open Market Committee.
FTSE – Financial Times Stock Exchange.
G7 – Canada, France, Germany, Italy, Japan,
the United Kingdom and the United States.
GfK – Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung, Great Britain 
Ltd.
HMRC – Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs.
HR1 form – Advance Notification of Redundancies 
form.
IMF – International Monetary Fund.
IT – information technology.
LTV – loan to value.
MPC – Monetary Policy Committee.
MTIC – missing trader intra-community.
OECD – Organisation for Economic Co-operation and 
Development.
NHS – National Health Service.
Ofgem – Office of Gas and Electricity Markets. 
ONS – Office for National Statistics.
ONS BICS – Office for National Statistics Business 
Insights and Conditions Survey.
PAYE – Pay As You Earn.
PPP – purchasing power parity.
REC – Recruitment and Employment Confederation.
S&P – Standard & Poor’s.
VAT – Value Added Tax.
WEO – IMF World Economic Outlook.
Symbols and conventions
Except where otherwise stated, the source of the data 
used in charts and tables is the Bank of England or the 
Office for National Statistics (ONS) and all data, apart 
from financial markets data and results from the 
Decision Maker Panel (DMP) Survey, are seasonally 
adjusted.
n.a. = not available.
Because of rounding, the sum of the separate items 
may sometimes differ from the total shown.
On the horizontal axes of graphs, larger ticks denote 
the first observation within the relevant period, eg data 
for the first quarter of the year.
