BANK: BOE
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: Monetary Policy Report - August 2022
DATE: 01/06/2022
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/monetary-policy-report/2022/august/monetary-policy-report-august-2022.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Bank of England
Monetary Policy Report 
Monetary Policy Committee  
August 2022


Monetary policy at the Bank of England 
The objectives of monetary policy 
The Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) sets monetary policy to keep inflation low and 
stable, which supports growth and jobs. Subject to maintaining price stability, the MPC is also 
required to support the Government’s economic policy. 
The Government has set the MPC a target for the 12-month increase in the Consumer Prices 
Index of 2%. 
The 2% inflation target is symmetric and applies at all times. 
The MPC’s remit recognises, however, that the actual inflation rate will depart from its target 
as a result of shocks and disturbances, and that attempts to keep inflation at target in these 
circumstances may cause undesirable volatility in output. In exceptional circumstances, the 
appropriate horizon for returning inflation to target can vary. The MPC will communicate how 
and when it intends to return inflation to the target. 
The instruments of monetary policy 
The MPC currently uses two main monetary policy tools. First, we set the interest rate that 
banks and building societies earn on deposits, or ‘reserves’, placed with the Bank of England 
– this is Bank Rate. Second, we can buy government and corporate bonds, financed by the
issuance of central bank reserves – this is asset purchases or quantitative easing.
The Monetary Policy Report 
The MPC is committed to clear, transparent communication. The Monetary Policy Report 
(MPR) is a key part of that. It allows the MPC to share its thinking and explain the reasons for 
its decisions. 
The Report is produced quarterly by Bank staff under the guidance of the members of the 
MPC.  
This Report has been prepared and published by the Bank of England in accordance with 
section 18 of the Bank of England Act 1998. 
Bank of England  
Page 1


The Monetary Policy Committee 
•
Andrew Bailey, Chair
•
Ben Broadbent
•
Jon Cunliffe
•
Jonathan Haskel
•
Catherine L Mann
•
Huw Pill
•
Dave Ramsden
•
Michael Saunders
•
Silvana Tenreyro
PowerPoint™ versions of the Monetary Policy Report charts and Excel spreadsheets of the 
data underlying most of them are available at www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetary-policy-
report/2022/august-2022. 
© Bank of England 2022 
ISSN 2633-7819 
Bank of England  
Page 2


Contents 
Monetary Policy Summary 
4 
1: The economic outlook 
7 
  1.1: The conditioning assumptions underlying the MPC’s baseline projections 
10 
  1.2: Key judgements and risks 
12 
  1.3: Comparison of the baseline projections with the May Report forecasts 
26 
Box A: Key risks around the MPC’s baseline projections 
31 
Box B: Monetary policy since the May 2022 Report 
35 
2: Current economic conditions 
37 
  2.1: Global developments and financial conditions 
39 
  2.2: Domestic activity 
48 
  2.3: Costs and prices 
54 
Box C: Agents’ update on business conditions 
63 
Box D: How have the interest rates facing households and firms responded to the 
rise in Bank Rate? 
68 
Box E: How does consumer price inflation compare across countries?  
73 
3: In focus – Why is the labour market so tight? 
80 
  3.1: How has the labour market evolved since the pandemic? 
81 
  3.2: What is driving tightness in the labour market? 
85 
  3.3: The outlook for the labour market 
93 
Annex: Other forecasters’ expectations 
96 
Glossary and other information 
98 
 
 
Bank of England  
Page 3


Monetary Policy Summary
The Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) sets monetary policy to meet
the 2% inflation target, and in a way that helps to sustain growth and employment. At its
meeting ending on 3 August 2022, the MPC voted by a majority of 8–1 to increase Bank
Rate by 0.5 percentage points, to 1.75%. One member preferred to increase Bank Rate
by 0.25 percentage points, to 1.5%.
Inflationary pressures in the United Kingdom and the rest of Europe have intensified
significantly since the May Monetary Policy Report and the MPC’s previous meeting. That
largely reflects a near doubling in wholesale gas prices since May, owing to Russia’s
restriction of gas supplies to Europe and the risk of further curbs. As this feeds through to
retail energy prices, it will exacerbate the fall in real incomes for UK households and
further increase UK CPI inflation in the near term. CPI inflation is expected to rise more
than forecast in the May Report, from 9.4% in June to just over 13% in 2022 Q4, and to
remain at very elevated levels throughout much of 2023, before falling to the 2% target
two years ahead.
GDP growth in the United Kingdom is slowing. The latest rise in gas prices has led to
another significant deterioration in the outlook for activity in the United Kingdom and the
rest of Europe. The United Kingdom is now projected to enter recession from the fourth
quarter of this year. Real household post-tax income is projected to fall sharply in 2022
and 2023, while consumption growth turns negative.
Domestic inflationary pressures are projected to remain strong over the first half of the
forecast period. Firms generally report that they expect to increase their selling prices
markedly, reflecting the sharp rises in their costs. The labour market has remained tight,
with the unemployment rate at 3.8% in the three months to May and vacancies at
historically high levels. As a result, and consistent with the latest Agents’ survey,
underlying nominal wage growth is expected to be higher than in the May Report over the
first half of the forecast period.
Inflationary pressures are nevertheless expected to dissipate over time. Global commodity
prices are assumed to rise no further, and tradable goods price inflation is expected to fall
back, the first signs of which may already be evident. Although the labour market may
loosen only slowly in response to falling demand, unemployment is expected to rise from
2023. Domestic inflationary pressures are therefore expected to subside in the second
Bank of England  
Page 4


half of the forecast period, as the increasing degree of economic slack and lower headline
inflation reduce the pressure on wage growth. Monetary policy is also acting to ensure
that longer-term inflation expectations are anchored at the 2% target.
The risks around the MPC’s projections from both external and domestic factors are
exceptionally large at present. There is a range of plausible paths for the economy, which
have CPI inflation and medium-term activity significantly higher or lower than in the
baseline projections in the August Monetary Policy Report. As a result, in coming to its
assessment of the outlook and its implications for monetary policy, the Committee is
currently putting less weight on the implications of any single set of conditioning
assumptions and projections.
The August Report contains several projections for GDP, unemployment and inflation: a
baseline conditioned on the MPC’s current convention for wholesale energy prices to
remain constant beyond the six-month point; an alternative projection in which energy
prices follow their downward-sloping futures curves throughout the forecast period; and a
scenario which explores the implications of greater persistence in domestic price setting
than in the baseline. These are all conditioned on announced Government fiscal policies,
including the Cost of Living Support package announced in May. There are significant
differences between these projections in the latter half of the forecast period. However, all
show very high near-term inflation, a fall in GDP over the next year and a marked decline
in inflation thereafter.
The MPC’s remit is clear that the inflation target applies at all times, reflecting the primacy
of price stability in the UK monetary policy framework. The framework recognises that
there will be occasions when inflation will depart from the target as a result of shocks and
disturbances. The economy has continued to be subject to a succession of very large
shocks, which will inevitably lead to volatility in output. Monetary policy will ensure that, as
the adjustment to these shocks occurs, CPI inflation will return to the 2% target
sustainably in the medium term.
The labour market remains tight, and domestic cost and price pressures are elevated.
There is a risk that a longer period of externally generated price inflation will lead to more
enduring domestic price and wage pressures. In view of these considerations, the
Committee voted to increase Bank Rate by 0.5 percentage points, to 1.75%, at this
meeting.
The MPC will take the actions necessary to return inflation to the 2% target sustainably in
the medium term, in line with its remit. Policy is not on a pre-set path. The Committee will,
as always, consider and decide the appropriate level of Bank Rate at each meeting. The
Bank of England  
Page 5


scale, pace and timing of any further changes in Bank Rate will reflect the Committee’s
assessment of the economic outlook and inflationary pressures. The Committee will be
particularly alert to indications of more persistent inflationary pressures, and will if
necessary act forcefully in response.
In the minutes of its May 2022 meeting, the Committee asked Bank staff to work on a
strategy for selling UK government bonds (gilts) held in the Asset Purchase Facility and
committed to providing an update at its August meeting. Based on this analysis, the
Committee is provisionally minded to commence gilt sales shortly after its September
meeting, subject to economic and market conditions being judged appropriate and to a
confirmatory vote at that meeting.
Bank of England  
Page 6


1: The economic outlook
Near-term inflationary pressures in the UK and the rest of Europe have intensified
significantly since the May Report. That reflects a near doubling in wholesale gas
prices, due to Russia’s restrictions on its supply of gas to Europe and the risk of
further curbs. This latest rise in gas prices, and to a lesser extent, a tightening in
financial conditions, have led to another significant deterioration in the outlook for
world activity, with economies in Europe, including the UK, particularly severely
affected. The UK is projected to enter recession from 2022 Q4. These
developments have further greatly accentuated the extent to which, in the MPC’s
baseline projection, UK CPI inflation is well above the 2% target over the first 18
months and well below the target in three years’ time (Table 1.A).
In line with the MPC’s conventions, the baseline forecasts and the fan charts around
them are conditioned on: the path of Bank Rate implied by financial markets, which
rises to 3.0% in 2023 Q2, before falling to 2.2% at year three; and wholesale energy
prices following their futures curves for the next six months and then remaining
constant. Such a path for energy prices would be extremely high by historical
standards throughout the three-year forecast period.
The uncertainty around the outlook is exceptionally high, especially for energy
prices. As an alternative to the baseline forecast, Box A sets out a projection in
which energy prices follow their downward-sloping futures curves throughout the
forecast period, though they remain well above their pre-pandemic levels. That
would result in a very different economic outlook in the second half of the forecast
than in the baseline projection. In view of the exceptional level of uncertainty, the
Committee puts more weight than it would normally on such an alternative
projection.
There are also unusually large uncertainties and risks around the outlook for
domestic inflationary pressures. These are also set out in Box A.
CPI inflation is expected to rise further and peak at just over 13% in 2022 Q4. That
is much higher than forecast in May. This overwhelmingly reflects the sharp
increase in gas prices since May, caused by Russia. The changes Ofgem has
announced to the method for updating the household energy price cap are also
expected to push up CPI inflation in the near term, though to a much lesser extent.
Typical annual household fuel bills are projected to rise by around 75% in October
Bank of England  
Page 7


when the price cap is next reset compared with the assumption of an increase of
40% in the May Report. That would mean those bills are around three times higher
than a year earlier.
Though responsible for much less of the rise in headline inflation, domestic
inflationary pressures have also increased and are projected to remain strong in the
near term. Consistent with the latest Agents’ employment and pay survey, nominal
private sector regular wage growth is expected to rise by more than in the May
projection over the first half of the forecast. That reflects the tighter-than-expected
labour market and upward pressure on pay from higher price inflation, as firms seek
to retain and recruit staff. Firms generally report that they expect to increase their
selling prices markedly, following the sharp rises in their costs, to protect their
margins.
Abstracting from temporary factors, underlying UK GDP growth has slowed and the
UK economy is forecast to enter recession later this year. Output is projected to fall
in each quarter from 2022 Q4 to 2023 Q4. Growth thereafter is very weak by
historical standards. The contraction in output and weak growth outlook beyond that
predominantly reflect the significant adverse impact of the sharp rises in global
energy and tradable goods prices on UK household real incomes.
In the alternative projection in which energy prices follow their downward-sloping
futures curves throughout the forecast period, the UK economy still enters
recession, but activity is stronger in the second half of the forecast, as the
pressures on real incomes ease to a greater extent (Table 1.B). The peak-to-trough
falls in output in the baseline and alternative projections are 2¼% and 1½%
respectively.
Given continued elevated recruitment difficulties due to the fall in the labour force
since the start of the pandemic and strong labour demand, firms are forecast to
respond initially to the weakness in demand by using their existing inputs less
intensively. So although economic slack emerges in 2022 Q4, the labour market is
expected to remain tight over the next year. Unemployment only starts to rise above
its current level from mid-2023, but it reaches 6¼% at the end of the forecast
period, with slack of 3¾% of potential GDP (Table 1.A).
In the alternative projection in which energy prices follow their downward-sloping
futures curves throughout the forecast period, unemployment and economic slack
do not rise by as much as in the baseline projection, given the less weak path of
activity (Table 1.B).
Bank of England  
Page 8


In the baseline forecast, after the peak in 2022 Q4, CPI inflation is projected to fall
to 9.5% in a year’s time, as the impact of the assumed stabilisation of global energy
prices, and falls in tradable goods prices, outweigh rising domestic pressures.
Inflation then falls sharply to the 2% target in two years’ time, as external influences
continue to wane and domestic factors fade. CPI inflation falls to 0.8%, well below
the target, in three years’ time reflecting a further weakening in domestic pressures.
In the alternative projection in which energy prices follow their downward-sloping
futures curves throughout the forecast period, CPI inflation is well below the
baseline projection at years two and three (Table 1.B).
Table 1.A: Forecast summary of the MPC’s baseline projections (a) (b)
GDP (c)
2.3 (2.9)
-2.1 (-0.8)
0.0 (0.4)
0.4
CPI inflation (d)
9.9 (9.5)
9.5 (5.9)
2.0 (1.8)
0.8
LFS unemployment rate
3.7 (3.5)
4.4 (4.1)
5.5 (4.8)
6.3
Excess supply/Excess demand (e)
+¾ (+¼)
-2¼ (-1½)
-3¼ (-2)
-3¾
Bank Rate (f)
1.6 (1.5)
3.0 (2.6)
2.5 (2.3)
2.2
2022 Q3
2023 Q3
2024 Q3
2025 Q3
(a) Modal projections for GDP, CPI inflation, LFS unemployment and excess supply/excess demand. Figures in
parentheses show the corresponding projections in the May 2022 Monetary Policy Report.
(b) Unless otherwise stated, the projections shown in this section are conditioned on: Bank Rate following a path implied
by market yields; the Term Funding Scheme and Term Funding Scheme with additional incentives for Small and
Medium-sized Enterprises; the Recommendations of the Financial Policy Committee and the current regulatory plans of
the Prudential Regulation Authority; the Office for Budget Responsibility’s assessment of the Government’s tax and
spending plans as set out in the March 2022 Economic and Fiscal Outlook and the May Cost of Living Support package;
commodity prices following market paths for six months, then held flat; the sterling exchange rate remaining broadly flat;
and the prevailing prices of a broad range of other assets, which embody market expectations of the future stocks of
purchased gilts and corporate bonds. The main assumptions are set out in the ‘Download the chart slides and data –
August 2022’.
(c) Four-quarter growth in real GDP.
(d) Four-quarter inflation rate.
(e) Per cent of potential GDP. A negative figure implies output is below potential and a positive that it is above.
(f) Per cent. The path for Bank Rate implied by forward market interest rates. The curves are based on overnight index
swap rates.
Bank of England  
Page 9


Table 1.B: Forecast summary of the alternative projection in which energy prices
follow their futures curves throughout the forecast period (a)
GDP (b)
2.3 (2.3)
-1.5 (-2.1)
0.6 (0.0)
0.8 (0.4)
CPI inflation (c)
9.9 (9.9)
8.4 (9.5)
0.9 (2.0)
0.3 (0.8)
LFS unemployment rate
3.7 (3.7)
4.0 (4.4)
4.6 (5.5)
5.1 (6.3)
Excess supply/Excess demand (d)
+¾ (+¾)
-1¾ (-2¼)
-2¼ (-3¼)
-2½ (-3¾)
Bank Rate (e)
1.6 (1.6)
3.0 (3.0)
2.5 (2.5)
2.2 (2.2)
1.1: The conditioning assumptions underlying the MPC’s baseline
projections
In line with the Committee’s conventions, the baseline projections are conditioned on:
2022 Q3
2023 Q3
2024 Q3
2025 Q3
(a) Figures in parentheses show the corresponding projections from the MPC’s baseline forecast.
(b) Four-quarter growth in real GDP.
(c) Four-quarter inflation rate.
(d) Per cent of potential GDP. A negative figure implies output is below potential and a positive that it is above.
(e) Per cent. The path for Bank Rate implied by forward market interest rates. The curves are based on overnight index
swap rates.
The paths for policy rates implied by financial markets. Since the May Report, interest
rates have increased materially in a number of advanced economies (Chart 2.7). In the
UK, the market-implied path for Bank Rate, as captured in the 15-day average of
forward interest rates to 26 July, was consistent with Bank Rate reaching 3.0% in 2023
Q2, 50 basis points higher than in May, before falling back to 2.2% by the end of the
projection.
A broadly flat path for the sterling effective exchange rate that is around 3% lower than
in May (Table 1.C and Section 2.1).
Fiscal policy evolving in line with announced Government policies to date. The most
recent of these was the May Cost of Living Support package. Bank staff estimate that
this will raise the level of GDP by a peak of around ½% in 2022 Q4 and 2023 Q1 before
fading (Section 2.2). Fiscal policy as a whole tightens over the projection.
Wholesale energy prices following their respective futures curves for the first six months
of the projection and then remaining constant (Table 1.C). Based on the 15-day
average to 26 July, gas futures prices for end-2022 have nearly doubled since the May
Report (Chart 2.15) and are almost seven times higher than implied by futures curves a
year ago. The recent sharp increases in gas prices are mostly due to Russia’s
Bank of England  
Page 10


restrictions on its supply of gas to Europe and the risk of further curbs. Higher gas
prices have also led to a sharp pickup in wholesale electricity prices, which have almost
trebled relative to a year earlier. Gas prices have continued to be highly volatile and
have risen above the 15-day average recently.
Household energy prices evolving in line with estimates of the Ofgem price cap. Bank
staff estimate that Ofgem will raise its retail energy price cap by around 75% in October,
compared to the assumption of around 40% in the May Report. That would increase the
typical annual household fuel bill from just under £2,000 to around £3,500, three times
higher than a year earlier. That is overwhelmingly due to the very substantial rise in
wholesale gas futures prices since the cap was last reset in April. To a much lesser
extent, it reflects Ofgem’s announced changes to the method for updating the cap,
which were shared with the Bank in advance of publication. These changes include
putting more weight on the most recent sharp increases in wholesale gas prices. The
switch to resetting the cap on a quarterly, rather than semi-annual basis, will only start
to affect the price cap from next year.
Oil prices following their respective futures curves for the first six months of the
projection and then remaining constant. Sterling oil prices have fallen since mid-June,
reflecting the weaker outlook for global activity, but are almost double their level a year
earlier.
Non-energy commodity prices following their respective futures curves for the first six
months and beyond that remaining constant. A wide range of non-energy commodity
prices, for example agricultural commodities and metals, have fallen since the May
Report, partly reflecting the weaker outlook for global activity.
Bank of England  
Page 11


Table 1.C: Conditioning assumptions underlying the MPC’s baseline projections (a)
(b)
Bank Rate
(c)
5.0
0.5
0.1
0.1 (0.1)
2.4 (1.9)
2.9 (2.6)
2.4 (2.2)
Sterling
effective
exchange
rate (d)
100
82
78
82 (82)
79 (81)
78 (81)
78 (81)
Oil prices (e) 39
78
45
79 (79)
97 (97)
93 (97)
93 (97)
Gas prices
(f)
29
53
41
238 (238)
420 (242)
327 (242)
327 (242)
Nominal
government
expenditure
(g)
7½
2¼
11¾
7½ (7½)
3½ (2¾)
2¼ (3)
2½ (2½)
1.2: Key judgements and risks
Key judgement 1: in the baseline forecast, persistently high gas and other
commodity prices continue to put upward pressure on global consumer price
inflation and depress global growth in the near term before their effects gradually
dissipate.
Average
1998–07
Average
2010–19
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg Finance L.P., Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR), ONS, Refinitiv Eikon from
LSEG and Bank calculations.
(a) The table shows the projections for financial market prices, wholesale energy prices and government spending
projections that are used as conditioning assumptions for the MPC’s projections for CPI inflation, GDP growth and the
unemployment rate. Figures in parentheses show the corresponding projections in the May 2022 Monetary Policy
Report.
(b) Financial market data are based on averages in the 15 working days to 26 July 2022. Figures show the average level
in Q4 of each year, unless otherwise stated.
(c) Per cent. The path for Bank Rate implied by forward market interest rates. The curves are based on overnight index
swap rates.
(d) Index: January 2005 = 100. The convention is that the sterling exchange rate follows a path that is half way between
the starting level of the sterling ERI and a path implied by interest rate differentials.
(e) Dollars per barrel. Projection based on monthly Brent futures prices for two quarters, then held flat.
(f) Pence per therm. Projection based on monthly natural gas futures prices for two quarters, then held flat.
(g) Annual average growth rate. Nominal general government consumption and investment. Projections are based on
the OBR’s March 2022 Economic and Fiscal Outlook and incorporate the May Cost of Living Support package. Historical
data based on NMRP+D7QK.
Bank of England  
Page 12


Inflationary pressures in the UK and the rest of Europe have intensified significantly
overall since the May Report, despite the recent falls in oil and non-energy commodity
prices, and growth prospects have weakened materially. This reflects the further very
sharp increase in wholesale gas prices, due to Russia’s restrictions on its supply of gas to
Europe and the risk of further curbs (Section 1.1).
Sustained disruption to global supply chains, and the shift in global demand towards
durable goods and away from services, have continued to put significant upward pressure
on tradable goods prices. Bank staff estimate that on a UK-weighted basis, four-quarter
world export price inflation, including energy, rose to 16% in 2022 Q2. This in turn has
boosted consumer price inflation substantially in many countries.
But four-quarter world export price inflation is projected to fall sharply over the next year
and turn negative in mid-2023. This is largely due to the recent stabilisation of many
commodity prices. It also reflects the Committee’s expectations that global tradable goods
prices will start to fall back. That is due to two main factors. The first is that supply chain
disruption is assumed to start to ease from Q4 this year, consistent with intelligence from
the Bank’s Agents (Box C). Second, global demand is expected to continue to shift away
from durable goods to services, particularly in the US.
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine is significantly adversely affecting world activity. The recent
tightening in financial conditions also weighs on global activity over the forecast period,
though to a much lesser extent (Section 2.1). As a result, in the MPC’s baseline forecast,
annual UK-weighted world GDP growth is projected to slow from 5½% in 2021 to 2½% in
2022, 1% in 2023 and 1½% in 2024, below pre-pandemic rates (Table 1.E). This weighs
materially on the demand for UK exports, in addition to the adverse direct impact on UK
real incomes and spending from higher global energy and tradable goods prices.
An upside risk to world prices is that the disruption to the supply of gas from Russia to
Europe is even greater than embodied in the Committee’s assumed path for gas prices in
the baseline forecast.
An associated risk is that the available supply of other commodities, for example
agricultural products and tradable goods, is hampered by more than assumed. That could
stem from developments around Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, or if new restrictions are
introduced to contain Covid.
There are considerable risks around the projections for global inflation and
activity, which largely depend on how current geopolitical tensions evolve.
Bank of England  
Page 13


Higher commodity and tradable goods prices would put more upward pressure on global
consumer price inflation and further restrain global activity. The latter would be
exacerbated if accompanied by a further tightening in global financial conditions.
A risk not explicitly captured by the baseline projection for CPI inflation is that the weight
of energy prices in the CPI basket is likely to rise over the forecast period, given the large
increase in the share of energy spending over the past year. There is considerable
uncertainty around how much the weight of energy may rise when the weights are next
updated by the ONS in 2023 Q1, how much the weights of the other components of the
CPI basket may change, and the overall impact these will have on CPI inflation. There are
also uncertainties over how the ONS will treat some of the Government’s energy support
measures in the calculation of the CPI, which could pose a downside risk. Overall, the
Committee judges that there are upside risks to the CPI projection in the year from 2023
Q1. This risk fades thereafter.
There are also downside risks to world prices. One is that the supply of agricultural
commodities is higher than expected following the recent agreement between Ukraine and
Russia to resume Ukraine’s grain exports.
Disruption to the supply of commodities and tradable goods could also ease earlier and by
a greater extent than assumed, for example if the geopolitical tensions are resolved more
quickly or it is easier to substitute away from the affected commodities and tradable
goods. This would be consistent with the recent falls in some indicators of supply chain
disruption, such as delivery times and some shipping rates, persisting or falling further
(Section 2.1).
Box A sets out an alternative projection in which energy prices follow their downward-
sloping futures curves throughout the forecast period. In view of the exceptional level of
uncertainty, the Committee puts more weight than it normally would on such an alternative
projection.
Lower commodity and tradable goods prices would put downward pressure on global
consumer price inflation and boost global activity.
Key judgement 2: given the sharp decline in household real incomes, consumer
spending falls over the next year and the UK economy enters recession.
Consumption falls by less than income, however, as households, in aggregate,
reduce their saving. GDP growth is weak thereafter, even though the pressures on
real incomes ease somewhat.
Bank of England  
Page 14


Bank staff estimate that underlying quarterly UK GDP growth slowed from 0.9% in 2022
Q1 to 0.5% in 2022 Q2. It is expected to slow further to 0.2% in Q3. This reflects the
adverse impact of the very sharp increases in energy, non-energy commodities and
tradable goods prices on UK household real incomes and spending.
These pressures will intensify in October when the very large increases in wholesale
energy prices feed through to households following the reset of the Ofgem price cap
(Section 1.1). As a result, household real incomes are projected to fall further and sharply,
and GDP is expected to decline by nearly 1% in 2022 Q4 (Chart 1.1). GDP is forecast to
fall further in the subsequent four quarters, as real incomes continue to decline.
In the alternative projection in which energy prices follow their downward-sloping futures
curves throughout the forecast period, the UK economy still enters recession, but activity
is stronger in the second half of the forecast, as the pressures on real incomes ease to a
greater extent. The peak-to-trough falls in output in the baseline and alternative
projections are 2¼% and 1½% respectively.
In the baseline projection, calendar year GDP growth is -1½% in 2023 and -¼% in 2024
(Table 1.E). Four-quarter GDP growth picks up to around ½% by the end of the projection
(Chart 1.2), as the pressures on household incomes ease somewhat, although GDP
growth is well below pre-pandemic rates.
Bank of England  
Page 15


Chart 1.1: GDP projection based on market interest rate expectations, other policy
measures as announced
The fan charts depict the probability of various outcomes for GDP (in Chart 1.1) and GDP growth (in Chart 1.2). They
have been conditioned on the assumptions in Table 1.A footnote (b). To the left of the shaded area, the distribution
reflects uncertainty around revisions to the data over the past. To the right of the shaded area, the distribution reflects
uncertainty over the evolution of GDP (in Chart 1.1) and GDP growth (in Chart 1.2) in the future. If economic
circumstances identical to today’s were to prevail on 100 occasions, the MPC’s best collective judgement is that the
mature estimate of GDP (in Chart 1.1) or GDP growth (in Chart 1.2) would lie within the darkest central band on only 30
of those occasions. The fan chart is constructed so that outturns are also expected to lie within each pair of the lighter
aqua areas on 30 occasions. In any particular quarter of the forecast period, GDP or GDP growth is therefore expected
to lie somewhere within the fan on 90 out of 100 occasions. And on the remaining 10 out of 100 occasions GDP or GDP
growth can fall anywhere outside the aqua area of the fan chart. Over the forecast period, this has been depicted by the
grey background. See the box on page 39 of the November 2007 Inflation Report for a fuller description of the fan chart
and what it represents.
Bank of England  
Page 16


Real post-tax household income is projected to fall by 1½% in 2022 (Table 1.E), despite
the near-term support from fiscal policy (Section 2.2) and the resilience of the labour
market (Section 3). Thereafter, it is projected to fall by 2¼% in 2023 before rising by ¾%
in 2024.
The Committee continues to assume that some households absorb part of the fall in their
real incomes by saving less of their current income or by spending some of their stock of
savings. Consistent with this, a quarter of respondents to a recent ONS survey, who are
facing a rise in the cost of living, expect to use their savings to support their consumption
(Section 2.2). As a result, consumption falls by a little less than household income over
the next 18 months. Calendar year household spending growth is -¾% in 2023 before
picking up to 1% in 2024. The household saving rate is therefore forecast to decline from
5% in 2022 Q3 to 3½% at the end of next year, lower than its average in the decade
preceding the pandemic of 7½% (Table 1.E). It then rises to 4¾% by the end of the
projection as households increase their precautionary saving given the projected increase
in unemployment (Key judgement 3).
Business investment growth picks up in the near term, as some spending is expected to
be brought forward in response to the Government’s capital allowance super-deduction.
This masks more underlying weakness, as capital spending is held back over the
Chart 1.2: GDP growth projection based on market interest rate expectations, other
policy measures as announced
See footnote for Chart 1.1.
Bank of England  
Page 17


projection by elevated uncertainty, the weakness in overall demand, the sharp increases
in firms’ costs, and the rising path for Bank Rate in the MPC’s conditioning assumption.
Business investment growth is negative in years two and three of the forecast period.
Lower UK demand growth over the projection also reflects the slowing in the world
economy (Key judgement 1) and the tightening in fiscal and monetary policy, which both
evolve in line with their conditioning assumptions (Section 1.1).
In projections conditioned on the alternative assumption of constant interest rates at
1.75%, activity is stronger than in the MPC’s forecasts conditioned on market rates. The
UK economy still enters recession, however, as the main driver of the contraction in output
is the sharp fall in real incomes.
It is notable that measures of business sentiment, although weaker than at the time of the
May Report, remain consistent with activity continuing to grow. This might suggest greater
momentum in demand than the MPC is assuming.
Consumer spending could be stronger than projected if the labour market is more resilient
(Key judgement 3) or energy prices are lower than assumed in the Committee’s baseline
projection (Box A). Both might encourage households to spend more of the additional
savings they have accumulated, in aggregate, during the pandemic.
Demand growth could slow by more than expected if households cut back their spending
more aggressively in the face of the very significant falls in their real incomes. The stock
of savings accumulated by households, in aggregate, during the pandemic should support
some households’ ability to smooth consumption temporarily as real incomes decline. But
the rise in savings during the pandemic has not occurred evenly – it is more marked
among higher-income households – so not everyone may be in a position to do this.
Energy and food bills form a larger share of lower-income households’ spending, so their
ability to use savings to support their consumption may be limited.
In addition, and even for higher-income households, the deterioration in the economic
outlook may increase households’ uncertainty about the future by more than assumed,
leading them to increase their precautionary saving and lower their spending further.
Higher uncertainty would also tend to lower capital spending by firms.
Key judgement 3: given elevated recruitment difficulties and strong labour demand,
firms respond initially to the weakness in spending by using their existing inputs
less intensively. So although economic slack emerges in 2022 Q4, the labour
The risks around the projection for GDP growth in the baseline projection are
judged to be balanced.
Bank of England  
Page 18


market remains tight over the next year and unemployment only starts to rise above
its current level in mid-2023. It reaches 6¼% at the end of the forecast period, with
slack building to 3¾% of potential GDP.
Most indicators suggest that there is currently a margin of excess demand across the
economy as a whole (Table 1.A). Many surveys suggest above-average levels of capacity
utilisation. The labour market is tight, with the unemployment rate of 3.8% in the three
months to May. That is an historically low level and below the MPC’s assessment of the
medium-term equilibrium rate of unemployment of just above 4%. Firms continue to report
significant recruitment difficulties and vacancies remain very high (Section 3). The
vacancy to unemployment ratio, a measure of labour market tightness, remains elevated,
with the stock of vacancies now broadly equal to the stock of unemployed people.
The tightness of the labour market partly reflects the fall in the labour force since the start
of the pandemic, and the larger decline relative to its pre-Covid trend, which are in part
due to an increase in the number of people with long-term health conditions. The tight
labour market also reflects strong labour demand, which is above pre-pandemic levels
(Section 3).
The Committee judges that the labour market is currently tighter than previously thought.
In particular, it has assumed that the ratio of vacancies to unemployment is giving a better
real-time indication of the balance between the demand for and supply of labour than the
gap between unemployment and the medium-term equilibrium rate of unemployment
(Section 3). The ratio of vacancies to unemployment implies a greater degree of labour
market tightness and more upward pressure on wage growth.
Given the intensity of recruitment difficulties amid strong labour demand, firms are
expected to respond initially to the weakness in demand by using their existing inputs less
intensively. So although economic slack begins to emerge in 2022 Q4, the labour market
is expected to remain tight over the next year. This is consistent with the Agents’ latest
employment and pay survey.
Unemployment rises from its current level from mid-2023 to 6¼% at the end of the
forecast period (Chart 1.3), given the very weak outlook for demand growth. Economic
slack rises to 3¾% of potential GDP (Table 1.A).
Bank of England  
Page 19


In the alternative projection in which energy prices follow their downward-sloping futures
curves throughout the forecast period, unemployment and economic slack do not rise by
as much as in the baseline projection, given the less weak path of activity (Table 1.B).In
projections conditioned on the alternative assumption of constant interest rates at 1.75%,
unemployment rises by around ¾ percentage point less than in the MPC’s forecast
conditional on market rates.
The labour market may remain tighter for longer than assumed for a number of reasons
(Section 3). If the current tightness in the labour market reflects much more labour being
demanded now than is available, there may be room for labour demand to fall for longer
before leading to a rise in unemployment. Labour hoarding as demand softens would also
prolong the tightness in the labour market. Moreover, the Agents’ employment and pay
Chart 1.3: Unemployment projection based on market interest rate expectations,
other policy measures as announced
The fan chart depicts the probability of various outcomes for LFS unemployment. It has been conditioned on the
assumptions in Table 1.A footnote (b). The coloured bands have the same interpretation as in Charts 1.1 and 1.2, and
portray 90% of the probability distribution. The calibration of this fan chart takes account of the likely path dependency of
the economy, where, for example, it is judged that shocks to unemployment in one quarter will continue to have some
effect on unemployment in successive quarters. The fan begins in 2022 Q2, a quarter earlier than for CPI inflation. That
is because Q2 is a staff projection for the unemployment rate, based in part on data for April and May. The
unemployment rate was 3.8% in the three months to May, and is projected to be 3.8% in Q2 as a whole. A significant
proportion of this distribution lies below Bank staff’s current estimate of the long-term equilibrium unemployment rate.
There is therefore uncertainty about the precise calibration of this fan chart.
The risks around unemployment in the baseline projection are judged to be
balanced.
Bank of England  
Page 20


survey suggests that firms expect employment growth over the next year to be similar to
that over the past 12 months. If that transpired, other things equal, the unemployment rate
would fall and the labour market would tighten further.
Alternatively, more of the fall in participation rates during the pandemic could prove to be
persistent. For example, the share of people with long-term health conditions and the
likelihood they participate in the labour market may not return to previous trends or people
may continue to retire earlier than expected.
Another risk is that the acute recruitment difficulties firms are facing reflect some frictions
in the matching of workers and jobs and have been accompanied by a rise in the medium-
term equilibrium rate of unemployment.
The labour market could also loosen more rapidly than assumed. Some recruiters have
started to report that greater economic uncertainty is causing some firms to delay hiring
decisions. Staff placements in the June KPMG/REC UK Report on Jobs fell back notably,
although candidate shortages were also reported to be a factor behind that. The Covid-
related factors weighing on participation could also unwind faster than assumed in the
baseline projections if, for example, the very recent decline in inactivity continues at the
same pace over the coming months. Labour supply growth could also be affected by how
households respond to the fall in their real incomes. Households may seek to boost their
real incomes through working more, which could involve those currently inactive re-
entering the labour market or those already in the labour force seeking to work longer
hours.
Key judgement 4: domestic price pressures remain strong over the first half of the
forecast, as nominal wage growth strengthens and many companies are able to
protect their margins. But the building degree of economic slack moderates these
forces and inflation expectations adjust downwards quickly as external pressures
abate and inflation itself begins to fall. Domestic pressures therefore fade and,
conditioned on the market yield curve, inflation is around the 2% target in two
years’ time and well below it in three years.
CPI inflation is expected to rise further and peak at just over 13% in 2022 Q4 (Chart 1.4).
That is 3 percentage points higher than forecast in the May Report. This overwhelmingly
reflects the sharp increase in gas futures prices since May, due to Russia restricting the
supply of gas to Europe and the risk of further curbs. To a lesser extent, it reflects the
changes Ofgem have announced to their method for updating the household energy price
cap (Section 1.1).
Bank of England  
Page 21


Table 1.D: The quarterly forecast for CPI inflation in the MPC’s baseline scenario (a)
CPI inflation 9.9
13.1
12.6
10.8
9.5
5.5
CPI inflation 4.3
2.6
2.0
1.4
1.2
0.9
0.8
Chart 1.4: CPI inflation projection based on market interest rate expectations, other
policy measures as announced
The fan chart depicts the probability of various outcomes for CPI inflation in the future. It has been conditioned on the
assumptions in Table 1.A footnote (b). If economic circumstances identical to today’s were to prevail on 100 occasions,
the MPC’s best collective judgement is that inflation in any particular quarter would lie within the darkest central band on
only 30 of those occasions. The fan chart is constructed so that outturns of inflation are also expected to lie within each
pair of the lighter orange areas on 30 occasions. In any particular quarter of the forecast period, inflation is therefore
expected to lie somewhere within the fans on 90 out of 100 occasions. And on the remaining 10 out of 100 occasions
inflation can fall anywhere outside the orange area of the fan chart. Over the forecast period, this has been depicted by
the grey background. See the box on pages 48–49 of the May 2002 Inflation Report for a fuller description of the fan
chart and what it represents.
2022
2023
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
2024
2025
Q1
Q2
Q3
Q4
Q1
Q2
Q3
(a) Four-quarter inflation rate.
Bank of England  
Page 22


The direct contribution of energy prices to CPI inflation alone is expected to peak at 6½
percentage points in 2022 Q4 (Chart 1.5). That is substantially higher than in the
Committee’s forecasts over the past year, given the successive very sharp increases in
global energy prices over this period. Together with higher indirect effects from energy
prices, which can affect both goods and services prices, this accounts for most of the
much higher outlook for CPI inflation over the first half of the forecast since May.
Though responsible for much less of the rise in headline inflation, domestic inflationary
pressures have also increased and are projected to be a little stronger than previously
expected. In particular, it appears that the labour market is currently tighter than the
Committee previously assumed (Key judgement 3). Together with a little more upward
pressure on pay from higher price inflation, nominal private sector regular pay growth
rises by more than in May over the first half of the forecast. This is broadly consistent with
the Agents’ survey on employment and pay, which suggests that firms expect pay
settlements to average 6% over the next year, higher than the equivalent survey set out in
the February Report (Section 2.3). As a result, CPI inflation is a little higher throughout the
projection from this judgement.
Chart 1.5: The direct contribution of energy prices to CPI inflation (a)
(a) Energy prices include fuels and lubricants, electricity, gas and other fuels.
Bank of England  
Page 23


Evidence from the Agents’ contacts and the DMP Survey suggests that firms generally
expect to increase their selling prices markedly, following the sharp rises in their costs,
with many seeking to protect their margins. Partly as a result, CPI services price inflation
is expected to rise further in the near term.
In the baseline projection, after the expected peak in 2022 Q4, the upward pressure on
CPI inflation is expected to dissipate, as global commodity prices are assumed to rise no
further, and tradable goods price inflation falls back. Domestic inflationary pressures
subside given the building significant degree of economic slack and as inflation
expectations are assumed to adjust down quickly as inflation itself falls back.
CPI inflation is projected to fall to 9.5% in a year’s time (Table 1.D) as fading external
factors outweigh rising domestic pressures. Inflation then falls sharply to the 2% target in
two years’ time, when the direct contribution of energy to CPI inflation is projected to have
fallen to zero (Chart 1.5) and domestic factors subside. CPI inflation falls to 0.8% in three
years’ time, well below the target, as domestic pressures weaken further.
In the alternative projection in which energy prices follow their downward-sloping futures
curves throughout the forecast period, CPI inflation would be around 1 percentage point
and ½ percentage point lower at the year two and three points respectively than in the
baseline projection (Table 1.B and Box A). That reflects the contribution from energy
prices to CPI inflation turning negative at those horizons (Chart 1.5).In projections
conditioned on the alternative assumption of constant interest rates at 1.75%, CPI inflation
is projected to be 2.5% and 1.3% in two years’ and three years’ time respectively, ½
percentage point higher than in the Committee’s forecast conditioned on market rates
(Chart 1.6).
Bank of England  
Page 24


There are significant risks around the central projection for CPI inflation from both global
factors, most notably gas prices (Key judgement 1), domestic inflationary pressures, and
the interactions between them (Key judgement 4).
Box A sets out the risks from domestic factors and a scenario in which domestic price
setting is more persistent than in the MPC’s baseline projection. In that scenario, CPI
inflation takes longer to return to the 2% target.
Overall, the Committee judges that the risks around CPI inflation in the baseline projection
are to the upside at year one, given the expected, but highly uncertain, increase in the
weight of energy prices in the CPI basket that is not explicitly captured in the forecast (Key
judgement 1). The risks are judged to be balanced thereafter.
Chart 1.6: CPI inflation projection based on constant interest rates at 1.75%, other
policy measures as announced
This fan chart depicts the probability of various outcomes for CPI inflation in the future, conditioned on the assumptions
in Table 1.A footnote (b), apart from for Bank Rate, with this chart conditioned on constant interest rates at 1.75%. The
fan chart has the same interpretation as Chart 1.4.
The risks around the inflation projection from domestic factors in the baseline
projection are judged to be balanced.
Bank of England  
Page 25


1.3: Comparison of the baseline projections with the May Report
forecasts
The level of UK GDP is projected to be 2¾% lower than in the May Report by the end of
the forecast period. That largely reflects the adverse impact on UK and world activity of
the further sharp increases in wholesale gas prices, and to a much lesser extent, the
impact of the higher market paths for interest rates. The measures contained in the
Government’s May Cost of Living Support package partly offset these (Section 2.2).
Excess demand is a little higher at the start of the forecast than assumed in May (Table
1.A), reflecting a judgement that the labour market is tighter than previously assumed
(Key judgement 3 and Section 3). Given the much weaker outlook for demand, economic
slack increases by more thereafter, ending the forecast at 3¾% of potential GDP, 1½
percentage points greater than in May. Unemployment stays close to its current
historically low level up to 2023 Q1, consistent with the Agents’ employment and pay
survey (Box C and Section 3). It rises to 6¼% at year three, compared with 5½% in May.
Nominal private sector regular wage growth is expected to be higher than in the May
projection over the first half of the forecast, reflecting a judgement that the labour market
is tighter than previously assumed (Key judgements 3 and 4).
CPI inflation is expected to rise further and peak at just over 13% in 2022 Q4. That is
much higher than forecast in May. This overwhelmingly reflects the sharp increase in gas
futures prices since May, due to Russia restricting the supply of gas to Europe and the risk
of further curbs. To a much lesser extent, it reflects Ofgem’s announced changes for
updating the household energy price cap (Section 1.1). Together with higher indirect
effects from energy prices, this accounts for most of the much higher outlook for CPI
inflation over the first half of the forecast.
At the year two point, CPI inflation is similar to May, as the judgement to raise the profile
for wage growth (Key judgement 4) is offset by the greater degree of economic slack. As
economic slack builds by much more than in May, CPI inflation is around ½ percentage
point lower at the end of the forecast period.
Bank of England  
Page 26


Table 1.E: Indicative projections consistent with the MPC’s forecast (a) (b)
World GDP
(UK-weighted)
(c)
3
2½
-4¼
5½
2½ (2½)
1 (2)
1½ (2)
World GDP
(PPP-
weighted) (d)
4
3¾
-3¼
6
3 (3½)
2¾ (3¼)
3 (3½)
Euro-area
GDP (e)
2¼
1½
-6½
5¼
2¾ (2¼)
-1 (1¼)
¼ (1)
US GDP (f)
3
2¼
-3½
5¾
2 (3¼)
1½ (2¼)
1¾ (2)
Emerging
market GDP
(PPP-
weighted) (g)
5½
5
-2½
6¾
3¾ (4)
4 (4½)
4¼ (5)
of which,
China GDP (h)
10
7¾
2¼
8
3¼ (4¾)
5¼ (5½)
4½ (5¼)
UK GDP (i)
3
2
-9¼
7½
3½ (3¾)
-1½ (-¼)
-¼ (¼)
Household
consumption (j)
3¼
2
-10½
6¼
4¼ (4¾)
-¾ (1)
1 (1)
Business
investment (k)
3
3¾
-11¼
-1
6 (11)
-2 (½)
-7¼ (-5¼)
Housing
investment (l)
3¼
3¾
-12½
14
6¾ (7¼)
-5¾ (-1¾)
-2½ (-1½)
Exports (m)
4½
3½
-13
-1¼
3½ (4¼)
-¼ (3)
0 (2½)
Imports (n)
6¼
3¾
-15¾
3¾
14¾ (5½)
0 (7¾)
¼ (2¼)
Contribution of
net trade to
GDP (o)
-½
0
1
-1½
-3¼ (-½)
0 (-1½)
0 (0)
Real post-tax
labour income
(p)
3¼
1½
2
1
-3½ (-3¼)
-4¼ (-¼)
¾ (1¾)
Real post-tax
household
income (q)
3
1½
-¾
2
-1½ (-1¾)
-2¼ (1)
¾ (2½)
Averages
Projections
1998–2007
2010– 19
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
Bank of England  
Page 27


Household
saving ratio (r)
7¼
7½
14
10½
5¼ (4½)
3¾ (4½)
3½ (5¾)
Credit spreads
(s)
¾
2½
2
1½
1¼ (1)
1¼ (1¼)
1½ (1½)
Excess
supply/Excess
demand (t)
0
-1¾
-1¾
0
¾ (¼)
-2 (-1¼)
-3 (-1¾)
Hourly labour
productivity (u)
2½
¾
1½
¾
-1 (-¼)
¼ (¼)
1 (1)
Employment
(v)
1
1¼
-2¼
1¼
1¼ (¾)
-1½ (-½)
-¾ (-¼)
Average
weekly hours
worked (w)
32¼
32
30
31½
31¾ (31¾)
31½ (31¾)
31½ (31¾)
Unemployment
rate (x)
5¼
6
5¼
4
3¾ (3½)
4¾ (4¼)
5¾ (5)
Participation
rate (y)
63
63½
63¼
63¼
63¼ (63)
62¾ (63)
62½ (62¾)
CPI inflation
(z)
1½
2¼
½
5
13 (10¼)
5½ (3½)
1½ (1½)
UK import
prices (aa)
-½
1¼
2¾
2¼
8½ (4¾)
-3¼ (-2¼)
-1¾ (-1¾)
Energy prices
– direct
contribution to
CPI inflation
(ab)
¼
¼
-½
1½
6½ (4)
¾ (¼)
0 (0)
Average
weekly
earnings (ac)
4¼
2¼
4½
4½
5¼ (5¾)
5¼ (4¾)
2¾ (2¾)
Unit labour
costs (ad)
2¾
1½
11¾
-2¼
8 (6¾)
5 (4)
2 (2)
Private sector
regular pay
based unit
wage costs (ae)
1¾
1¾
9¼
-1¾
7½ (4¾)
6½ (5)
2 (2¼)
Bank of England  
Page 28


Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg Finance L.P., Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, Eurostat,
IMF World Economic Outlook (WEO), National Bureau of Statistics of China, ONS, US Bureau of Economic Analysis
and Bank calculations.
(a) The profiles in this table should be viewed as broadly consistent with the MPC’s projections for GDP growth, CPI
inflation and unemployment (as presented in the fan charts).
(b) Figures show annual average growth rates unless otherwise stated. Figures in parentheses show the corresponding
projections in the May 2022 Monetary Policy Report. Calculations for back data based on ONS data are shown using
ONS series identifiers.
(c) Chained-volume measure. Constructed using real GDP growth rates of 188 countries weighted according to their
shares in UK exports.
(d) Chained-volume measure. Constructed using real GDP growth rates of 189 countries weighted according to their
shares in world GDP using the IMF’s purchasing power parity (PPP) weights.
(e) Chained-volume measure. Forecast was finalised before the release of the preliminary flash estimate of euro-area
GDP for Q2, so that has not been incorporated.
(f) Chained-volume measure. Forecast was finalised before the release of the advance estimate of US GDP for Q2, so
that has not been incorporated.
(g) Chained-volume measure. Constructed using real GDP growth rates of 155 emerging market economy countries, as
defined by the IMF WEO, weighted according to their relative shares in world GDP using the IMF’s PPP weights.
(h) Chained-volume measure.
(i) Excludes the backcast for GDP.
(j) Chained-volume measure. Includes non-profit institutions serving households. Based on ABJR+HAYO.
(k) Chained-volume measure. Based on GAN8.
(l) Chained-volume measure. Whole-economy measure. Includes new dwellings, improvements and spending on
services associated with the sale and purchase of property. Based on DFEG+L635+L637.
(m) Chained-volume measure. The historical data exclude the impact of missing trader intra‑community (MTIC) fraud.
Since 1998 based on IKBK-OFNN/(BOKH/BQKO). Prior to 1998 based on IKBK.
(n) Chained-volume measure. The historical data exclude the impact of MTIC fraud. Since 1998 based on IKBL-
OFNN/(BOKH/BQKO). Prior to 1998 based on IKBL.
(o) Chained-volume measure. Exports less imports.
(p) Wages and salaries plus mixed income and general government benefits less income taxes and employees’ National
Insurance contributions, deflated by the consumer expenditure deflator. Based on [ROYJ+ROYH-(RPHS+AIIV-
CUCT)+GZVX]/[(ABJQ+HAYE)/(ABJR+HAYO)]. The backdata for this series are available via the ‘Download the chart
slides and data – August 2022’.
(q) Total available household resources, deflated by the consumer expenditure deflator. Based on
[RPQK/((ABJQ+HAYE)/(ABJR+HAYO))].
(r) Annual average. Percentage of total available household resources. Based on NRJS.
(s) Level in Q4. Percentage point spread over reference rates. Based on a weighted average of household and
corporate loan and deposit spreads over appropriate risk-free rates. Indexed to equal zero in 2007 Q3.
(t) Annual average. Per cent of potential GDP. A negative figure implies output is below potential and a positive figure
that it is above.
(u) GDP per hour worked. Hours worked based on YBUS.
(v) Four-quarter growth in LFS employment in Q4. Based on MGRZ.
(w) Level in Q4. Average weekly hours worked, in main job and second job. Based on YBUS/MGRZ.
(x) LFS unemployment rate in Q4. Based on MGSX.
(y) Level in Q4. Percentage of the 16+ population. Based on MGWG.
(z) Four-quarter inflation rate in Q4.
(aa) Four-quarter inflation rate in Q4 excluding fuel and the impact of MTIC fraud.
(ab) Contribution of fuels and lubricants and gas and electricity prices to four-quarter CPI inflation in Q4.
(ac) Four-quarter growth in whole‑economy total pay in Q4. Growth rate since 2001 based on KAB9. Prior to 2001,
growth rates are based on historical estimates of AWE, with ONS series identifier MD9M.
Bank of England  
Page 29


(ad) Four-quarter growth in unit labour costs in Q4. Whole‑economy total labour costs divided by GDP at constant
prices. Total labour costs comprise compensation of employees and the labour share multiplied by mixed income.
(ae) Four-quarter growth in private sector regular pay based unit wage costs in Q4. Private sector wage costs divided by
private sector output at constant prices. Private sector wage costs are average weekly earnings (excluding bonuses)
multiplied by private sector employment.
Bank of England  
Page 30


Box A: Key risks around the MPC’s baseline projections
The degree of uncertainty around the MPC’s projections from both external and
domestic factors is exceptionally high. There are significant risks around the
baseline projection for CPI inflation from global factors, most notably gas prices
(Key judgement 1), domestic inflationary pressures, and the potential interactions
between them (Key judgement 4).
To illustrate plausible different outcomes, this box sets out an alternative projection
and a scenario. As in the baseline projection, the UK economy enters recession
later this year in both. In the alternative projection, global energy prices follow their
downward-sloping futures curves, in contrast to the MPC’s conditioning
assumptions in its baseline projection. In this alternative, CPI inflation is materially
lower and activity significantly higher in years two and three than in the MPC’s
baseline forecast. In the scenario, there is assumed to be more persistence in
domestic price setting than in the MPC’s baseline projection. In this scenario, CPI
inflation is materially stronger in the first two years of the forecast period.
Based on the 15-day average to 26 July, gas futures prices for end-2022 have
nearly doubled since the May Report (Chart 2.15) and are almost seven times
higher than implied by futures curves a year ago. The sharp increases in gas prices
are mostly due to Russia’s restrictions on its supply of gas to Europe and the risk of
further curbs. Gas prices have continued to be highly volatile and have risen above
the 15-day average recently.
Commodity prices are very difficult to predict. The paths of these prices will continue
to have significant effects on the UK and world economies, so the MPC’s forecasts
are based on a conditioning assumption for how they will evolve. As set out in Box 5
of the August 2019 Report, the MPC conditions its projections on wholesale energy
prices following their respective futures curves for the first six months of the forecast
and then remaining constant. Assuming prices remain constant over most of the
forecast period makes the forecast simpler and more transparent.
At present, however, such an assumption implies that energy prices would remain
extremely high by historical standards throughout the three-year forecast period. To
illustrate a risk to the baseline forecast, this box sets out an alternative projection in
An alternative projection in which global energy prices follow their
downward-sloping futures curves throughout the forecast period.
Bank of England  
Page 31


which energy prices follow their downward-sloping futures curves (Chart 2.15)
throughout the forecast period, though they remain well above their pre-pandemic
levels. That would result in a very different economic outlook in the second half of
the forecast than in the baseline projection. In view of the exceptional level of
uncertainty, the Committee puts more weight than it would normally on such an
alternative.
If energy prices did follow their futures curves over the whole forecast period, CPI
inflation would be around 1 percentage point and ½ percentage point lower at the
year two and three points respectively than in the baseline projection (Table A).
That reflects the contribution from energy prices being negative at those points
(Chart 1.5).
This would weigh less heavily on households’ real incomes and spending and so
GDP would be materially higher than in the baseline projection, though the UK
economy still enters recession later this year. The peak-to-trough fall in output in the
baseline and alternative projections are 2¼% and 1½% respectively.
Given the less weak outlook for demand, unemployment and economic slack would
rise by over 1 percentage point less than in the MPC’s baseline projection at the
end of the forecast period.
Table A: Forecast summary of the alternative projection in which energy
prices follow their futures curves throughout the forecast (a)
GDP (b)
2.3 (2.3)
-1.5 (-2.1)
0.6 (0.0)
0.8 (0.4)
CPI inflation (c)
9.9 (9.9)
8.4 (9.5)
0.9 (2.0)
0.3 (0.8)
LFS unemployment rate
3.7 (3.7)
4.0 (4.4)
4.6 (5.5)
5.1 (6.3)
Excess supply/Excess demand (d)
+¾ (+¾)
-1¾ (-2¼)
-2¼ (-3¼)
-2½ (-3¾)
Bank Rate (e)
1.6 (1.6)
3.0 (3.0)
2.5 (2.5)
2.2 (2.2)
2022 Q3
2023 Q3
2024 Q3
2025 Q3
(a) Figures in parentheses show the corresponding projections from the MPC’s baseline forecast.
(b) Four-quarter growth in real GDP.
(c) Four-quarter inflation rate.
(d) Per cent of potential GDP. A negative figure implies output is below potential and a positive that it is above.
(e) Per cent. The path for Bank Rate implied by forward market interest rates. The curves are based on
overnight index swap rates.
Bank of England  
Page 32


Inflation could remain persistently high for a number of reasons. First, it may reflect
the impact of the series of adverse shocks that many countries have experienced
over the past few years, which have resulted in sharp and successive increases in
global energy, non-energy commodity and tradable goods prices.
Second, it may reflect the indirect effects of such developments passing through
supply chains, pushing up CPI inflation further over time. The MPC’s projections
incorporate such effects.
There are a number of risks to the outlook for CPI inflation from more persistent
strength in domestic wage and price setting arising from their potential interactions
with the significant and rising global influences on inflation, notably from gas prices.
More persistence in wage and price-setting could reflect feedback between high
past outturns for CPI inflation and nominal wage growth, which pushes up CPI
inflation further. The MPC’s projections incorporate some catch-up of nominal wage
growth to the sharp rise in CPI inflation, as firms seek to recruit and retain staff. This
in turn pushes up the CPI inflation projection somewhat. But there is a risk that firms
grant larger pay awards than assumed given the very tight labour market and the
sharp increase in CPI inflation. Many respondents to the Agents’ employment and
pay survey did not report their expected pay settlement, as they are waiting to see
how much further CPI inflation rises and how long it is likely to remain above the 2%
target.
How quickly inflation falls back to the 2% target will also depend on households’
and firms’ inflation expectations. In the Committee’s baseline projection, they are
assumed to base their inflation expectations largely on recent inflation outturns.
Inflation expectations therefore fall back fairly quickly as inflation itself declines next
year and in 2024. But an upside risk to the inflation outlook is that households and
firms are less confident that inflation will fall back as quickly and do not factor such
a decline into their wage and price setting behaviour.
Short-term indicators of inflation expectations have risen further since the May
Report as inflation has continued to increase (Section 2.3). They are well above
their historical averages, though appear broadly consistent with other developments
in the economy. At the medium-term horizon, expectations of households and firms
are also above their past averages, as are financial market measures, although the
latter have fallen back in recent months. Surveys suggest financial market
A scenario in which there is more persistence in domestic price setting than
in the MPC’s baseline projection.
Bank of England  
Page 33


participants and professional forecasters continue to expect CPI inflation to fall back
towards the 2% target in two to three years’ time, however. The Committee will
continue to monitor measures of inflation expectations very closely and act to
ensure that longer-term inflation expectations are well anchored around the 2%
target.
Table B shows one particular scenario in which inflation is more persistent than in
the baseline forecast. In this scenario, firms are able to pass on the increases in
their labour costs to their prices to a greater extent than normal, based on the
estimated relationship between the changes in firms’ expected costs and prices in
the latest DMP Survey.
CPI inflation is around 1¼ percentage points higher than in the MPC’s baseline
projection at year one, ¾ percentage point higher at year two and unchanged at
year three (Table B). By the end of the forecast, the level of GDP would be a little
lower in this scenario and unemployment and economic slack a little higher.
Table B: Marginal impacts on key forecast variables in a scenario in which
there is greater persistence in domestic price setting than in the MPC’s
baseline projection (a)
GDP (b)
-0.4
0.0
+0.1
CPI inflation (c)
+1.2
+0.7
0.0
LFS unemployment rate
+0.3
+0.3
+0.3
Excess supply/Excess demand (d)
-0.4
-0.3
-0.2
2023 Q3
2024 Q3
2025 Q3
(a) Percentage point changes relative to the MPC’s baseline projections.
(b) Four-quarter growth in real GDP.
(c) Four-quarter inflation rate.
(d) Per cent of potential GDP. A negative figure implies more economic slack than the baseline projection and a
positive figure implies less.
Bank of England  
Page 34


Box B: Monetary policy since the May 2022 Report
At its meeting ending on 15 June 2022, the MPC voted by a majority of 6–3 to
increase Bank Rate by 0.25 percentage points, to 1.25%.
There had been relatively little news in global and domestic economic data since
the May Report, although there had been significant movements in financial
markets. UK-weighted global growth in 2022 Q2 appeared to be broadly in line with
expectations. Global inflationary pressures had remained elevated and oil prices
had risen further. Equity markets had ended the period lower, while short and
longer-term government bond yields had continued to rise.
UK GDP was weaker than had been expected in April, partly reflecting a further
decline in Test and Trace activity. Bank staff expected GDP to fall by 0.3% in the
second quarter as a whole, weaker than anticipated at the time of the May Report.
Consumer confidence had fallen further, but other indicators of household spending
appeared to have held up. Some indicators of business sentiment had weakened,
although they had remained more resilient than indicators of consumer confidence
and consistent with positive underlying GDP growth.
In the three months to April, the unemployment rate was 3.8% and employment had
grown by 0.5%. The inactivity rate had declined a little over recent months but was
still higher than immediately before the pandemic. Recruitment difficulties had
remained elevated and labour demand had remained strong. Underlying nominal
earnings growth had also remained strong, and the Bank’s Agents reported that
bonus payments had been used to address recruitment and retention difficulties. All
of these indicators remained consistent with a tight labour market.
Twelve-month CPI inflation had risen from 7.0% in March to 9.0% in April, close to
expectations at the time of the May Report, and triggering the exchange of open
letters between the Governor and the Chancellor of the Exchequer. Inflation’s
overshoot of the 2% target mainly reflected previous large increases in global
energy and other tradable goods prices.
CPI inflation was expected to rise to slightly above 11% in October. The increase in
October reflected higher projected household energy prices following a prospective
additional large increase in the Ofgem price cap.
Bank of England  
Page 35


In view of continuing signs of robust cost and price pressures, including the
tightness of the labour market, and the risk of those pressures becoming more
persistent, the Committee voted to increase Bank Rate by 0.25 percentage points,
to 1.25%.
Bank of England  
Page 36


2: Current economic conditions
In the face of materially higher gas prices stemming from the war in Ukraine,
inflationary pressures in the UK and the rest of Europe have increased further, and
global GDP growth has continued to slow. In response to the elevated outlook for
inflation, many central banks have raised policy rates and are expected to tighten
policy further. Risky asset prices have fallen markedly, leaving global financial
conditions tighter.
UK GDP is expected to fall a little in Q2, and then rise by 0.4% in Q3, with that
volatility in part reflecting the scaling back of Test and Trace activity and the
additional bank holiday for the Platinum Jubilee. Adjusting for these temporary
factors, underlying output growth is judged to be positive, but slowing. That partly
reflects the squeeze on real incomes from higher global energy and tradable goods
prices. Despite the slowdown in underlying growth, the unemployment rate is
expected to remain broadly flat in the near term.
CPI inflation was 9.4% in June. Since the May Report, wholesale gas prices have
risen significantly. As a result, inflation is now expected to rise to around 13% in Q4
as the Ofgem energy price cap is reset. Domestic price pressures are also
strengthening. Underlying wage growth is rising and survey evidence suggests that
firms are passing a larger share of costs into prices to protect margins.
Bank of England  
Page 37


Chart 2.1: GDP growth is expected to pick up in Q3, unemployment is projected to
remain broadly flat, and inflation is expected to rise further
Near-term projections (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
Bank of England  
Page 38


2.1: Global developments and financial conditions
Global GDP growth has been slowing since the middle of last year (Chart 2.2). The level
of UK-weighted world GDP is expected to have been broadly unchanged in 2022 Q2,
following growth of 0.3% in Q1. Growth is projected to remain weak in Q3. While global
growth has slowed, recent outturns and the near-term projection are broadly in line with
expectations in the May Report. The projection further out is notably weaker than in May,
however, reflecting the higher current and forward prices for energy and, to a lesser
extent, tighter financial conditions (Section 1).
In the euro area, GDP increased by 0.7% in Q2 according to the flash estimate, up from a
0.5% increase in Q1, but still much weaker than growth outturns in mid-2021. The
slowdown partly reflects materially higher energy and food prices, partly driven by the war
in Ukraine (Box B of the May 2022 Report), which weighed on household real incomes
and consumer spending. The war and supply chain disruption have also pushed up
tradable goods prices. These adverse supply shocks, which are also hitting the UK
economy, are expected to continue to drag on growth. In the July releases, euro-area
consumer confidence declined sharply to a new record low, and the flash S&P Global PMI
fell into contractionary territory.
In the United States, GDP fell in Q2, the second consecutive quarter of negative growth.
While the fall was mainly driven by lower stockbuilding, domestic demand growth also
slowed. In response to rising domestic inflationary pressures, which appear stronger than
in the euro area (Chart D, Box E), the FOMC has tightened monetary policy markedly.
Financial conditions have tightened as a result, and that is expected to weigh on activity.
(a) The lighter diamonds show Bank staff’s projections at the time of the May 2022 Monetary Policy Report. The darker
diamonds show Bank staff’s current projections. Projections for GDP and the unemployment rate are quarterly and show
Q2 and Q3 (May projections show Q1 and Q2). Projections for CPI inflation are monthly and show July to September
(May projections show April to June). GDP and unemployment rate 2022 Q2 projections are based on official data to
May. CPI inflation figure is an outturn.
Global GDP growth has been slowing, and is expected to remain weak in the near
term.
Bank of England  
Page 39


In China, quarterly GDP growth was negative in Q2, following strict regional restrictions on
activity imposed in response to Covid-19 outbreaks. But growth is expected to rebound in
Q3 owing to policy support measures and the lifting of restrictions. This contributes to the
small pickup in quarterly UK-weighted global growth expected in Q3 (Chart 2.2).
Labour markets have been tightening across the US, euro area and the UK for some time,
and they remained tight in the most recent data. That tightness is particularly apparent in
the UK (Section 3) and the US, where unemployment rates are low (left panel of Chart
2.3). In the euro area, the unemployment rate is higher, but it still fell to a new record low
of 6.6% in May.
Tight labour markets have probably contributed to the pickup in measures of wage growth
across the UK, US and euro area. Wage growth has increased most notably in the US and
UK (right panel of Chart 2.3), and may explain why services inflation in these countries is
stronger (Chart D, Box E). Euro-area negotiated wage growth remains much lower,
despite an increase in the latest data.
Chart 2.2: Global GDP growth has been slowing since the middle of last year
UK-weighted world GDP growth (a)
Sources: Refinitiv Eikon from LSEG and Bank calculations.
(a) See footnote (c) of Table 1.E for definition. Figures for 2022 Q2 and Q3 are Bank staff projections. These projections
do not include the Advance Estimate of US 2022 Q2 GDP and the Preliminary Flash Estimate of euro-area 2022 Q2
GDP which were released after the data cut-off.
Labour markets remain tight, putting upward pressure on nominal wage growth.
Bank of England  
Page 40


Inflation rates remain elevated in many countries. Box E compares the drivers of the rise
in consumer price inflation across the US, the euro area and the UK. Global factors, such
as the rise in commodity prices, and the impact of bottlenecks on tradable goods prices,
have played an important role.
Since May, European spot natural gas prices have risen by around 70% (Chart 2.4), as
flows of natural gas from Russia have fallen and amid heightened concerns that supply
will remain restricted in coming months. Europe has made up for some of the shortfall in
Russian supply through alternative sources. However, there are concerns that supply from
these alternative sources may be difficult to increase much further if Russian supply
continues to fall.
Chart 2.3: Labour markets remain tight in advanced economies, particularly in the
US and UK, which has pushed wage growth up
Unemployment rates and annual nominal wage growth in the UK, US and euro area (a)
Sources: Bureau of Labor Statistics, ECB, Eurostat, ONS, Refinitiv Eikon from LSEG and Bank calculations.
(a) Unemployment rates are monthly data to May in the UK and euro area, and to June in the US. Wage measures are
monthly US average hourly earnings to June, monthly UK underlying pay growth, using Bank staff estimates to adjust
private sector regular pay growth for furlough and compositional effects, to May, and quarterly euro-area negotiated
wages to 2022 Q1. The diamond shows the Bank staff projection for UK underlying pay growth in June 2022.
Global inflation remains elevated.
Bank of England  
Page 41


By contrast, other commodity prices have started to decline. Oil prices have fallen since
the middle of June (Chart 2.5). Models estimated by Bank staff suggest that this reflects
weaker prospective demand. Reflecting similar drivers, industrial metals prices have fallen
back by almost 30% since the May Report (Chart 2.5). Agricultural goods prices have
fallen by almost 20% as supply has increased in regions outside Russia and Ukraine, and
as fears of restricted Ukrainian supply have abated somewhat.
Chart 2.4: European wholesale gas prices have risen by around 70% since the May
Report
International wholesale gas prices (a)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and Bank calculations.
(a) Daily data to 26 July. The Dutch Title Transfer Facility pricing point is used for the European price. European spot
gas prices have risen by substantially more than in the US reflecting the segmentation of the global gas market.
Bank of England  
Page 42


The latest indicators are consistent with continuing supply chain disruption, partly
reflecting the lockdowns in China and the war in Ukraine. An indicator of global supply
constraints, derived from PMIs such as delivery times and stocks of finished goods,
remains elevated (Chart 2.6).
There are some tentative signs that global supply bottlenecks are starting to ease,
however. In June, supply constraints in China loosened (Chart 2.6) and PMI
manufacturing delivery times fell back across regions. Moreover, some indicators of
shipping costs, such as the Baltic Dry Index and the Freightos Baltic Container Index,
have fallen back from their peaks. And there are some signs of a gradual slowdown in US
goods consumption.
In the MPC’s baseline projection, higher gas prices and upward pressure from global
bottlenecks are expected to keep global inflationary pressures strong in the near term. As
these pressures then fade, four-quarter world export price growth is projected to fall
sharply over the next year (Section 1).
Chart 2.5: Oil, agricultural and metals prices have fallen back
US dollar commodity prices (a)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., Refinitiv Eikon from LSEG, S&P indices and Bank calculations.
(a) Daily data to 26 July. Calculated using S&P GSCI US dollar commodity price indices, the ‘Agricultural goods’ series
is based on the total agricultural and livestock S&P Commodity Index and the ‘Oil’ series is based on US dollar Brent
forward prices for delivery in 10–25 days’ time.
Bank of England  
Page 43


Many central banks have continued to tighten monetary policy. In the US, the FOMC
increased the target range for the federal funds rate by 75 basis points in both June and
July to 2.25%–2.50%, following a 50 basis points rise in May. These were the largest
increases in a single meeting since 1994. At its June meeting, the ECB Governing Council
announced an end to its net asset purchases as of 1 July 2022 and, at its July meeting, it
increased its key interest rates by 50 basis points, the first rate rises since 2011. In June,
the MPC voted to increase Bank Rate for the fifth consecutive meeting, by 25 basis
points, to 1.25%.
Market-implied expectations for policy rates have risen since the May Report (Chart 2.7).
The market-implied path in the euro area over the next three years is 25 basis points
higher on average than in the run up to the May Report, rising to 1.5% in 2025. The
Chart 2.6: Indicators of supply chain constraints point to continuing disruption,
although supply constraints in China have eased
Indicators of supply constraints (a)
Sources: IHS Markit, JPMorgan, Refinitiv Eikon from LSEG and Bank calculations.
(a) Indicators are estimated by Bank staff using principal component analysis on a range of PMIs for supply constraints
in the manufacturing sector (supplier delivery times, stocks of purchases, stocks of finished goods, input prices and
backlogs of work). Before principal components are estimated, these indicators are regressed on the new orders PMI to
control for movements in demand. Latest data are for June 2022.
Many central banks have tightened monetary policy since May, including a large
increase in US policy rates…
…and market pricing implies that policy rates will rise further in the near term.
Bank of England  
Page 44


market-implied path for policy rates in the US continues to embody a sharp rise in rates in
the near term to a peak of 3.5% in 2023. It then falls to around 2.5% at the three-year
horizon.
Chart 2.7: Financial markets are pricing further increases in policy rates
International forward interest rates (a)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and Bank calculations.
(a) All data as of 26 July 2022 except for ECB deposit rate and Federal funds rate which are to 27 July 2022. The 
August and May curves are estimated using instantaneous forward overnight swap rates in the 15 working days to 26 
July 2022 and 26 April 2022 respectively. Federal funds rate is the upper bound of the target range.
In the UK, the market-implied path rises to a peak of 3.0% in 2023 Q2. As in the US, the 
market curve is then downward sloping further out. On average, the market path is around 
30 basis points higher over the next three years than in the run-up to the May Report.
The path for Bank Rate implied by the latest Market Participants Survey remains lower 
than the market curve. The median central expectation of the peak level is 2.5%, 50 basis 
points higher than in May. Survey respondents attributed the gap, in part, to the balance of 
risks being skewed towards a higher path for Bank Rate (Rosen (2022)), particularly at 
the short end of the curve.
Medium-term measures of inflation expectations derived from financial markets
have fallen back.
Bank of England  
Page 45


Medium-term measures of inflation expectations derived from financial markets have
fallen since the May Report in the UK, US and euro area (Chart 2.8). That may reflect the
weaker global growth outlook and lower prices for some commodities. It may also reflect
tighter monetary policy and expectations of further rate rises in the near term (Chart 2.7).
These measures remain above their 2010–19 averages in the UK and euro area, but in
the US they have fallen a little below.
Rates on new mortgages, fixed-rate deposits and bank lending to companies have
continued to rise since the May Report, reflecting the pass-through of higher risk-free
interest rates (Box E). In terms of the supply of bank lending, the latest Credit Conditions
Survey (CCS) suggested that the availability of secured credit to households decreased
in the three months to May 2022, with lenders reporting that this reflected a worsening
economic outlook. The availability of bank credit to the corporate sector was reported to
Chart 2.8: Medium-term measures of inflation expectations have fallen back
Financial market measures of inflation compensation (a)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and Bank calculations.
(a) Five‑year inflation, five years ahead and two‑year inflation, five years ahead, derived from swaps. The instruments
are linked to the UK RPI, US CPI and euro‑area HICP measures of inflation respectively. UK RPI is due to be aligned
with CPIH from February 2030, which will affect the pricing of the UK five-year, five-year measure. Since 2000, annual
CPIH inflation has averaged 90 basis points lower than RPI inflation.
Reflecting the rise in risk-free rates, interest rates facing UK households and firms
have increased.
Bank of England  
Page 46


be unchanged in the Q2 CCS, though contacts of the Bank’s Agency network reported a
modest tightening in bank credit availability, particularly for small firms in sectors exposed
to elevated costs or discretionary consumer spending (Box C).
Most global equity indices have continued to decline since the time of the May Report,
reflecting expectations of higher interest rates. The S&P 500, the Euro Stoxx and MSCI
Emerging Market indices are between 9% and 12% lower. The FTSE All-Share index has
fallen by over 5%. In particular, equity prices for so-called ‘cyclical’ stocks – those
companies whose earnings and performance are correlated with overall economic growth
– have fallen. That suggests that a weaker global growth outlook is also playing a role in
the fall in stock prices.
Reflecting similar factors, spreads on corporate debt have widened. Since the May
Report, spreads on high yield corporate debt in the UK, US and euro area have risen by
more than 160 basis points, and by more than 25 basis points on investment-grade debt.
The fall in equity prices, the rise in spreads and the increase in expected policy rates
mean that global financial conditions have tightened since the last Report. That is
expected to weigh on the global growth outlook (Section 1).
The sterling effective exchange rate has depreciated by 3% since the May Report (Chart
2.9). The depreciation against the US dollar accounts for around 60% of the fall in the
sterling ERI since May. Currencies other than sterling have also depreciated against the
US dollar. This may in part reflect ‘safe-haven’ flows supporting the US dollar given
heightened uncertainty about the global outlook. In the early part of this year, the
depreciation of sterling against the dollar may have also reflected the rising differential in
expected policy rates between the US and the UK.
Global financial conditions have tightened since May, equity prices have fallen
and spreads on corporate bonds have widened.
Sterling has depreciated, particularly against the US dollar.
Bank of England  
Page 47


2.2: Domestic activity
UK GDP is expected to have fallen by 0.2% in 2022 Q2, compared with 0.8% growth in
Q1. This slowdown in activity primarily reflects a fall in government output due to the
scaling back of Test and Trace activity, and some temporary weakness associated with
the additional Platinum Jubilee bank holiday (Chart 2.10). Bank staff then expect headline
GDP to rise by 0.4% in Q3, as the drag from the fall in Test and Trace activity dissipates
and the effect of the Jubilee bank holiday unwinds.
Chart 2.9: The sterling ERI has depreciated by around 3% since May
Sterling effective exchange rate index (ERI) and selected bilateral exchange rates (a)
(a) Figures in parentheses show currency trade weights in the overall sterling ERI.
UK GDP is expected fall a little in Q2, and then rebound in Q3, partly reflecting the
effects of Test and Trace activity and the Platinum Jubilee bank holiday.
Bank of England  
Page 48


Bank staff estimate that underlying output growth, calculated as market sector output
growth adjusted for the effects of the Jubilee, has slowed from around 0.9% in Q1 to 0.5%
in Q2. A further slowing to 0.2% in Q3 is expected (purple bars in Chart 2.10). That is
consistent with surveys such as the S&P Global/CIPS composite PMI, where the output
index and the new orders index have declined, while remaining above the 50 ‘no change’
mark (Chart 2.11). The future output index – which asks firms about expected changes in
output over the next year – has fallen particularly sharply. Other surveys such as those
from the BCC and CBI paint a similar picture. Underlying output growth in both Q2 and Q3
is expected to be slightly weaker than projected in the May Report.
Chart 2.10: Underlying output growth is judged to have slowed since Q1
Contributions to quarterly GDP growth (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Diamonds show quarterly headline GDP growth. Gold bars are Bank staff estimates for the contribution of the extra
bank holiday in June. Purple bars show adjusted market sector output, as a proxy for ‘underlying growth’. Orange bars
are contributions of output in government services to quarterly GDP, including the vaccination and Test and Trace
programmes. Data for Q2 and Q3 are Bank staff projections.
Adjusting for these temporary factors, underlying output growth is judged to be
positive, but to have slowed more rapidly than expected.
Bank of England  
Page 49


Contacts of the Bank’s Agents reported that output growth in manufacturing and
construction was being constrained by shortages of labour and goods, as well as a
softening in demand for some consumer goods due to the real income squeeze. Many of
these factors were expected to continue to weigh on output in coming months.
Beyond Q3, output is projected to fall in each quarter from 2022 Q4 to 2023 Q4. That
predominantly reflects the significant adverse impact of the sharp rises in global energy
and tradable goods prices on UK household real incomes (Section 1).
The pickup in global energy and tradable goods prices has led to a marked squeeze on
household real incomes (Chart 2.14). A range of evidence suggests that this real income
squeeze is weighing on consumption.
Spending on goods, as indicated by retail sales volumes, fell in May and June. While this
may partly reflect some rotation of spending back from goods to services, it also probably
reflects the impact of higher prices: the nominal value of sales has increased in recent
Chart 2.11: Survey indicators point to a slowdown in output growth
S&P Global/CIPS indicators of current and expected output growth (a)
Source: S&P Global/CIPS.
(a) A reading of above 50 indicates positive change on the previous month while a reading below 50 indicates negative
change. UK composite output, new orders and future output indices. Latest data are flash estimates for July 2022.
Various indicators suggest that the real income squeeze is weighing on consumer
spending.
Bank of England  
Page 50


months, while real volumes across almost all categories of goods continued to drift lower.
Contacts of the Bank’s Agents report that growth in spending on consumer services was
flat in real terms (Box C).
Households responding to a recent ONS survey reported that they were spending less
due to the rising cost of living (Chart 2.12). Just over 60% said they were spending less on
non-essentials, while almost 50% said they were using less fuel at home and spending
less on food. The impact of higher prices is likely to be felt more acutely by those on lower
incomes, because items such as food and energy make up a higher proportion of their
spending (Chart 3.8 in the May Report).
Consumer confidence has deteriorated, probably reflecting increasing concerns about
rising cost pressures. The GfK consumer confidence index, which has been falling
steadily throughout 2022, remained at its record low in July (Chart 2.13). The forward-
looking balances for households’ confidence in their own financial situation and the
general economic situation over the next 12 months also remained around record lows.
Chart 2.12: Consumers are spending less due to the rising cost of living
Responses to the ONS Opinions and Lifestyle Survey (a)
(a) Based on adults who said their cost of living had increased. Question: ‘Which of the following are you doing because
your cost of living has increased?’. Respondents were able to choose more than one answer. Survey conducted 6–17
July 2022.
Surveys point to a deterioration in consumer sentiment.
Bank of England  
Page 51


Households may be able to absorb some of the fall in their real incomes by saving less of
their current income or by spending some of their stock of savings. In aggregate,
households accumulated substantial savings earlier in the pandemic. But the distribution
of those savings has been increasingly skewed over time towards higher income
households, who might be less likely to spend them. Only around a quarter of
respondents to an ONS survey carried out in July who were facing a rise in the cost of
living expected to use their savings to support their consumption (Chart 2.10). Households
may seek other ways of funding spending. For example, respondents to the Bank/NMG
survey earlier this year indicated that aside from using their savings, they may choose to
work more, seek a pay rise or borrow money (see Section 3 in the May Report).
In the MPC’s baseline projection, the savings rate is projected to decline from 6.6% in Q1
to 5.1% in Q3, and then decline further over the next year.
The Government announced an additional £15 billion Cost of Living Support package
during May, particularly intended to support those on lower incomes. This included: a
direct one-off payment of £650 for households on means-tested benefits; a payment of
Chart 2.13: Consumer sentiment has deteriorated further
Consumer confidence (a)
Source: GfK.
(a) GfK Consumer Confidence Index and sub-indices based on the net balances of respondents reporting that they
expect their personal financial situation and the general economic situation to improve over the next 12 months. Latest
data points are for July 2022, with the survey conducted between 1 July and 12 July 2022. Not seasonally adjusted.
Household savings may provide some support to consumption...
…as should the Cost of Living Support package announced by the Government…
Bank of England  
Page 52


£300 to pensioners; and a £150 payment to people on disability benefits. The package
also included a doubling of the universal rebate through the Energy Bills Support scheme
(announced earlier this year in February), and that the full rebate of £400 for all
households would no longer have to be repaid. While some of these measures, such as
means-tested benefits, were beginning to be implemented during July, many will be rolled
out during Q4. Bank staff estimate that the Cost of Living Support package will raise the
level of GDP by a peak of around ½% in 2022 Q4 and 2023 Q1 before fading (Section 1).
Overall, while nominal wage growth has picked up (Section 2.3) and employment growth
is strong, Bank staff expect a further squeeze on household real incomes from the rise in
energy prices, due to the assumed increase in the Ofgem price cap in October (Section
2.3). Real post-tax household income is now expected to fall by around 2% in the year to
2022 Q4 (Chart 2.14). Household spending growth is expected to weaken as a result:
Bank staff expect consumption to rise by 0.3% in Q2, 0.1% in Q3, and then fall in Q4.
…but overall, Bank staff expect consumer spending to weaken in the near term,
reflecting falling real income.
Chart 2.14: Real household income is projected to fall in 2022
Contributions to four-quarter real household income growth (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Diamonds show Bank staff projections for 2022 Q2, Q3 and Q4. Bars may not sum to total due to rounding. Income
includes non-profit institutions serving households. See footnote (q) in Table 1.D for the definition of real post-tax
household income.
Business investment continues to be held back by supply chain disruptions and
broader economic uncertainty.
Bank of England  
Page 53


Business investment fell by 0.6% in 2022 Q1, over 3 percentage points lower than
expected in the May Report. This continued weakness could partly reflect the impact of
temporary supply shortages and broader uncertainty about the economic outlook.
Intelligence from the Bank’s Agencies highlights that investment intentions had softened
slightly but remained positive (Box C). Bank staff expect business investment to rise
modestly in Q2 and Q3.
Goods trade flows appear to have picked up in recent months, but the ONS has flagged
that there are currently large uncertainties around these data, partly due to a change in
data collection methods. This makes it difficult to judge recent trends. The ONS has also
highlighted that the impact of Brexit and supply chain disruptions have contributed to
higher levels of volatility in trade in the past two years.
UK house prices, as measured by the UK House Price Index, increased by 11% in the
year to May. Growth has generally been easing on a month-on-month basis since the start
of 2022, however. Some of that slowdown probably reflects the squeeze in real incomes
that is weighing on consumer spending more broadly, and contacts of the Bank’s Agents
expect that squeeze to slow house price inflation in the months ahead. The pickup in
mortgage rates, driven by the recent rises in reference rates including Bank Rate (Box D),
is also likely to be playing a role.
The strength of the housing market during the pandemic has boosted GDP directly.
Housing investment was around 10% higher in Q1 than its pre-pandemic level. But that
support is expected to fade. Bank staff expect housing investment to be relatively flat in
the near term.
Despite the economic slowdown, a range of evidence suggests that the labour market
remains tight (Section 3). And some surveys point to higher-than-usual levels of capacity
utilisation within firms. Based on that evidence, there is judged to be some excess
demand in Q2. In the MPC’s baseline projection, excess supply is expected to open up in
the economy over time, as demand grows at a slower pace than potential supply, and the
unemployment rate gradually rises (Section 1).
2.3: Costs and prices
Goods trade flows appear to have picked up, but there remain large uncertainties
around these data.
The UK housing market has been strong, but momentum appears to be easing.
Despite the economic slowdown, the labour market remains tight.
CPI inflation picked up to 9.4% in June, higher than expected in May.
Bank of England  
Page 54


CPI inflation increased to 9.4% in June, from 7.0% in March, 0.3 percentage points higher
than expected in the May Report. This news was largely accounted for by higher food and
fuel prices. There was some downside news in core CPI inflation – which excludes more
volatile items like energy and food – as it eased from a recent high of 6.2% in April to
5.8% in June. This was driven by a deceleration in core goods price inflation.
Sterling spot wholesale gas prices have risen substantially since May, while gas futures
prices for end-2022 have nearly doubled (Chart 2.15). As with the rise in European
wholesale gas prices (Chart 2.4), that has been due to Russia’s restrictions on gas
supplies, and increasing concerns that supply will be restricted further in coming months.
Bank staff expect inflation to pick up slightly to around 10% in July and remain at around
this level through the rest of Q3, reflecting higher fuel, food and services prices (Chart
2.16).
Inflation is then expected to pick up further to around 13% in 2022 Q4 (Chart 2.16), about
3 percentage points higher than expected in May. This sharp upward revision
overwhelmingly reflects the substantial rise in wholesale gas futures prices. To a lesser
Gas futures prices have nearly doubled since May…
Chart 2.15: Spot gas and futures prices are markedly higher than in May
Wholesale gas spot price and futures curves (a)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and Bank calculations.
(a) Spot price is the one-day forward price of UK natural gas. August 2022 curve is the 15 working day average to 26
July 2022 and the May 2022 curve is the 15 working day average to 26 April 2022.
…CPI inflation is expected to rise to around 13% in October, due to the projected
increase in Ofgem’s price caps.
Bank of England  
Page 55


extent, it reflects Ofgem’s announced changes to the methodology for updating its price
caps. That includes putting more weight on the most recent sharp increases in wholesale
gas prices. Overall, Ofgem is expected to raise its price cap by around 75% in October,
compared to a 40% rise anticipated in the May Report. These projections imply that
energy will directly contribute around 6½ percentage points to CPI inflation in 2022 Q4
(purple and orange bars in Chart 2.16), nearly 2½ percentage points higher than in the
May Report and accounting for more than half of the overshoot of CPI inflation relative to
the 2% target. Ofgem is increasing the frequency of updates from semi-annual to
quarterly, so the cap will change again in January.
While the vast majority of the rise in inflation in 2022 H2 is accounted for by higher energy
prices, core CPI inflation is also expected to pick up a little. It is expected to reach around
6¼% by the end of the year, largely reflecting strengthening services prices inflation.
Chart 2.16: Inflation is expected to pick up to around 13% in 2022 Q4
Contributions to CPI inflation (a)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, ONS and Bank
calculations.
(a) Figures in parentheses are CPI basket weights in 2021 and do not sum to 100 due to rounding. Data to June 2022.
Bank staff projection from July 2022 to December 2022. Fuels and lubricants estimates use Department for Business,
Energy and Industrial Strategy petrol price data for July 2022 and then are based on the sterling oil futures curve. Other
goods is the difference between CPI inflation and the other contributions identified in the chart.
The bulk of the strength in inflation continues to reflect high energy and tradable
goods prices…
Bank of England  
Page 56


The bulk of the strength in inflation continues to reflect the direct impact of high energy
and tradable goods prices. The rise in energy prices has been significantly exacerbated
by the build-up to and Russia’s subsequent invasion of Ukraine. Higher global goods
prices reflect various factors including: the economic recovery from the worst of the
pandemic; the rotation of consumer spending towards goods and away from services,
most notably in the United States; and supply constraints in certain sectors.
These higher prices will also have indirect effects on inflation via higher transport,
production and utility costs for firms supplying non-energy goods and services.
Respondents to the Bank’s Q2 DMP Survey reported that energy input prices and supply
shortages continue to contribute to changes in realised price inflation. These indirect
effects probably explain part of the pickup in prices across a broad set of goods and
services components within the overall CPI. Inflation rates of components accounting for
around 90% of the UK CPI basket are now above their pre-Covid averages, compared to
around 50% this time last year.
Consumer services price inflation picked up to 5.2% in June, its highest rate since March
1993. While some of the rise may reflect the indirect effect of energy price rises, it is also
likely to reflect the strength of nominal pay growth, since labour costs tend to make up a
large proportion of costs for service sector firms. Annual whole-economy average weekly
earnings grew by 6.2% in the three months to May, while private sector regular pay growth
– which excludes bonuses – was 5%. Bank staff estimate that underlying pay growth,
which is adjusted for furlough and compositional effects, had been around 4½% in the
three months to May, in excess of pre-pandemic rates of around 3% to 3½%. The HMRC
PAYE measure of the median of pay growth was also above its pre-pandemic rate.
…but there has also been a role for domestic factors. Consumer services inflation
has picked up further, partly reflecting the strength in pay growth.
Bank of England  
Page 57


Models estimated by Bank staff indicate that the pickup in underlying pay growth so far
has been driven by a tightening in the labour market (Section 3) and a rise in short-term
inflation expectations (Chart 2.17). The latter probably reflects higher headline inflation
itself: short-term measures of inflation expectations tend to move with actual inflation
(Rowe (2016)).
These factors are expected to push up underlying pay growth in the near term, with Bank
staff projecting a rise to around 5½%. Surveys by the Bank’s Agents also suggest pay
growth will strengthen. In the latest Agents’ survey on employment and pay, respondents
expected average pay settlements to be nearly 6% over the next 12 months, up from
around 5% in January (Chart 2.18). Around a quarter of respondents had given or were
Chart 2.17: Models suggest that a tightening labour market and higher inflation
expectations are contributing to the pickup in nominal pay growth
Contributions to annual private sector regular pay growth (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Wage equation based on Yellen (2017). Short-term inflation expectations are based on the Barclays Basix Index and
the YouGov/Citigroup one year ahead measure of household inflation expectations. Slack is based on the MPC’s
estimate of the unemployment gap. Productivity growth is based on long-run market sector productivity growth per head.
The unexplained component is the residual.
Underlying pay growth is expected to pick up further to around 5½% in the near
term, driven by persistent tightness in the labour market and higher inflation.
Bank of England  
Page 58


considering awarding one-off payments to compensate staff. Many did not report their
expected pay settlement over the next year, as they are waiting to see how much further
CPI inflation rises.
Contacts of the Bank’s Agents across a range of sectors report that they are continuing to
pass through higher costs to prices in order to protect margins. Manufacturing output
prices continued to rise sharply as a result of higher input costs, while consumer services
firms were similarly raising prices in response to higher input, energy and labour costs.
Business services firms continue to report significant cost pressure, especially higher
wages, and report being able to increase prices by more than normal given strong
demand. And retailers also expected to continue passing through costs into consumer
prices in coming months.
Chart 2.18: Respondents to the Agents’ pay survey in July expected average pay
settlements to be nearly 6% over the next 12 months, up from 5% in January
Pay settlements (a)
Sources: Bank of England, including the wage settlements database (which draws on information from the Bank’s
Agents, Incomes Data Research, Incomes Data Services, Industrial Relations Services and the Labour Research
Department).
(a) Companies were asked to state their expected average UK pay settlement for the next 12 months in the July survey.
Companies were asked to state their expected average UK pay settlement for 2022 in the January survey. Bank of
England private sector settlements based on average over the previous 12 months, using monthly data.
Firms have continued to pass through increased costs to prices in order to
protect margins…
…and their expectations for future price growth have picked up further, although
uncertainty around that outlook remains elevated.
Bank of England  
Page 59


The Bank’s DMP Survey suggests that firms expect elevated price inflation to persist over
the next year: one year ahead price expectations picked up to 6.3% in the three months to
July, on average. The same survey suggests that firms’ uncertainty about future prices
has been rising for some time, with a sharp increase following the war in Ukraine (Chart
2.19). Staff analysis using these results suggests that higher inflation uncertainty is
associated with larger forecast errors by firms in predicting their own price growth.
Measures of household inflation expectations over the next year remain elevated.
Respondents to the Bank/Ipsos Mori expected one year ahead CPI inflation to be 4.6% in
Q2, while the corresponding expectation was 6.0% in the July YouGov/Citigroup survey.
These measures are correlated with inflation outturns.
Chart 2.19: Firms’ uncertainty about future prices remains elevated
Inflation uncertainty (a)
Sources: DMP Survey and Bank calculations.
(a) Three-month moving average. The index is constructed using the standard deviations of expected firm-level price
growth over the next 12 months. Latest data from the July 2022 DMP Survey.
Short-term measures of inflation expectations remain elevated.
Companies’ expectations for inflation in two years’ time remain above historical
averages, financial market participants expect inflation to return close to target.
Bank of England  
Page 60


Turning to companies’ inflation expectations, two year ahead expectations reported in the
CBI Distributive Trades survey remained above its historical average in 2022 Q2. The Q2
Deloitte CFO Survey had reported a median expectation for CPI inflation of 3.4% in two
years’ time.
In financial markets, in the latest Market Participants Survey the median expectation for
CPI inflation was 2.2% in three years’ time. In the Bank’s survey of professional
forecasters, the average forecast was 2% in three years’ time, in line with the target
(Annex).
Financial market indicators of medium-term inflation expectations have fallen from their
recent highs. Two‑year inflation expectations, five years ahead, which are unaffected by
the alignment of RPI and CPIH in 2030, have declined since May but still remain above
their 2010–19 average (Chart 2.7). Household measures also remain above historical
averages (Chart 2.20). The YouGov/Citigroup five to ten year ahead measure averaged
4.1% over Q2 as a whole, around 1 percentage point higher than its 2010–19 average,
Chart 2.20: Long-term inflation expectations are above past averages
Measures of five year ahead inflation expectations (a)
Sources: Bank of England, Citigroup, Ipsos Mori, YouGov and Bank calculations.
(a) Data are not seasonally adjusted. See Table 2.B in the February Report for more information about the different
measures.
Financial market indicators of medium-term inflation expectations have fallen but
they, and household indicators, remain above historical averages.
Bank of England  
Page 61


before it edged down in July. The Bank/Ipsos Mori measure is only slightly above its
2010–19 average, but recent results may have been affected by a change in survey
method in mid-2020.
Bank of England  
Page 62


Box C: Agents’ update on business conditions
The key information from Agents’ contacts considered by the Monetary Policy
Committee at its August meeting is highlighted in this box, which summarises
intelligence gathered in the six weeks to mid-July.
Economic activity grew at a moderate pace overall, with output constrained by
shortages of labour and goods. Input cost inflation remained elevated, which,
combined with increasing labour costs, continued to weigh on companies’ margins.
To prevent further margin erosion, companies reported passing on higher costs to
consumer prices to a greater extent than normal. There were signs of consumer
demand softening, as squeezed household incomes depressed spending.
Food retailers reported declines in sales values and volumes compared with a year
ago as shoppers traded down to cheaper goods and reduced the quantity of goods
purchased. Discount supermarkets said they were continuing to gain market share.
There were also widespread reports of a slowdown in nominal sales of durable
goods, in particular of household appliances, with contacts reporting that customers
were buying cheaper brands or opting to repair rather than replace items. Car
dealers reported a reduction in customer enquiries and orders for new cars, and
there were some reports of existing orders being cancelled.
Growth in spending on consumer services remained strong in nominal terms,
reflecting higher inflation, but was flat in real terms as consumers cut back. Mid-
priced hospitality contacts reported weaker demand, while those at the lower-priced
end of the market reported stronger demand, and said they were gaining market
share. Staycation demand remained reasonably firm and contacts reported hotel
occupancy rates being close to or at pre-pandemic levels in most areas. However,
contacts said that the number of day trips to some tourist attractions had fallen,
possibly reflecting consumers economising on fuel.
Providers of subscription-based services reported weakening renewal rates. There
were also reports of households cutting back on discretionary insurance, for
example for house contents, and medical and dental services.
Annual growth in the value of spending on consumer goods slowed,
reflecting pressure on household incomes.
Bank of England  
Page 63


Third sector organisations said that the rising cost of living had led to increased
demand for their services, in particular debt advice. They also reported rising
numbers of people experiencing in-work poverty.
Business services contacts continued to report strong annual growth in turnover,
particularly in professional and financial services, IT, recruitment services and
consultancy, though growth was held back by the availability of staff. There were
some modest signs of softening in merger and acquisition activity, and in logistics
for some non-essential consumer goods and construction materials.
Manufacturing output continued to grow at a modest pace, held back by shortages
of materials and components due to the war in Ukraine and Covid-related
restrictions in China. Labour shortages also constrained growth. Demand remained
solid for a range of products – supported in part by companies building up stocks to
guard against future input price increases – but softened for durable consumer
goods.
Contacts reported shortages of sunflower oil, grain, timber, paper, construction
materials, steel, IT equipment, titanium, electric motors, microchips and electronic
components. However, companies reported taking a variety of actions to minimise
the effect of shortages, for example by switching products or changing suppliers –
including by near or on-shoring production. Contacts said there was continuing
uncertainty over how long supply chain disruption would persist, though the outlook
had improved slightly in recent months.
Growth in construction output moderated slightly, but remained about normal,
supported by infrastructure, industrial, and health projects. House-building activity
also remained strong, though it was constrained by shortages of labour, materials
and planning delays. There were some reports of large commercial projects being
delayed or cancelled due to rising materials costs and uncertainty about the
economic outlook. And demand for home improvements softened, which weighed
on activity among smaller builders and contractors.
Business services firms reported strong growth; growth in manufacturing
and construction was constrained by shortages of labour and goods, as well
as a modest softening in demand.
Demand in the housing market and for some types of commercial property
cooled.
Bank of England  
Page 64


Housing market demand cooled in most parts of the UK, but continued to outstrip
supply. Contacts attributed a slowdown in enquiries and online viewings in recent
weeks to concerns about the rising cost of living, and noted that properties were
selling at closer to asking prices than previously. There were also reports of lenders
making lower mortgage offers than in recent months, reflecting the increased cost of
living and higher lending rates.
In commercial real estate, transaction volumes remained high for all types of
industrial property and for prime office space. However, contacts reported some
properties selling for less than the asking price. The availability of bank credit to
finance commercial real estate purchases was reported to have tightened.
Values and rents for retail premises were under renewed pressure, and vacancy
rates were reported to be increasing again.
Investment intentions remained positive, with companies continuing to spend on
projects such as improving their IT and automation, and on energy-saving
measures. However, more contacts indicated that uncertainty about demand may
curtail investment in the future. There were some reports of companies reducing
their investment intentions, either due to the uncertain outlook – in particular for
hospitality and retail – or because they had completed investment projects that had
been delayed during the pandemic and were now returning to more normal levels of
investment.
Credit availability tightened modestly, especially for small companies in sectors
exposed to elevated costs, for example in the energy, agriculture and construction
sectors, and consumer-facing businesses.
Large investment-grade companies said that the cost of raising finance on financial
markets had increased. Sub-investment grade companies reported a significant
tightening in access to market finance. There had been little change in the
availability of bank credit overall for large corporates, though conditions were
reported to have tightened for some sectors, such as construction.
Contacts reported increased demand for working capital to cover rising input costs
and inventory, though many companies reported having large cash balances.
Insolvencies continued to increase, albeit from a low level.
Investment intentions softened slightly but remained positive; current
investment spending continued to be held back by cost pressures and
shortages. Credit availability tightened for some firms.
Bank of England  
Page 65


Companies reported ongoing, broad-based recruitment difficulties, with attrition and
vacancy rates higher than normal for many contacts. Employment intentions also
remained positive, driven by expected growth in demand and the need to replace
leavers. A survey of Agents’ contacts showed that companies would ideally like to
expand headcount by around 7% over the coming year, but expected to be able to
increase headcount by only around 4% due to recruitment difficulties (Section 3).
That is similar to the growth in employment firms reported over the past 12 months.
There was little evidence of companies planning to reduce headcount.
Wage inflation remained elevated, mainly due to labour shortages, but also in
response to higher inflation. According to the Agents’ survey, pay settlements were
expected to increase by around 6% over the next 12 months, a little higher than in
the corresponding survey discussed in the February 2022 Report (Section 2). And
around a quarter of respondents have given or are considering awarding one-off
payments to compensate staff.
Contacts said that input price inflation remained elevated for a wide range of goods,
with the weakness of sterling contributing to cost pressures for many companies.
Most companies said that margins remained below normal levels, and contacts
continued to increase output prices to prevent further margin erosion. However,
companies in sectors where demand was weakening were less likely to raise prices
due to concerns about losing sales to competitors. This was especially true for
companies that manufacture and/or retail consumer goods.
For example, companies reported offering incentives such as discounts and
interest-free credit to stimulate demand for big-ticket items such as furniture –
though with limited success. Used car prices eased back from their recent peak.
By contrast, supermarkets reported annual food price inflation of 5%–9%. They
expected food price inflation to increase in the coming months despite efforts to
stabilise the prices of essential items.
Clothing retailers reported annual inflation of 5%–7%, with robust demand for
holiday and formal wear and lower stock levels than last year. And companies in a
range of other consumer-facing sectors, such as hospitality and tourism reported
Recruitment difficulties remained acute, and employment intentions
continued to be strong. As a result, pay settlements increased further.
Input price inflation remained elevated; many companies expect to pass on
higher costs into prices to protect margins, which remained below normal.
Bank of England  
Page 66


putting up prices to cover increased input, energy and labour costs.
Bank of England  
Page 67


Box D: How have the interest rates facing households and
firms responded to the rise in Bank Rate?
An important way in which monetary policy affects the economy is through its effect
on the interest rates facing households and firms.
Prior to the August MPC meeting, Bank Rate had increased by 115 basis points
since December 2021. Bank Rate is the main ‘reference rate’ or ‘risk-free rate’ for
some retail products, but term overnight index swap (OIS) rates are the key
reference rate for others, and largely reflect expectations for the path of Bank Rate.
OIS rates have been increasing since August 2021, rising by around 240 basis
points.
In addition to changes in risk-free rates, banks and other lenders take a number of
other factors into account in their pricing of interest rates to households and
businesses, such as credit risk charges, funding spreads and other costs.[1] These
might vary at the same time as changes in reference rates, making it difficult to
isolate the precise impact of the rise in reference rates.
Notwithstanding this issue, the evidence set out in this box suggests that there has
been full pass-through of the increases in risk-free rates to interest rates on new
fixed-rate mortgages, with less pass-through to instant access deposit rates. There
could be further increases in household and business interest rates as the most
recent rises in risk-free rates feed through.
Interest rates on new mortgages have increased substantially since August 2021
(Chart A). For example, the average quoted rate on a two-year fixed rate 75% loan
to value (LTV) mortgage has increased to 3.5%, around 225 basis points higher
than in August 2021 and the highest rate since 2012. That is broadly in line with the
increase in the relevant risk-free rate (Table 1), suggesting that the rise in reference
rates has been fully passed through.
While new mortgage rates have gone up substantially, existing mortgagors on a
fixed-rate product will not face higher interest rates until the end of the initial fixed-
rate period (Box C of the February 2022 Report). However, over half of the
outstanding stock of fixed-rate mortgages will still reach the end of the fixed-rate
Since the autumn of 2021, there has been full pass-through of the increases
in risk-free rates to new fixed-rate mortgages...
Bank of England  
Page 68


period within the MPC’s forecast period. A borrower on a floating-rate mortgage will
face higher interest rates relatively quickly. For example, with an outstanding
mortgage balance of £140,000 and a remaining term of 17 years, monthly interest
payments would increase by around £80 as a result of the increase in Bank Rate
from 0.1% to 1.25%.
The overall increase in interest rates on high LTV fixed-rate mortgages since August
2021 has been less than for lower LTV mortgages (Table 1). That is primarily
because towards the end of 2021, interest rates on high LTV products continued to
decline (Chart A) even as risk-free rates were rising. Supervisory intelligence
suggests that other factors were offsetting the impact of rising risk-free rates.
Notably, the improvement in the macroeconomic outlook after the height of the
pandemic was reducing the credit risk associated with this lending.
Chart A: Interest rates on some UK retail products have risen substantially
Average quoted rates on two-year fixed-rate mortgages and savings products (a)
(a) The Bank’s quoted rates series are weighted monthly average rates advertised by all UK banks and building
societies with products meeting the specific criteria. In February 2019 the method used to calculate these data
was changed. For more information, see ‘Introduction of new Quoted Rates data – Bankstats article’. Latest
quoted rates data are flash estimates for July using data to 25 July and are provisional until publication on 5
August.
Bank of England  
Page 69


Table 1: Higher risk-free rates have been fully passed through to new fixed-
rate mortgages
Changes in average quoted rates on two-year mortgages and savings products and the
relevant risk-free rates (a)
Change since
August 2021
+225 basis points
+115 basis points
+165 basis points
+240 basis
points
Change since
November 2021
+75 basis points
+25 basis points
+30 basis points
+115 basis
points
Around 70% of all households do not have a mortgage but some of these
households may be using unsecured borrowing. Interest rates on credit cards and
personal loans tend to be less sensitive to changes in Bank Rate, as factors such
as the credit risk associated with the lending are more important. Rates on these
products have increased by much less since November 2021.
The majority of all household deposits – around two thirds – are in instant access
accounts. Interest rates on these are up by only around 30 basis points since
November compared to the more marked increase in fixed-rate bonds (Table 1),
which account for a smaller share of household deposits. The limited increase in
instant access rates has turned the spread between these rates and Bank Rate
Household borrowing rate
Household
deposit rate
Relevant
reference
rate
Two-year fixed rate,
75% LTV mortgage
Two-year fixed rate,
90% LTV mortgage
Two-year fixed-
rate bond
Two-year
OIS rate
Household borrowing rate
Household
deposit rate
Relevant
reference
rate
Two-year 75% LTV
variable rate
mortgage
Credit cards
Instant access
deposit account
Bank Rate
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg Finance L.P. and Bank calculations.
(a) See footnote (a) on Chart A. Data are monthly averages to 25 July compared to monthly averages in August
2021 and November 2021 respectively. Data are rounded to the nearest 5 basis points.
…although there has been much less pass-through to household instant
access deposits.
Bank of England  
Page 70


negative (Chart B). Prior to 2008, instant access deposit rates were well below
Bank Rate, but when Bank Rate was cut close to zero, deposit rates fell by less as
banks and building societies did not impose negative interest rates on deposits. In
the period that followed, instant access deposit rates were – unusually – higher than
Bank Rate. Partial pass-through of the recent increases in Bank Rate may in part
reflect a desire to normalise this spread over time. The fact that banks have a
plentiful supply of retail funding – as suggested by the Bank Liabilities Survey – is
likely to make it easier to do that, because it reduces the incentive to increase rates
to attract new deposit funding.
As Bank Rate moves further from the lower bound, the rate of pass-through from
Bank Rate to instant access deposits may rise. Indeed, the increase in instant
access rates after the most recent rises in Bank Rate seem to be a little greater
than occurred initially (Chart A).
Around three quarters of the stock of corporate bank debt has a variable interest
rate, with changes in reference rates, such as Bank Rate, reflected fairly quickly in
the interest rates that companies pay. The effective rates on new lending to private
non-financial corporations and to small and medium-sized enterprises (SMEs) were
Chart B: Partial pass-through of increases in Bank Rate to instant access
deposit rates has turned the spread negative once again
Instant access deposit spread to Bank Rate (a)
(a) Prior to 2011 the spread is constructed using data on time deposit spreads and assumes that spreads on
time deposits and instant access accounts moved in parallel. Data are monthly averages to 25 July.
The increases in Bank Rate appear to have been fully passed through to
new bank lending rates to corporates.
Bank of England  
Page 71


around 105 and 85 basis points higher respectively in June than in November. This
suggests that the rise in reference rates has been fully passed through, particularly
since these data may not yet fully reflect the increase in Bank Rate in June.
As set out in the July 2022 Financial Stability Report, a large part of the
additional debt taken on by SMEs during the pandemic has been provided through
government schemes at relatively low interest rates. These are fixed for periods of
up to six years and so will not be affected by changes in reference rates for some
time.
Bank of England  
Page 72


Box E: How does consumer price inflation compare across
countries?
UK CPI inflation was 9.4% in June, and is expected to increase further in coming
months (Section 2.3). Inflation has also picked up in other countries (Chart A). The
coincidence of high inflation in many places underlines the key role of global factors
in driving inflation, including shocks to global food, energy and goods prices. There
are some differences between regions, however. Energy prices are contributing
more to inflation in the UK and euro area, partly reflecting Russia’s role in supplying
gas to Europe. Services inflation has been higher in the US and UK, reflecting a
greater role for labour market tightness. And goods price inflation is a little higher in
the UK at the moment. This box sets out some of these similarities and differences
in more detail.
Consumer price inflation rates are elevated almost everywhere. Of the 38 countries
in the OECD, all but five currently have inflation rates above 6%, and over half have
inflation rates above 8% (Chart A). Some countries in Northern Europe have
inflation rates as high as 20%.
Chart A: Inflation is high in many countries
CPI inflation in OECD countries (a)
Sources: OECD and ONS.
(a) Latest data points are for June 2022. All OECD member countries are shown except Australia, New Zealand
and Turkey. See OECD – CPIs – Frequently Asked Questions for more details.
Headline inflation rates are elevated almost everywhere, underlining the key
role of global factors.
Bank of England  
Page 73


In the UK, CPI inflation was 9.4% in June. Euro-area HICP inflation, which is
constructed on the same basis as UK CPI, was 8.6% in June (Chart B). The flash
estimate for July was 8.9%. Inflation is measured somewhat differently in the US.
US PCE inflation – the Federal Reserve’s preferred measure of inflation – was 6.8%
in June, while US CPI inflation was 9.1%. Neither measure is exactly comparable to
the UK and euro-area measures.
The coincidence of high inflation in all three of these major economies, as well as in
other countries, underlines the dominant role of global factors in driving inflation
rates at the moment. These factors include: the economic recovery from the
pandemic; global supply chain disruption, including from China; and the Russian
invasion of Ukraine.
Chart B: Inflation has picked up across the UK, US and euro area
Contributions to annual consumer price inflation (a)
Sources: Eurostat, ONS, Refinitiv Eikon from LSEG, US Bureau of Economic Analysis, US Bureau of Labor
Statistics and Bank calculations.
(a) Energy includes fuel and household energy bills. Other goods is the difference between overall inflation and
the other contributions identified on the chart, and therefore includes alcohol and tobacco.
Energy prices have increased globally, but they are making a larger
contribution to inflation in the UK and euro area than in the US, partly
reflecting Russia’s role in supplying gas to Europe.
Bank of England  
Page 74


Energy prices have increased almost everywhere, but the effects on consumer price
inflation have been larger in the UK and euro area than in the US. Energy was
directly contributing over 3.5 percentage points to inflation in the UK and euro area
in June; in the US the contribution was around half of that (Chart B).
Energy includes both motor fuel and energy used in the home. The US has higher
motor fuel inflation than the UK and euro area, in part because fuel taxes are lower,
so changes in global oil prices result in larger percentage changes in pump prices.
The larger overall impact from energy prices in the UK and euro area is the result of
a larger contribution from household energy price inflation. European and UK
natural gas prices have gone up much more than US gas prices (Chart 2.4). Gas is
traded via a network of pipelines around Europe, and Russia has typically been a
major supplier to that network. The Russian invasion of Ukraine has led to
disruption to that supply, and concerns that supply could be further restricted in the
future. Although gas can be traded between Europe and the US in liquid form by
ship, there are extra costs involved and limited capacity, so price differences
between regions can be persistent (Section 3 of the May Monetary Policy Report).
Household energy has a larger weight in the euro-area measure of inflation than in
the UK’s; this means that even though energy price inflation is lower in the euro
area, it makes a larger contribution to the headline rate.
Energy price inflation may peak later in the UK compared with the euro area
because of the operation of the UK’s household energy price caps. Most UK
households are now on variable-rate energy tariffs that have their prices capped by
the UK’s energy regulator, Ofgem. These caps are updated periodically to reflect
changes in the costs faced by energy providers. In recent years, the caps have
been updated twice a year. As a result, there has been a relatively long lag between
changes in wholesale energy price changes and changes in the prices faced by
households. Reflecting that longer lag, UK energy price inflation has been lower
than elsewhere until very recently (Chart C). From next year, Ofgem will update the
cap four times a year, so consumer prices will respond more quickly to changing
wholesale prices.
There is a lot of variation in household energy price inflation rates across euro-area
countries: some countries, such as France, have seen prices rise by less than 30%
over the past year, while some countries, such as the Netherlands, have seen
Energy inflation may peak later in the UK than in the euro area.
Bank of England  
Page 75


prices increase by over 80%. This variation partly reflects differences in government
policies. Most euro-area countries have adjusted energy taxes in some way, and
some have imposed caps on retail or wholesale prices (Sgaravatti et al (2022)).
Food prices have also increased around the world, largely because of supply
issues. Russia’s invasion of Ukraine has been a particularly significant shock to
food supply. The two countries account for a large share of global production of
some agricultural commodities, such as sunflower oil and wheat (see Box B in the
May Monetary Policy Report). The conflict has disrupted the supply of these
goods, resulting in prices increasing sharply, although they have fallen back recently
(Chart 2.5). Higher energy prices have also contributed to the rise in food prices
because energy is an input into food production.
The UK and euro area have had very similar rates of food price inflation recently
(Chart C). In June, UK food prices were 9.8% higher than a year earlier; in the euro
area they were 10.4% higher. US food price inflation was higher, at 12.7%. But food
has a higher weight in the euro-area measure than in the UK and US, so the
contribution of food to the headline rate of inflation is largest there (Chart B).
All three regions are experiencing elevated rates of food price inflation.
Chart C: Energy and food prices have increased everywhere
Energy and food price annual inflation (a)
Sources: Eurostat, ONS, US Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bank calculations.
(a) Energy includes fuel and household bills. Food includes non-alcoholic beverages.
Bank of England  
Page 76


Services inflation has also picked up in all three places, although to varying
degrees. The US had the fastest rate of services price inflation over 2021 and early
2022 (Chart D). The UK’s rate was lower over 2021, but was higher in June, at
5.2%. Services inflation has been lower in the euro area, and was 3.4% in June.
The pickup in all three places reflects the economic recovery from the pandemic
causing labour markets to tighten and wage growth to rise, although the degree of
tightness varies across countries. Labour markets appear tighter in the US and UK
than in the euro area (Section 2.1). This is consistent with services price inflation
having been strongest in the US, with the UK not too far behind. Services prices will
also have been pushed up by higher food and energy prices, as these will be used
as inputs for certain services.
Finally, the inflation rate for core goods has also picked up in the UK, US and euro
area (Chart D). Goods are often tradable between countries, so prices are
influenced by global factors. Since the start of 2021, there has been strong global
demand for goods, and some disruption to global supply chains (Box B in the
February Monetary Policy Report). As a result, goods price rises have been
widespread.
However, factors such as transport costs and tariffs prevent goods prices being
exactly equal across countries, and providing goods to consumers almost always
requires at least some domestic labour. As a result, goods prices can also reflect
local economic conditions, and there has been some variation in goods price
inflation across countries.
Services inflation has been highest in the US, on average, over the past
year, possibly reflecting labour market tightness.
Goods price inflation has also picked up.
Bank of England  
Page 77


The US has experienced the highest rates of goods price inflation until recently
(Chart D). Durable goods inflation has been particularly strong, peaking at 11.5%
earlier this year on the PCE measure. Used car prices rose especially steeply.
Demand for goods has been particularly strong in the US as a result of strong
growth in household incomes and a shift in demand from services to goods during
the pandemic. Goods inflation has started to fall more recently as some prices, such
as car prices, stabilise at their new levels.
Core goods price inflation in the UK was 6.5% in June, higher than the euro area,
where it was 4.3%. Some of the strength of goods price inflation in the UK relative
to the euro area might reflect a normalisation in price levels. Clothing and footwear
prices were particularly low in the UK in 2020 because of discounting in the
pandemic; inflation in this component has subsequently been higher than in the
euro area.
Chart D: Services price and goods price inflation have picked up
everywhere, although there are some differences across regions
Services and core goods price annual inflation (a)
Sources: Eurostat, ONS, US Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bank calculations.
(a) Core goods is all goods except energy, food and beverages. In the case of the UK and euro area, it also
excludes tobacco.
US goods price inflation picked up earlier than elsewhere, reflecting
particularly strong demand, especially during the pandemic.
Core goods price inflation has been somewhat higher in the UK than the
euro area recently. This might reflect some UK prices recovering from
unusually low levels in the pandemic. It may also reflect the tighter labour
market.
Bank of England  
Page 78


Higher goods price inflation in the UK and US compared to the euro area may also
reflect labour market tightness. Although services inflation is often assumed to be a
clearer indicator of domestic inflationary pressures, almost all goods embody some
domestic labour input as well. As a result, higher goods inflation might reflect some
of the same drivers of higher services price inflation.
Bank of England  
Page 79


3: In focus – Why is the labour market so tight?
The overshoot of the 2% inflation target mainly reflects previous large increases in
global energy and other tradable goods prices, but domestic inflationary pressure
has also been strengthening recently (Section 2.3). Part of the strengthening in
underlying nominal wage growth reflects the UK labour market being tighter than it
was before the pandemic. The unemployment rate has been around its pre-Covid
trough for some months (Chart 3.1), despite output being only a little above its pre-
Covid level. And the high level of vacancies and other measures of recruitment
difficulties also suggest that the labour market is tighter than implied by the
unemployment rate alone (Section 3.1).
Section 3.2 looks at the factors that have contributed to the recent tightening in the
labour market. Labour supply is lower than pre-Covid: an unusually large number of
people have left the workforce during the pandemic and although some have now
returned, many have not. In contrast, labour demand is above pre-Covid levels.
How labour market tightness evolves will be a key factor determining wage growth
and domestic inflationary pressure over the medium term. This is because
inflationary pressure stemming from the labour market has tended to be more
persistent in the past than that caused by factors such as the cost of energy.
Section 3.3 sets out the MPC’s projection for the labour market and the risks around
it. In the central case, the labour market remains tight and firms initially respond to
the weakness in aggregate demand by using their existing inputs less intensively.
The unemployment rate then picks up above 4% in the middle of 2023, rising to
6¼% by the end of the forecast (Chart 3.1). This contributes to economic slack
which moderates domestic inflationary pressures. But there is uncertainty around
how labour market tightness will respond to slowing demand. Labour demand may
slow in line with aggregate demand, leading to a quicker rise in unemployment. But
if the fall in labour supply is currently the limiting factor in the labour market,
constraining hiring and firms’ output, then it may take even longer for the labour
market to loosen materially in response to falling demand. The evolution of labour
market tightness will also depend on how persistent the effects of the pandemic are
on labour force participation.
Bank of England  
Page 80


3.1: How has the labour market evolved since the pandemic?
The pandemic caused large changes in the labour market. Demand for labour fell sharply,
with the number of vacancies falling by 60% in just four months. Hiring flows, both
between jobs and into employment, also fell sharply. Significant numbers of employees
were furloughed, which kept them attached to the labour market, even as demand fell.
While the furlough scheme prevented widespread job losses, the unemployment rate still
rose to a peak of 5.2% in 2020 Q4, rising by more than 1 percentage point in a year
(Chart 3.1).
The unemployment rate has since reversed that rise and was 3.8% in the three months to
May 2022, equal to its pre-pandemic trough (Chart 3.1). The proportion of people in
employment is only a little below early 2020 levels but many people have left the labour
market. The proportion of people not working but also not actively seeking a job –
‘inactive’ in the labour market – rose by more than a percentage point in the first year of
the pandemic, the sharpest 12-month rise on record. It has remained higher than pre-
Chart 3.1: The unemployment rate is expected to rise from the middle of 2023
following a slowing in demand
The unemployment rate and the MPC’s baseline projection (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Diamonds show the MPC’s baseline projection for Labour Force Survey unemployment in 2022 Q3, 2023 Q3, 2024
Q3 and 2025 Q3.
The labour market was materially affected by Covid…
…but now appears tighter than before Covid across a range of measures.
Bank of England  
Page 81


Covid since, even as the economy has recovered. Inactivity has fallen back somewhat
over the past few months, and employment has risen, but there are still many more
people inactive than before the pandemic (Chart 3.2).
The labour market is tighter than before the pandemic, and appears tighter than the
unemployment rate alone would suggest. Vacancies have continued to climb in recent
quarters, setting new record highs. The rise in vacancies and fall in unemployment means
there is now a similar number of vacancies to the number of unemployed people. The
Beveridge curve (Chart 3.3), which compares the vacancy rate against the unemployment
rate, shows that although unemployment is currently around the same level as in January
2020, there are many more unfilled vacancies (Haskel (2021)). Other measures of labour
market tightness paint a similar picture. For example, the ONS underemployment rate –
which measures the proportion of workers that want to work more hours – is at its lowest
level for more than 15 years. The marginal attachment ratio – the proportion of the
population who report that they would like a job but are not actively seeking one – is more
than 2 percentage points lower than pre-Covid. On the basis of this evidence, the MPC
Chart 3.2: Unemployment has fallen back but the number of people inactive in the
labour market remains much higher than pre-Covid
Changes in employment, unemployment and inactivity since 2019 Q4 (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) For those aged 16 and over. Employment includes employees and self-employed. Changes do not sum to zero as
the population is estimated to have increased during the period.
Bank of England  
Page 82


judges that the ratio of vacancies to unemployment is giving a better read on labour
market tightness than the gap between the unemployment rate and its medium-term
equilibrium.
Recruitment difficulties still appear elevated. The Bank’s Agents’ score for recruitment
difficulties remains at a series high and more than 80% of companies are reporting that
recruitment conditions are quite or very tight in company visits (Chart 3.4). The staff
availability index pointed to a decline in overall labour availability for the sixteenth month
in a row in the June KPMG/REC UK Report on Jobs.
Chart 3.3: The vacancy rate is much higher than before the pandemic even though
the unemployment rate is similar
Vacancy rate and unemployment rate (a)
Sources: HMRC, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Three-month moving averages. Latest data is for the three months to May 2022. Vacancy rate is the number of
vacancies divided by total employment. The unemployment figures have been increased to reflect an MPC judgement
that 10% of those furloughed between March 2020 and September 2021 were actively searching for work.
Bank of England  
Page 83


Nominal wage growth has continued to be robust, at higher rates than before the
pandemic. Bank staff’s estimate of underlying private sector regular pay growth, which
strips out estimates of compositional and furlough effects, is around 4½% (Section 2.3).
This is materially higher than pay growth in early 2020.
At least part of the strengthening in wages has been driven by labour market tightness. As
recruitment has become more difficult for employers, they have been offering higher
salaries to new joiners and some have been including joining bonuses. There were
continued reports among contacts of the Bank's Agents of staff being offered higher pay to
switch company, particularly in sectors where skills shortages are most acute. Bank staff
analysis using the DMP Survey shows that firms reporting that recruitment is much harder
than normal have experienced more than half a percentage point higher pay growth than
other firms.
Chart 3.4: Recruitment difficulties are elevated
Agents’ company visit scores for recruitment conditions (a)
Sources: Bank of England and Bank calculations.
(a) The Bank’s Agents assign company visit scores on a regular basis. For this chart, the scores are associated with the
following recruitment conditions: -5 and -4 are very loose; -3 and -2 are quite loose; -1, 0 and +1 are close to normal; +2
and +3 are quite tight and +4 and +5 are very tight. Data are for company visits carried out until the end of June 2022.
That appears to have contributed to a firming in underlying nominal wage growth,
an important component of domestic inflationary pressure.
Bank of England  
Page 84


Overall, indicators suggest that the labour market is tighter than before the pandemic, a
period where the labour market was already judged to be fairly tight (Section 3 of the
January 2020 Report). This is in contrast to output which has only just recovered to its
pre-Covid levels, and remains materially below the level its pre-Covid trend would have
implied. Labour market tightness could have occurred in this context if there had been a
marked deterioration in the underlying trend in labour productivity, resulting in firms
needing to hire more workers to produce the same output. This may have occurred to an
extent: aggregate labour productivity growth during the pandemic has matched the weak
pre-pandemic trend, but has been lifted by compositional effects, as some lower
productivity sectors have shrunk as a share of GDP. But other factors are likely to have
been more important drivers of labour market tightness at present.
3.2: What is driving tightness in the labour market?
Labour supply
A key reason that firms are struggling to recruit while employment remains below pre-
Covid levels, is that the supply of people available to work remains lower than at the start
of 2020 (left panel of Chart 3.5). In particular, there has been a fall in the proportion of the
population participating – or being ‘active’ – in the labour market. While reduced
participation was expected initially, as people were unable to search for work and some
were cautious about social contact, it remained weak as the economy reopened and has
only recently started to pick up. Looking at the factors driving lower participation can give
an insight into whether, and how quickly, those who are still outside the labour market will
return.
This tightness has occurred despite output only just reaching pre-Covid levels.
One of the factors contributing to tightness is constrained labour supply and, in
particular, a fall in the proportion of the population participating in the labour
market.
Bank of England  
Page 85


Long-term sickness appears to be one of the main reasons behind high levels of labour
market inactivity (Chart 3.6). While many people with long-term health conditions
participate in the labour market, the rate of participation is lower than among the rest of
the population. The proportion of the population with a long-term health condition has
been rising for some time (Haskel and Martin (2022)), in part because of the ageing
population, so some increase in inactivity due to long-term sickness would have been
expected even without the pandemic. But there are signs this trend has accelerated. In
addition, the participation rate for those with long-term health conditions had been rising in
previous years but this has stalled since the start of the pandemic.
It is likely that Covid and associated delays in treatment for other conditions have played a
significant role in the increase in inactivity due to long-term sickness. Just under two
million people reported to the ONS that they have long Covid as of 4 June. Around 20% of
those people report that this reduces their ability to undertake day-to-day activities a lot.
Those with existing health conditions may have also left the labour force in order to shield
Chart 3.5: Labour supply remains below its pre-Covid level while labour demand
has recovered
Changes in labour supply and labour demand since 2019 Q4 (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Changes since the three months to December 2019. Labour supply shows the number of people in employment and
unemployment. Population contribution shows the increase in labour supply if the participation rate had been
unchanged. Participation contribution shows the difference due to a changing participation rate. The number of people
currently employed plus vacancies (additional desired employment) is a measure of labour demand.
Inactivity due to long-term sickness has remained persistently higher than before
Covid.
Bank of England  
Page 86


from Covid. In addition, participation may be lower due to the effects of other long-term
health conditions, which may have been more difficult to treat than before the pandemic
given capacity pressures in the healthcare sector.
It is difficult to judge how long these pandemic-related effects will last. The number of
people with long Covid declined in the most recent ONS data and those shielding from
Covid may return to the labour force. More generally, if experiences during the pandemic
lead to more widespread flexible working practices, more people with health conditions
could participate in the labour market. That said, much of this effect may have already
occurred and it is unlikely to benefit all workers as many jobs cannot be done from home.
Firms have reported to the Bank’s Agents that some of their employees have
reconsidered their plans during the pandemic and taken early retirement. According to
Labour Force Survey (LFS) data on reasons for inactivity, this channel is fairly small
relative to other factors (Chart 3.6). Data on labour market flows which capture the
Chart 3.6: Long-term sickness has driven much of the persistent rise in inactivity
Change in inactivity since 2019 Q4 by reason (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Changes from the three months to December 2019, based on those aged 16–64. Other reasons include:
discouraged workers; those awaiting the results of a job application; have not yet started looking for work; do not need
or want employment; have given an uncategorised reason; or have not given a reason.
While early retirement appears to be a smaller part of the story, these people
might be less likely to return to the labour force.
Bank of England  
Page 87


characteristics of people changing labour market status suggest a larger role for early
retirement in explaining the pickup in inactivity (IFS (2022)). But these data have a smaller
sample size than the headline LFS measures.
Those who have taken early retirement might not be expected to return to the labour
market, unless there is a significant change in their preferences or circumstances. The hit
to real income from higher prices could cause some people to return if finances become
stretched, but the Bank’s Agents report little evidence of this happening so far. Fifty-nine
per cent of respondents to the ONS’s Over 50s Lifestyle Study who had left the labour
market in 2021 said they would not consider returning to work in the future. While early
retirement might weigh on participation over the next few years, it is less likely to have
affected future retirement decisions, so the effects on the participation rate should fade
over time.
An important driver of the rise in inactivity earlier in the pandemic was from those inactive
because they were a student (Chart 3.6). This could have reflected some people deciding
to undertake study rather than search for work because of the pandemic, or existing
students being unable to find a job alongside their studies. But the number inactive due to
being a student is now back to around pre-pandemic levels.
Those inactive for other reasons (see notes to Chart 3.6), also rose early in the pandemic.
Some of this may have reflected the difficulty of searching for a job during lockdowns or
those discouraged from searching for work because they believed no jobs were available.
But as the labour market has opened up, inactivity due to other reasons has returned
much closer to previous levels.
Regardless of the reason for leaving the labour market, over 80% of working age people
who are inactive state that they do not want a job, almost 3 percentage points higher than
before the pandemic. This increase has more than accounted for the rise in inactivity
overall. This could point to some of the fall in participation persisting, although some of the
recent fall back in inactivity has been from those who previously did not want a job.
There have also been increases in inactivity for other reasons.
Whatever the reason for inactivity, there has been a rise in the number of ‘inactive’
people who do not want a job.
Long-running demographic trends have also been weighing on labour supply
growth.
Bank of England  
Page 88


Long-running demographic trends are weighing on labour supply growth. One factor has
been a rising share of older people, who are less likely to participate in the labour market,
in the population. For much of the past two decades, that effect was offset by factors
boosting participation such as higher educational attainment and the rising state pension
age for women (Saunders (2022)). But the boost from those factors has been levelling off
and the share of older people is expected to grow more rapidly.
Another long-running trend weighing on labour supply has been slowing population
growth. Population growth has accounted for the majority of labour supply growth since
the financial crisis, and much of this has been driven by migration. But UK population
growth has been falling since 2016, as migration has slowed. Lower net migration from
the EU has only partially been offset by higher migration from outside the EU.
Migration figures have become more uncertain since the start of the pandemic (see
Section 3 of the November 2021 Report), but the LFS data have recently incorporated
information from HMRC’s payroll database, providing an updated steer on the level of the
population aged 16 and above in the UK. Growth in the EU-born population appears to
have stalled since 2017. Although that has been partly offset by a pickup in growth from
those born outside of the UK and EU, growth in the non-UK born population overall has
slowed. This has been weighing on available labour supply.
On top of these, labour supply growth has also been reduced in recent years by
lower net migration from the EU…
Bank of England  
Page 89


Slowing population growth is expected to weigh on labour supply but this, on its own,
would not normally add to labour market tightness. This is because changes in the
population typically affect both the supply and demand for labour. Changes in the
composition of the population can however contribute to labour market tightness if they
have altered the composition of the labour force, for example the mix of skills. Over 40%
of firms pointed to a lack of availability of EU workers as a source of recruitment and
retention difficulties in the Agents’ recent pay and employment survey (Chart 3.7).
Labour demand
While constraints on labour supply have been important drivers of labour market
tightness, the recovery in demand for labour is also playing a role (Chart 3.5). Increased
demand for labour was the most commonly cited source of recruitment and retention
difficulties in the Bank’s Agents’ survey on employment and pay (Chart 3.7). Vacancies
Chart 3.7: A lack of EU workers is one factor behind recruitment difficulties,
although increased demand for labour and higher wages offered elsewhere appear
most important
Sources of recruitment and retention difficulties for firms (a)
Sources: Bank of England and Bank calculations.
(a) Taken from responses to the Agents’ survey on employment and pay. Responses were collected between 23 May
and 6 July 2022. Question: ‘If you have experienced recruitment difficulties over the past 12 months, what are the
sources of these?’.
…which may be contributing to labour market tightness if it has altered the
composition of the labour force.
Labour demand appears to have recovered more quickly than labour supply.
Bank of England  
Page 90


have been much higher than previous records for several quarters (Chart 3.8). The exact
level of vacancies may be difficult to compare across long periods of time because the
ability to advertise online has reduced the cost to firms of posting a vacancy. This is
unlikely to materially distort comparisons to the period immediately before the pandemic
however, and other data such as employment intentions have also pointed to a rapid
recovery in labour demand.
Alongside the sharp rise in vacancies, the flow of new hires recovered from around 20%
below pre-Covid levels in 2020 Q3 to 20% above a year later (Chart 3.8). But the pace of
hiring has slowed since 2021 Q3, even as vacancies have continued to rise. The
KPMG/REC UK Report on Jobs can give a more timely steer on the path for vacancies
and hiring. This has pointed to a slowing in permanent placements growth over the first
half of 2022 to around previous averages. The index of total vacancies, however, has only
softened slightly and continues to suggest sharp increases at rates much higher than
previous averages. Some of the wedge between vacancies and hires may reflect the
tightness in the labour market. Standard models of the labour market would predict that it
becomes harder for each vacancy to be filled when many of them are open at the same
time (Pissarides (2000)). For example, much of the slowdown in hiring is explained by
reduced flows from unemployment to employment, which may reflect the fact that the pool
of unemployed people has shrunk.
Chart 3.8: Hiring increased sharply from its Covid trough but has flattened off
Vacancies and hires (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Data are quarterly. Latest data points are 2022 Q1 for hires and 2022 Q2 for vacancies. Hires are inflows into
employment (for people aged 16–64) plus job-to-job flows (for people aged 16–69).
Bank of England  
Page 91


Mismatch between those searching for work and the available vacancies may also be
contributing to recruitment difficulties. The uneven impact of the pandemic, with job losses
and reduced hiring being concentrated in contact-intensive sectors such as hospitality, led
to a sharp increase in sectoral mismatch in the early stages of the pandemic. However, as
hiring picked up in the worst-affected sectors, models that estimate sectoral mismatch
suggest it fell back and is no longer elevated. Similar models for regional mismatch
suggest it has been relatively stable throughout the pandemic. Recruitment difficulties
could signal frictions on different, or more granular, dimensions of the labour market,
however. They may also reflect a shortage of workers with particular skills. This is
supported by reports to the Bank’s Agents of skills shortages, some of which are viewed
as structural and not expected to ease materially over the next 12 months. In addition,
some workers with certain skills, particularly those from the EU, who had left the UK
during the pandemic are not expected to return.
The experience of recruitment difficulties can sometimes lead firms to hoard labour, even
in the event demand for their output falls (see, for example, Fair (1985) and Horning
(1994)). So even if demand softens, and some firms then have more staff than they need,
they might be reluctant to make any redundancies to avoid being unable to fill vacancies
later once demand recovers. Indeed, in the Bank’s Agents’ recent survey on employment
and pay, a net balance of more than half of firms reported that a desire to retain staff to
avoid needing to rehire in future had contributed to employment levels both over the past
year and expectations for the coming year. This could add to the persistence of labour
market tightness in a softening demand environment. But the high level of capacity use in
firms suggests that, so far, labour hoarding has not been large in aggregate.
Adding the number of people employed to vacancies – the number of additional people
firms would like to employ – is a measure of labour demand. On this measure, labour
demand now exceeds its pre-Covid levels (Chart 3.5), even though it remains below the
level implied by pre-Covid trends. Labour supply on the other hand remains a little below
pre-Covid levels. If labour market tightness primarily reflects strength in labour demand,
that could mean that tightness is less persistent if demand were to fall. But the changes
during the pandemic appear to have left labour supply roughly equal to labour demand,
The composition of labour demand may be contributing to tightness…
…and if firms hoard labour that could also add to labour market tightness…
…but the overall balance of labour demand relative to labour supply is likely to be
a more important factor at the moment.
Bank of England  
Page 92


when it is usually higher. This might suggest that the fall in labour supply is currently the
limiting factor in the labour market, constraining hiring. If this is the case, demand may be
able to fall for some time before the labour market loosens materially.
3.3: The outlook for the labour market
In the MPC’s baseline projections labour supply growth is assumed to slow. As in previous
forecasts, this is driven by a slowdown in population growth and the ageing population.
Trend labour supply is judged to be lower than previously expected. This is due to a
revision of the trend in participation among women aged 60–64, as part of the MPC’s
regular assessment of trends in labour supply. The previous projected trend in
participation for this group was judged to carry too much momentum from the period when
participation growth was being boosted by the increase in the state pension age (Section
3.2). In addition, some of the fall in participation seen during the pandemic is assumed to
persist during the forecast period, but unwind by the end. For example, inactivity due to
long-term sickness returns gradually towards previous trends, and those that have retired
early reach official retirement age, when they would have left the labour market anyway.
The unemployment rate is expected to remain broadly stable around its current level for
the rest of this year, given the levels of tightness in the labour market and firms’ robust
hiring plans. There are no signs of slowing employment growth in firms’ responses to the
Bank’s Agents’ survey on employment and pay (Chart 3.9). Firms expect to increase
headcount by a little more than last year and would ideally expand even more. The gap
between desired and expected headcount may reflect the scale of recruitment difficulties
that firms expect to encounter. Given strong employment intentions and the current
difficulties in recruitment, firms are expected to initially respond to weak demand by
keeping their existing resources, including staff, but use them less intensively, for example
by reducing hours worked.
Trend labour supply is judged to be a little weaker than previously anticipated.
The labour market is expected to remain tight in the near term…
Bank of England  
Page 93


Underlying nominal wage growth is projected to pick up further in the coming quarters. In
part, this reflects the tightness of the labour market but also rising pressure from CPI
inflation (Section 2.3). This, in turn, is expected to push up inflation via domestic price
pressures.
Consumption growth is expected to slow materially over the coming year, as a result of
the squeeze in real incomes (Section 1). Over time, as demand continues to slow, firms
are expected to reduce their workforce, which will ease the tightness in the labour market
and increase unemployment. The unemployment rate is expected to rise above 4% in
2023 Q3 as these forces start to take effect (Chart 3.1). It is projected to reach 6¼% by
the end of the forecast period, higher than the peak during Covid, but lower than levels
seen following the financial crisis.
Chart 3.9: Firms expect to expand headcount further in the coming year, but by
less than they would ideally like
Reported, expected and desired changes in businesses’ staff numbers (a)
Sources: Bank of England and Bank calculations.
(a) Taken from responses to the Agents’ survey on employment and pay. Responses were collected between 23 May
and 6 July 2022. Questions: ‘How have staff numbers changed over the past 12 months?’; ‘Given your expectations of
changes in the labour market, how are staff numbers expected to change in the next 12 months?’; and ‘How would you
like staff numbers to change in the next 12 months?’.
…but loosen over time, with the unemployment rate rising from next year.
The labour market may remain tighter for longer if labour supply has been an
important constraint on recent hiring or if the effects of Covid on participation are
more persistent…
Bank of England  
Page 94


If the current labour market tightness reflects much more labour being demanded now
than is available, such that capacity utilisation is at its limit, there may be room for labour
demand to fall for longer before leading to spare labour capacity or rising unemployment.
Labour hoarding as demand softens would also prolong the tightness in the labour market
(Section 3.2). Alternatively, more of the fall in participation rates during the pandemic
could prove to be persistent. For example the share of people with long-term health
conditions and the likelihood they participate in the labour market may not return to
previous trends or people may continue to retire earlier than expected. This would further
dampen labour supply growth and push down on unemployment. However, changes to
labour supply would be expected to be reflected in labour demand over time, reducing the
impact on labour market tightness.
On the other hand, labour market tightness could unwind more quickly. The labour market
may respond more rapidly to slowing demand. Recruiters mentioned that greater
economic uncertainty and rising costs were already slowing hiring according to the June
KPMG/REC UK Report on Jobs. The Covid-related factors weighing on participation could
also unwind faster than assumed in the baseline projections if, for example, the very
recent decline in inactivity continues at the same pace over the coming months. Labour
supply growth could also be affected by how households respond to the real income
squeeze. Households may seek to boost income through working more, which could
involve those currently inactive re-entering the labour market or those already in the
labour force seeking to work longer hours. Although, if unemployment starts rising,
households may become discouraged from entering the workforce as fewer jobs are
available.
…but the labour market may loosen more rapidly, in response to slowing demand
or if participation recovers more quickly.
Bank of England  
Page 95


Annex: Other forecasters’ expectations
This annex reports the results of the Bank’s most recent survey of external forecasters.
Responses were submitted in the two weeks to 22 July. Expectations throughout the
forecast period are summarised in Chart A.[2]
On average, respondents expected GDP growth of 0.5% in the four quarters to 2023 Q3
(left panel, Chart A). Responses ranged from -1% to 1.8%. Four-quarter GDP growth was
then, on average, expected to rise to 1.7% in 2024 Q3 and 2025 Q3. These forecasts are
all higher than the MPC’s modal projections.
External forecasters expected an unemployment rate of 4.2% in 2023 Q3, just below the
MPC’s projection (middle panel, Chart A). The average external forecast remains at
similar levels two and three years ahead. By comparison, in the MPC’s projection the
unemployment rate rises to 6.3% by 2025 Q3, which is above the range of external
forecasters.
On average, CPI inflation was expected to fall to 5.4% in 2023 Q3, a faster decline than in
the MPC’s projection (right panel, Chart A). Responses at that horizon ranged from 3.6%
to 9.3%. The average forecast for 2024 Q3 was 2.4% and for 2025 Q3 it was 2%, in line
with the target. In comparison, the MPC’s projection is 2% in 2024 Q3, and is below target
at the end of the forecast period.
Bank of England  
Page 96


Chart A: At the three-year horizon, external forecasters expect four-quarter GDP
growth to be 1.7%, the unemployment rate to be 4.2%, and CPI inflation to be 2%
Projections for GDP, the unemployment rate and CPI inflation
Bank of England  
Page 97


Glossary and other information
AWE – average weekly earnings.
CPI – consumer prices index.
CPI inflation – inflation measured by the consumer prices index.
CPIH – consumer prices index including owner-occupiers’ housing costs.
DMP – Decision Maker Panel.
ERI – exchange rate index.
GDP – gross domestic product.
HICP – harmonised index of consumer prices.
LFS – Labour Force Survey.
OIS – overnight index swap.
PCE – personal consumption expenditure.
PMI – purchasing managers’ index.
RPI – retail prices index.
RPI inflation – inflation measured by the retail prices index.
Glossary of selected data and instruments
CBI – Confederation of British Industry.
CIPS – Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply.
CFO – chief financial officer.
ECB – European Central Bank.
EU – European Union.
Abbreviations
Bank of England  
Page 98


FOMC – Federal Open Market Committee.
FTSE – Financial Times Stock Exchange.
GfK – Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung, Great Britain Ltd.
HMRC – Her Majesty’s Revenue and Customs.
IFS – Institute of Fiscal Studies.
IMF – International Monetary Fund.
LTV – loan to value.
MPC – Monetary Policy Committee.
MSCI – Morgan Stanley Capital International Inc.
MTIC – missing trader intra-community.
OBR – Office for Budget Responsibility.
OECD – Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
Ofgem – Office of Gas and Electricity Markets.
ONS – Office for National Statistics.
PAYE – Pay As You Earn.
PPP – purchasing power parity.
REC – Recruitment and Employment Confederation.
S&P – Standard & Poor’s.
SMEs – small and medium-sized enterprises.
WEO – IMF World Economic Outlook.
Except where otherwise stated, the source of the data used in charts and tables is the
Bank of England or the Office for National Statistics (ONS) and all data, apart from
financial markets data and results from the Decision Maker Panel (DMP) Survey, are
seasonally adjusted.
Symbols and conventions
Bank of England  
Page 99


n.a. = not available.
Because of rounding, the sum of the separate items may sometimes differ from the total
shown.
On the horizontal axes of graphs, larger ticks denote the first observation within the
relevant period, eg data for the first quarter of the year.
1. See Button et al (2010) ‘Understanding the price of new lending to households’, Bank of England Quarterly Bulletin,
2010 Q3.
2. For detailed distributions, see ‘Monetary Policy Report chart slides and data – August 2022’. External
expectations for monetary policy are now covered in the Market Participants Survey.
Bank of England  
Page 100
