BANK: BOE
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: Monetary Policy Report - August 2023
DATE: 01/06/2023
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/monetary-policy-report/2023/august/monetary-policy-report-august-2023.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Bank of England
Monetary Policy Report
Monetary Policy Committee 
August 2023


Monetary policy at the Bank of England 
The objectives of monetary policy 
The Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) sets monetary policy to keep inflation low and 
stable, which supports growth and jobs. Subject to maintaining price stability, the MPC is also 
required to support the Government’s economic policy. 
The Government has set the MPC a target for the 12-month increase in the Consumer Prices 
Index of 2%. 
The 2% inflation target is symmetric and applies at all times. 
The MPC’s remit recognises, however, that the actual inflation rate will depart from its target 
as a result of shocks and disturbances, and that attempts to keep inflation at target in these 
circumstances may cause undesirable volatility in output. In exceptional circumstances, the 
appropriate horizon for returning inflation to target can vary. The MPC will communicate how 
and when it intends to return inflation to the target. 
The instruments of monetary policy 
The MPC currently uses two main monetary policy tools. First, we set the interest rate that 
banks and building societies earn on deposits, or ‘reserves’, placed with the Bank of England 
– this is Bank Rate. Second, we can buy government and corporate bonds, financed by the
issuance of central bank reserves – this is asset purchases or quantitative easing. 
The Monetary Policy Report 
The MPC is committed to clear, transparent communication. The Monetary Policy Report 
(MPR) is a key part of that. It allows the MPC to share its thinking and explain the reasons for 
its decisions. 
The Report is produced quarterly by Bank staff under the guidance of the members of the 
MPC.  
This Report has been prepared and published by the Bank of England in accordance with 
section 18 of the Bank of England Act 1998. 
Bank of England  
Page 1


The Monetary Policy Committee 
• Andrew Bailey, Chair 
• Ben Broadbent 
• Jon Cunliffe 
• Swati Dhingra 
• Megan Greene 
• Jonathan Haskel 
• Catherine L Mann 
• Huw Pill 
• Dave Ramsden 
PowerPoint™ versions of the Monetary Policy Report charts and Excel spreadsheets of the 
data underlying most of them are available at www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetary-policy-
report/2023/august-2023. 
© Bank of England 2023 
ISSN 2633-7819 
 
Bank of England  
Page 2


 Contents  
Monetary Policy Summary 
4 
1: The economic outlook 
6 
  1.1: The conditioning assumptions underlying the MPC’s projections 
8 
  1.2: Key judgements and risks 
9 
Box A: Reviewing the process of quantitative tightening 
27 
Box B: Monetary policy since the May Report 
33 
2: Current economic conditions 
35 
  2.1: Global economy and financial markets 
37 
  2.2: Interest rates facing households and firms 
41 
  2.3: The impact of interest rates on activity 
45 
  2.4: UK activity 
50 
  2.5: The labour market and wage growth 
52 
  2.6: Inflation 
59 
  2.7: Inflation expectations 
67 
Box C: Agents’ update on business conditions 
71 
Box D: Key messages from external meetings on food price inflation 
75 
Annex 1: Other forecasters’ expectations 
78 
Annex 2: How has the economy evolved recently relative to the  
MPC’s projections? 
80 
Glossary and other information 
89 
 
 
Bank of England  
Page 3


Monetary Policy Summary
The Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) sets monetary policy to meet
the 2% inflation target, and in a way that helps to sustain growth and employment. At its
meeting ending on 2 August 2023, the MPC voted by a majority of 6–3 to increase
Bank Rate by 0.25 percentage points, to 5.25%. Two members preferred to increase
Bank Rate by 0.5 percentage points, to 5.5%, and one member preferred to maintain
Bank Rate at 5%.
The Committee’s updated projections for activity and inflation are set out in the
accompanying August Monetary Policy Report. These are conditioned on a market-
implied path for Bank Rate that rises to a peak of just over 6% and averages just under
5½% over the three-year forecast period, compared with an average of just over 4% for
the equivalent period at the time of the May Report. The sterling effective exchange rate is
around 4% higher than in the May Report.
Underlying quarterly GDP growth has been around 0.2% during the first half of this year.
Bank staff expect a similar growth rate in the near term, reflecting more resilient
household income and retail sales volumes, and most business surveys over recent
months. Some more recent indicators show signs of weakening, however, including the
July S&P Global/CIPS UK composite PMI.
The labour market remains tight but there are some indications that it is loosening. The
LFS unemployment rate rose to 4.0% in the three months to May, somewhat higher than
expected in the May Report, and the vacancies to unemployment ratio has continued to
fall, although the latter still remains above historical averages.
Annual private sector regular pay growth increased to 7.7% in the three months to May,
materially above expectations at the time of the May Report, and three-month on three-
month growth in this measure of pay has picked up further. Earnings growth is
nevertheless expected to decline in coming quarters, to around 6% by the end of this
year, although there is uncertainty around this near-term outlook.
Twelve-month CPI inflation fell from 8.7% in May to 7.9% in June, lower than expected at
the time of the Committee’s previous meeting. Within this, core goods and services CPI
inflation were both lower than expected, although the downside news in the latter, which is
more likely to be informative about persistent inflationary pressures, was much smaller.
Compared to the May Report projections, June CPI inflation was in line with expectations.
Bank of England  
Page 4


CPI inflation remains well above the 2% target. It is expected to fall significantly further, to
around 5% by the end of the year, accounted for by lower energy, and to a lesser degree,
food and core goods price inflation. Services price inflation, however, is projected to
remain elevated at close to its current rate in the near term.
In the MPC’s August most likely, or modal, projection conditioned on market interest rates,
CPI inflation returns to the 2% target by 2025 Q2. It then falls below the target in the
medium term, as an increasing degree of economic slack reduces domestic inflationary
pressures, alongside declining external cost pressures. The Committee has decided in
this forecast to bring some of the upside risks to inflation from persistence into its modal
projection, pushing up on this inflation projection in the medium term relative to the May
Report.
The Committee continues to judge that risks around the modal inflation forecast are
skewed to the upside, albeit by less than in May, reflecting the possibility that the second-
round effects of external cost shocks on inflation in wages and domestic prices take
longer to unwind than they did to emerge. Mean CPI inflation, which incorporates these
risks, is 2.0% and 1.9% at the two and three-year horizons respectively.
The MPC’s remit is clear that the inflation target applies at all times, reflecting the primacy
of price stability in the UK monetary policy framework. The framework recognises that
there will be occasions when inflation will depart from the target as a result of shocks and
disturbances. Monetary policy will ensure that CPI inflation returns to the 2% target
sustainably in the medium term.
Recent data outturns have been mixed. However, some key indicators, notably wage
growth, suggest that some of the risks from more persistent inflationary pressures may
have begun to crystallise. At this meeting, the Committee voted to increase Bank Rate by
0.25 percentage points, to 5.25%.
Given the significant increase in Bank Rate since the start of this tightening cycle, the
current monetary policy stance is restrictive. The MPC will continue to monitor closely
indications of persistent inflationary pressures and resilience in the economy as a whole,
including the tightness of labour market conditions and the behaviour of wage growth and
services price inflation. If there were to be evidence of more persistent pressures, then
further tightening in monetary policy would be required. The MPC will ensure that
Bank Rate is sufficiently restrictive for sufficiently long to return inflation to the 2% target
sustainably in the medium term, in line with its remit.
Bank of England  
Page 5


1: The economic outlook
CPI inflation remains well above the 2% target, having fallen back to 7.9% in June
in line with expectations in the May Monetary Policy Report. Both services and core
goods CPI inflation have been stronger than expected, although news in the latter is
in general less likely to imply persistent inflationary pressures. The Committee
expects CPI inflation to continue to fall, to around 5% by the end of the year, owing
to lower energy, and to a lesser degree, food and core goods price inflation. Annual
private sector regular pay growth has increased further, to 7.7% in the three months
to May, materially above expectations in the May Report. The near-term outlook for
regular pay growth is uncertain, but the MPC expects it to decline to around 6% by
the end of this year.
Sharp increases in energy, food and other import prices over the past two years
have had second-round effects on domestic prices and wages. These second-
round effects are likely to take longer to unwind than they did to emerge, and the
MPC has placed weight in its recent forecasts on the risk that they might persist for
longer. The Committee now judges that some of this risk may have begun to
crystallise. As a result, the MPC has decided to bring some of the upside risks to
inflation from persistence into its most likely, or modal, projection. In this forecast,
and assuming Bank Rate follows the path implied by financial markets, an
increasing degree of slack in the economy and declining external cost pressures
lead CPI inflation to return to the 2% target by 2025 Q2 and to fall below target in
the medium term, but to a lesser degree than projected in the May Report. The
Committee continues to judge that the risks to the modal forecast are skewed to the
upside, but by less than in May. Taking account of this skew, mean CPI inflation is
2.0% and 1.9% at the two and three-year horizons respectively.
Past increases in Bank Rate, and the higher path of market interest rates on which
the forecast is conditioned, will weigh to an increasing degree on UK activity and
inflation in coming quarters. GDP growth is expected to remain below pre-pandemic
rates in the medium term, also reflecting relatively weak potential supply and a
waning boost from fiscal policy. Relative to the May projection, quarterly GDP
growth is expected to be weaker throughout much of the forecast period,
particularly during 2024 and at the beginning of 2025.
Bank of England  
Page 6


The UK economy has been in excess demand over recent quarters, but an
increasing degree of economic slack is expected to emerge after the middle of next
year. The labour market remains tight but there are some indications that it is
loosening. The LFS unemployment rate rose to 4.0% in the three months to May
and the vacancies to unemployment ratio has been falling since mid-2022, although
the latter still remains above its 2019 Q4 level. In the MPC’s August projection, the
unemployment rate is projected to rise to just under 5% by 2026 Q3. Both
aggregate spare capacity and unemployment increase by somewhat more in the
Committee’s latest projections than in the May Report, reflecting the weaker path of
GDP.
Table 1.A: Forecast summary (a) (b)
2023 Q3
2024 Q3
2025 Q3
2026 Q3
GDP (c)
0.8 (0.6)
0.3 (0.6)
0.3 (0.8)
1.1
Modal CPI inflation (d)
6.9 (7.0)
2.8 (2.9)
1.7 (1.0)
1.5
Mean CPI inflation (d)
6.9 (7.0)
3.1 (3.7)
2.0 (1.8)
1.9
LFS unemployment rate
4.1 (3.8)
4.3 (3.9)
4.8 (4.4)
4.8
Excess supply/Excess demand (e)
½ (0)
-½ (-¾)
-1¼ (-1)
-1½
Bank Rate (f)
5.3 (4.7)
6.0 (4.2)
5.2 (3.7)
4.5
(a) Figures in parentheses show the corresponding projections in the May 2023 Monetary Policy Report.
(b) Unless otherwise stated, the numbers shown in this table are modal projections and are conditioned on the
assumptions described in Section 1.1. The main assumptions are set out in Monetary Policy Report – Download the
chart slides and data – August 2023.
(c) Four-quarter growth in real GDP.
(d) Four-quarter inflation rate. The modal projection is the single most likely outcome. If the risks are symmetrically
distributed around this central view, this will also provide a view of the average outcome or mean forecast. But when the
risks are skewed, as in the current forecast, the mean projection will differ from the mode.
(e) Per cent of potential GDP. A negative figure implies output is below potential and a positive that it is above.
(f) Per cent. The path for Bank Rate implied by forward market interest rates. The curves are based on overnight index
swap rates.
Bank of England  
Page 7


1.1: The conditioning assumptions underlying the MPC’s
projections
As set out in Table 1.B, the MPC’s projections are conditioned on:
The paths for policy rates implied by financial markets, as captured in the 15-working
day average of forward interest rates to 25 July, which are higher than in the May
Monetary Policy Report (Chart 2.3). In particular, the market-implied path for Bank Rate
in the United Kingdom rises to a peak of just over 6% and averages just under 5½%
over the next three years, compared with an average of just over 4% for the equivalent
period at the time of the May Report.
A path for the sterling effective exchange rate index that is around 3½% stronger on
average than in the May Report, but is depreciating gradually over the forecast period
given the role for expected interest rate differentials in the Committee’s conditioning
assumption.
Fiscal policy that evolves in line with announced government policies to date, including
the most recent measures in the Spring Budget.
Wholesale energy prices that follow their respective futures curves over the forecast
period. Since May, gas and crude oil futures curves have moved slightly lower.
Significant uncertainty remains around the outlook for wholesale energy prices.
Household energy prices that, from 2023 Q3, move in line with Bank staff estimates of
the Ofgem price cap implied by the path of wholesale energy prices (Section 2.6),
having previously been determined by the Energy Price Guarantee.
Bank of England  
Page 8


Table 1.B: Conditioning assumptions (a) (b)
Average
1998–2007
Average
2010–19
Average
2020–21
Average
2022
2023
2024
2025
Bank Rate
(c)
5.0
0.5
0.1
2.8
5.8 (4.8)
5.9 (4)
5.0 (3.7)
Sterling
effective
exchange
rate (d)
100
82
80
78
82 (79)
81 (79)
81 (78)
Oil prices
(e)
39
78
62
88
79 (81)
75 (76)
72 (72)
Gas prices
(f)
29
52
169
201
113 (137)
139 (148)
114 (123)
Nominal
government
expenditure
(g)
7½
2¼
9
4¼
4 (4½)
3 (2¾)
1½ (1½)
1.2: Key judgements and risks
Key judgement 1: past increases in Bank Rate, and the higher path of market
interest rates on which the forecast is conditioned, weigh to an increasing degree
on the UK economy in coming quarters. GDP growth remains below pre-pandemic
rates in the medium term, also reflecting relatively weak potential supply and a
waning boost from fiscal policy.
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg Finance L.P., Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR), ONS, Refinitiv Eikon from
LSEG and Bank calculations.
(a) The table shows the projections for financial market prices, wholesale energy prices and government spending
projections that are used as conditioning assumptions for the MPC’s projections for CPI inflation, GDP growth and the
unemployment rate. Figures in parentheses show the corresponding projections in the May 2023 Monetary Policy
Report.
(b) Financial market data are based on averages in the 15 working days to 25 July 2023. Figures show the average
level in Q4 of each year, unless otherwise stated.
(c) Per cent. The path for Bank Rate implied by forward market interest rates. The curves are based on overnight index
swap rates.
(d) Index. January 2005 = 100. The convention is that the sterling exchange rate follows a path that is half way between
the starting level of the sterling ERI and a path implied by interest rate differentials.
(e) Dollars per barrel. Projection based on monthly Brent futures prices.
(f) Pence per therm. Projection based on monthly natural gas futures prices.
(g) Annual average growth rate. Nominal general government consumption and investment. Projections are based on
the OBR’s March 2023 Economic and Fiscal Outlook. Historical data based on NMRP+D7QK.
Bank of England  
Page 9


UK GDP is expected to have grown by 0.1% in 2023 Q2, slowed by the additional bank
holiday for the King’s Coronation. Underlying quarterly growth is judged to have been
around 0.2% during the first half of this year and Bank staff expect a similar rate in the
near term. This is consistent with most business surveys of output over recent months,
and developments in household income and retail sales volumes.
Given the continued resilience of economic activity over recent months, the Committee
has increased somewhat its judgement from recent forecast rounds to boost the expected
path of demand. This reflects a number of factors, including the possibility of lower
precautionary saving by households than previously assumed, in turn related to a lower
risk of job loss given the continued strength in labour market activity (Key judgement 2).
The pass-through of past increases in Bank Rate, and the latest, significantly higher,
market-implied interest rate path on which the forecast is conditioned (Section 1.1),
nonetheless push down on GDP over the forecast period. As well as increasing the cost of
borrowing, Bank Rate rises affect asset prices, incomes and the exchange rate, all of
which will influence the decisions taken by firms and households. This is discussed in
more detail in Section 2.3.
The Committee is continuing to monitor closely the impact of the significant increases in
Bank Rate so far. Both the GfK consumer confidence index and the flash S&P
Global/CIPS UK composite PMI fell quite sharply in July, following the 0.5 percentage
point increase in Bank Rate at the June MPC meeting. Realised and expected real sales
growth in the latest Decision Maker Panel were unchanged in the three months to July,
however. In the most recent period, a greater number of contacts of the Bank’s Agents
reported a slowing in the outlook for activity, with the increase in interest rates having
played a role.
Taking account of all announced government plans, the positive impacts of past fiscal
loosening measures on the level of GDP unwind, which generally pulls down on GDP
growth over much of the forecast period.
In the Committee’s August projection, GDP growth is projected to weaken into 2024, as
past increases in Bank Rate, and the path of market interest rates on which the forecast is
conditioned, weigh on demand to an increasing degree. GDP growth recovers over the
second half of the forecast period, although it remains below pre-pandemic rates in the
medium term. As well as the impact of higher interest rates, this reflects relatively weak
potential supply (Key judgement 1 in the February 2023 Report) and a waning boost from
fiscal policy.
Bank of England  
Page 10


Calendar-year GDP growth is expected to be ½% in 2023 and in 2024, and ¼% in 2025
(Table 1.D). Four-quarter GDP growth picks up to just over 1% by 2026 Q3 (Chart 1.1).
Relative to the May Monetary Policy Report projection, quarterly GDP growth is expected
to be weaker throughout much of the forecast period, particularly during 2024 and at the
beginning of 2025. The level of GDP is around ¾% lower by the end of the forecast
period. That lower level reflects the projected impact of the higher path of market interest
rates on which the forecast is conditioned and, to a lesser degree, the estimated impact of
the exchange rate appreciation (Section 1.1). These factors have been offset partially by
the Committee’s judgement to boost demand, given the continued resilience of economic
activity over recent months.
Chart 1.1: GDP growth projection based on market interest rate expectations, other
policy measures as announced
The fan chart depicts the probability of various outcomes for GDP growth. It has been conditioned on Bank Rate
following a path implied by market yields, but allows the Committee’s judgement on the risks around the other
conditioning assumptions set out in Section 1.1, including wholesale energy prices, to affect the calibration of the fan
chart skew. To the left of the shaded area, the distribution reflects uncertainty around revisions to the data over the past.
To the right of the shaded area, the distribution reflects uncertainty over the evolution of GDP growth in the future. If
economic circumstances identical to today’s were to prevail on 100 occasions, the MPC’s best collective judgement is
that the mature estimate of GDP growth would lie within the darkest central band on only 30 of those occasions. The fan
chart is constructed so that outturns are also expected to lie within each pair of the lighter aqua areas on 30 occasions.
In any particular quarter of the forecast period, GDP growth is therefore expected to lie somewhere within the fan on 90
out of 100 occasions. And on the remaining 10 out of 100 occasions GDP growth can fall anywhere outside the aqua
area of the fan chart. Over the forecast period, this has been depicted by the grey background. See the Box on page 39
of the November 2007 Inflation Report for a fuller description of the fan chart and what it represents.
Bank of England  
Page 11


In the GDP projection conditioned on the alternative assumption of constant interest rates
at 5.25% over the forecast period, growth is broadly similar on average across the
forecast period to the MPC’s projection conditioned on market rates, as the market curve
is higher than the constant rate assumption in coming quarters but then falls below it
further out.
Within the components of GDP underpinning the August most likely, or modal, projection
conditioned on market interest rates, calendar-year household spending is expected to
rise by ½% in 2023, and by ¾% in 2024 and 2025 (Table 1.D). Real post-tax household
labour income is projected to grow modestly over the forecast period. In part reflecting the
Committee’s judgement to boost demand, the household saving ratio, which has remained
above its pre-pandemic level, is expected to decline moderately, towards a level that is
broadly consistent with its past relationship with wealth, interest rates and unemployment.
The medium-term paths of both consumption and household income are nonetheless
somewhat weaker than in the May Report.
Business investment is expected to rise by 1¾% in 2023, to fall by 2% in 2024 and to
increase by 1¾% in 2025. This is broadly similar across the whole forecast period to that
in the May Report.
In large part reflecting the transmission of higher interest rates, housing investment is
expected to fall significantly, by around 6% in both 2023 and 2024, and by 3% in 2025.
This profile is weaker than in the May Report.
UK-weighted world GDP is projected to be slightly lower in the near term than in the May
Report, accounted for primarily by weakness in the euro area and in China. Near-term
activity in the United States is expected to be slightly stronger, however. As in the United
Kingdom, global growth is being pulled down by the higher market-implied path of interest
rates. Overall, global GDP is expected to grow at a moderate pace throughout the
forecast period, broadly unchanged from the May Report in the medium term. In the
MPC’s modal projection, annual UK-weighted world GDP growth is projected to rise from
1½% to 2% over the forecast period (Table 1.D). That compares with average annual
growth of around 2½% in the decade prior to the pandemic.
There are risks in both directions around the central projections for household spending
and GDP, including related to the Committee’s judgements to boost the expected path of
demand in light of recent strength in the labour market. Spending could be stronger than
expected if some households choose to save less or run down existing stocks of savings
The risks around the projection for UK GDP growth are judged to be broadly
balanced.
Bank of England  
Page 12


to a greater extent. As set out in Annex 1 of this Report, external forecasters’ average
medium-term projections for GDP remain stronger than the MPC’s, particularly in 2025.
Conversely, demand could be weaker than expected if some people become more
worried about their job security and try to build up their savings to a greater extent, or if
there is less scope for some households to run down existing stocks of savings that have
already been eroded in real terms by high inflation. Were the weaker trend in the most
recent readings of some indicators of activity to continue, there could be a downside risk
to the MPC’s near-term GDP projection.
There are also risks related more particularly to the transmission of monetary policy.
There may be the potential for remortgaging behaviour to slow or weaken the
transmission of higher interest rates to the economy, including if more households than
usual choose to extend the terms of their mortgage than choose to shorten their terms.
Such behaviour would have to be more widespread than in the past to have a material
impact on the transmission of policy, however, and there are limits on how far mortgagors
are able to extend terms. There could also be changes in the response of consumption to
higher interest rates, for example if some mortgagors who need to refinance in the future
take, or are already taking, advance actions to prepare for spending more on interest
costs.
Regarding the housing channel of monetary policy, several factors should limit the impact
of higher interest rates on mortgage defaults and therefore may reduce downward
pressure on house prices from any forced sales of owner-occupied properties. For
example, the Financial Policy Committee’s mortgage market measures and the Financial
Conduct Authority’s (FCA’s) responsible lending requirements have increased borrower
resilience, and robust capital and profitability mean that UK banks have options to offer
forbearance. In addition, mortgage lenders, the Chancellor of the Exchequer, and the FCA
agreed new support measures for residential mortgage holders as part of the Mortgage
Charter published on 26 June. There could, however, be greater sales of properties by
buy-to-let investors, given the sector’s larger size relative to previous downturns and the
range of factors currently putting pressure on investors’ profitability, although market exits
from landlords have not so far been on a scale that is likely to have a material impact on
overall house prices (Section 2.1 of the July 2023 Financial Stability Report).
More generally, the MPC’s aggregate projections are constructed based in large part on
the average relationships over the past between Bank Rate, other financial instruments
and economic activity. The Committee will continue to keep all of these relationships
under review, including how they may have changed during the current monetary policy
tightening cycle.
Bank of England  
Page 13


Key judgement 2: the UK economy has been in excess demand over recent
quarters, but an increasing degree of economic slack is expected to emerge after
the middle of next year.
The Committee continues to judge that there has been a significant margin of excess
demand in the economy over recent quarters, in part reflecting the weakness of potential
supply. That excess demand can be accounted for by both the tightness of the labour
market and a higher than normal degree of capacity utilisation within companies. In part
reflecting the resilience of activity over recent months, there is judged to be greater
excess demand currently than expected in the May Report.
There are nevertheless some indications that the labour market is loosening (Section 2.5).
The LFS unemployment rate rose to 4.0% in the three months to May and is also
expected to have been at that level in 2023 Q2. This is 0.2 percentage points higher than
expected in the May Report. The vacancies to unemployment ratio has been falling since
mid-2022, although it remains above its 2019 Q4 level. The Bank’s Agents have reported
that recruitment conditions remain tighter than normal for most of their contacts, but that
they have eased significantly for lower-skilled roles.
The unemployment rate is expected to be slightly above 4% during the second half of
2023, slightly below the latest estimate of the medium-term equilibrium rate of
unemployment. Based on a simple extrapolation of recent trends, the ratio of vacancies to
unemployment could return to its pre-pandemic level around the turn of the year. This
would, nevertheless, still leave the ratio somewhat higher than its historical average.
A fall in the labour market inactivity rate has been the counterpart to a continued rise in
employment rate over recent quarters, which has in turn boosted activity in the economy
(Key judgement 1). According to the current vintage of ONS data, the participation rate is
now only 0.3 percentage points below its 2019 Q4 level. In addition to a continuation of
the recent trend for students to be more active in the labour market, recent data suggest
that fewer people are becoming inactive due to early retirement or because they need to
look after family (Chart 2.13). The number of people who are inactive due to long-term
sickness has remained elevated, however. In light of recent news, the Committee has
revised up its view of the sustainable level of labour market participation. However, this
has not affected its view of the overall degree of excess demand in the economy.
Although aggregate supply is expected to remain relatively weak, the headwinds to
demand, including from the path of market interest rates on which the forecast is
conditioned, lead to an increasing degree of economic slack emerging in the Committee’s
projections after the middle of next year. Companies are expected to respond to this
Bank of England  
Page 14


weakness by retaining their existing inputs, while using them less intensively and hoarding
labour for a prolonged period. As a result, in the MPC’s August modal projection, the
unemployment rate is projected to rise in 2024 and then increase fairly gradually
thereafter such that it reaches just under 5% by 2026 Q3 (Chart 1.2). The margin of
aggregate excess supply is expected to widen to 1½% of potential GDP by the end of the
forecast period (Table 1.A). Both aggregate spare capacity and unemployment increase
by somewhat more in the Committee’s latest projections than in the May Report, reflecting
the weaker path of GDP (Key judgement 1).
In projections conditioned on the alternative assumption of constant interest rates at
5.25% over the forecast period, the unemployment rate rises to a similar degree on
average over the forecast period to the MPC’s projection conditional on market rates, as
the market curve is higher than the constant rate assumption in coming quarters but then
falls below it further out.
Chart 1.2: Unemployment rate projection based on market interest rate
expectations, other policy measures as announced
The fan chart depicts the probability of various outcomes for LFS unemployment. It has been conditioned on Bank Rate
following a path implied by market yields, but allows the Committee’s judgement on the risks around the other
conditioning assumptions set out in Section 1.1, including wholesale energy prices, to affect the calibration of the fan
chart skew. The coloured bands have the same interpretation as in Chart 1.1, and portray 90% of the probability
distribution. The fan begins in 2023 Q2, a quarter earlier than for CPI inflation. That is because Q2 is a staff projection
for the unemployment rate, based in part on data for April and May. The unemployment rate was 4.0% in the three
months to May, and is projected to remain at that level in Q2 as a whole. A significant proportion of this distribution lies
below Bank staff’s current estimate of the long-term equilibrium unemployment rate. There is therefore uncertainty about
the precise calibration of this fan chart.
Bank of England  
Page 15


The labour market could remain tight for longer than assumed for a number of reasons,
including the upside risks around the outlook for demand (Key judgement 1). For a given
demand profile, an increase in labour hoarding could prolong the tightness in the labour
market, although it may not affect the overall degree of slack in the economy. Conversely,
the labour market could loosen more rapidly than assumed, again including because of
any downside risks to demand. There is also uncertainty around the extent to which the
number of job vacancies can continue to fall without any significant adjustment in
employment.
As discussed in the February 2023 Report, it remains difficult to interpret developments in
labour market participation, and the extent to which they may be having an impact on
spare capacity in the economy. There is also significant uncertainty about the equilibrium
rate of unemployment in the economy. Higher-than-expected wage growth after the terms
of trade shock that has affected the economy suggests that the medium-term equilibrium
rate is likely to be higher. This implies a stronger outlook for wage growth and inflationary
pressures all else equal (Key judgement 3). There is also some evidence that the
efficiency with which vacancies are matched to those seeking work has decreased over
recent years, which would also push up on the equilibrium rate of unemployment. The
Committee will undertake a broader review of these issues, and the overall supply
capacity of the economy, in its next regular stocktake.
Key judgement 3: second-round effects in domestic prices and wages are likely to
take longer to unwind than they did to emerge. In the modal forecast conditioned
on market interest rates, an increasing degree of slack in the economy and
declining external cost pressures lead CPI inflation to return to the 2% target by
2025 Q2 and to fall below target in the medium term, but to a lesser degree than
projected in the May Report. The Committee continues to judge that the risks are
skewed to the upside, but by less than in May. Taking account of this skew, mean
CPI inflation is 2.0% and 1.9% at the two and three-year horizons respectively.
Twelve-month CPI inflation remains well above the 2% target, having fallen back to 7.9%
in June in line with expectations in the May Report. In 2023 Q2, CPI inflation averaged
8.4%, slightly higher than the projection in the May Report. Inflation is expected to
continue to fall, to an average of 6.9% in 2023 Q3 and 4.9% in Q4 (Table 1.C). That near-
term decline is expected to be accounted for by lower energy, and to a lesser degree, food
and core goods price inflation.
The risks around the unemployment rate projection are judged to be broadly
balanced.
Bank of England  
Page 16


Reflecting recent wholesale energy price developments, the direct contribution of energy
prices to CPI inflation is projected to fall further and then turn more negative from October.
At that point, the Ofgem price cap for household gas and electricity bills is expected to fall
to slightly below £2,000 per year, compared with the comparable figure of £2,500 in
October 2022 that was set by the Government’s Energy Price Guarantee. Over the
second and third years of the forecast period, the direct energy contribution to inflation is
expected to be generally around zero or slightly negative, based on the downward slope
of wholesale futures curves.
Food price inflation has remained extremely high, falling from just under 20% in March to
17.3% in June. Based in part on evidence from the Bank’s Agents (Box C), the
contribution of food prices to CPI inflation is projected to fall from around 2 percentage
points in June to 1.3 percentage points in 2023 Q4. The Committee has retained its
judgement from the May Report that, relative to the broader balance of demand and
supply in the economy, food prices will on average boost CPI inflation by around an
additional 1 percentage point in coming quarters, although this is not expected to persist
further out.
Core goods CPI inflation picked up to around 6½% in 2023 Q2, even as other, potentially
leading, indicators of goods prices have continued to weaken (Section 2.6). For example,
annual input and output producer price inflation moderated to -2.7% and 0.1%
respectively in June. Bank staff expect core consumer goods price inflation to ease
gradually during the rest of this year.
Four-quarter UK-weighted world export price inflation, excluding the direct effect of oil
prices, is expected to have turned negative in 2023 Q2 and to remain so over coming
quarters. This reflects the indirect effects of lower energy prices, the continued unwinding
of supply chain bottlenecks and weak producer price inflation. Recent weakness in
Chinese tradable goods prices appears broadly consistent with such an outlook. World
export price inflation is projected to be slightly positive in the second half of the forecast
period, broadly unchanged from the May Report.
On the other hand, UK import prices have continued to rise over recent quarters and have
been stronger than past relationships with world export prices and the sterling exchange
rate would have suggested. The Committee has made a judgement to allow this
unexplained strength in the level of import prices to persist over the forecast period. The
continued recent appreciation of the sterling exchange rate (Section 1.1) will, however, put
some downward pressure on import price inflation, and over time on CPI inflation, relative
to the May Report. Overall, import prices are projected to fall by 4½% in 2023, by 3¼% in
2024 and to rise by ½% in 2025 (Table 1.D).
Bank of England  
Page 17


Services CPI inflation, developments in which are more likely to indicate persistent
inflationary pressures, increased to over 7% in 2023 Q2, and is now contributing more to
headline inflation than other high-level components (Chart 2.18). That probably reflects
resilient demand, the strength of nominal pay growth and, to a lesser degree, non-labour
input costs. Services inflation was stronger than expected in the May Report, although
some of this news can be accounted for by components that have historically been less
informative about underlying inflationary pressures (Section 2.6). Services price inflation is
projected to remain elevated in the near term, at around 7% (Chart 2.19).
Annual private sector regular pay growth has also increased further, to 7.7% in the three
months to May, materially above expectations in the May Report. On a three-month on
three-month annualised basis, pay growth has risen significantly, to 9.2% in May. Recent
outturns appear to have been notably stronger than a standard model of wage growth,
based on productivity, short-term inflation expectations and a measure of economic slack,
would have predicted.
The near-term outlook for pay growth is expected to be stronger than projected in the May
Report. The annual growth rate is nonetheless projected to decline in coming quarters, to
around 6% by 2023 Q4, which requires a rapid decline in three-month on three-month
growth during the second half of the year. The Bank’s Agents report that pay settlements
are expected to ease slightly in the second half of 2023.
The Committee noted in the minutes of its June meeting that there has been significant
upside news in recent data that indicates more persistence in the inflation process and
which is therefore likely to have implications for the medium-term projection for CPI
inflation.
Analysis by Bank staff supports the view that there are non-linearities in the way inflation
is reacting to changes in demand. In particular, there is some evidence that the response
is greater, to any given increase in demand, when spare capacity is more limited to begin
with. Such non-linearities might help to explain some of the recent strength in domestic
inflation, given the recent pattern of excess demand. In and of themselves, however, they
would not result in greater persistence of inflation. If the labour market continues to
loosen, as is expected in the MPC’s central projection (Key judgement 2), equally marked
effects on inflation in the other direction would be expected.
More relevant may be the potential asymmetry in the second-round effects of changes in
global prices. Steep rises in global goods prices weighed heavily on UK real incomes in
2021 and much of 2022. In an effort to protect falling real incomes, whether wages or
profits, employees and domestic firms have sought compensation in the form of higher
Bank of England  
Page 18


nominal pay and domestic selling prices. This mechanism can also be considered as
broadly equivalent to an increase in the medium-term equilibrium rate of unemployment
and hence consistent with a tighter labour market and greater upward pressure on wage
and price inflation. As global prices cease to rise, and in some cases reverse, this should
in time reduce the corresponding pressure on domestic inflation. But, to the extent that
employees and firms are still seeking to recoup lost incomes, second-round effects are
likely to take longer to unwind than they did to emerge.
The current circumstances are highly unusual. As such, it is hard to be precise about the
extent of this asymmetry. Nevertheless, the Committee has for this reason judged
previously that, relative to a modal expectation of significant declines in domestic inflation,
there were material upside risks over the medium term. The MPC now judges that some
of these risks may have begun to crystallise. In its latest August modal projection, and in
addition to other similar judgements in previous Reports, the Committee has made a
judgement to increase the persistence of inflation in wages and domestic prices. In
addition to the MPC’s judgement to boost demand further in this forecast (Key judgement
1), this pushes up on the medium-term modal CPI inflation projection materially relative to
the May Report.
In the MPC’s modal projection conditioned on the higher path of market interest rates as
captured in the 15-working day average to 25 July, CPI inflation declines to below the 2%
target in the medium term, as an increasing degree of economic slack is expected to
reduce domestic inflationary pressures, alongside a slightly negative contribution from
energy prices. CPI inflation is projected to return to the 2% target by 2025 Q2, and to be
1.7% at the two-year horizon and 1.5% in three years (Table 1.C and Chart 1.3).
Compared with the May Report modal projection, CPI inflation is expected to return to the
2% target marginally less rapidly in the middle of the forecast period. CPI inflation is
higher in the medium term than in May, in large part reflecting the judgements that the
Committee has made in this forecast including on the persistence of inflation in wages
and domestic prices.
In the MPC’s modal projection, average weekly earnings growth falls to around 2% by the
end of the forecast period, as short-term inflation expectations are assumed to fall back
and a margin of spare capacity is expected to open up in the labour market in the medium
term. This is a broadly similar medium-term profile for earnings to that in the May Report,
but is consistent with a stronger path of private sector regular unit wage cost growth
(Table 1.D). This takes account of both earnings and productivity per employee, and is a
more relevant measure of the labour costs affecting companies’ pricing decisions.
Bank of England  
Page 19


2023 Q3
2023 Q4
2024 Q1
2024 Q2
2024 Q3
CPI inflation
6.9
4.9
4.3
3.3
2.8
2024 Q4
2025 Q1
2025 Q2
2025 Q3
CPI inflation
2.5
2.2
1.7
1.7
2025 Q4
2026 Q1
2026 Q2
2026 Q3
CPI inflation
1.6
1.5
1.5
1.5
Chart 1.3: CPI inflation projection based on market interest rate expectations, other
policy measures as announced
The fan chart depicts the probability of various outcomes for CPI inflation in the future. It has been conditioned on Bank 
Rate following a path implied by market yields, but allows the Committee’s judgement on the risks around the other 
conditioning assumptions set out in Section 1.1, including wholesale energy prices, to affect the calibration of the fan 
chart skew. If economic circumstances identical to today’s were to prevail on 100 occasions, the MPC’s best collective 
judgement is that inflation in any particular quarter would lie within the darkest central band on only 30 of those 
occasions. The fan chart is constructed so that outturns of inflation are also expected to lie within each pair of the lighter 
orange areas on 30 occasions. In any particular quarter of the forecast period, inflation is therefore expected to lie 
somewhere within the fans on 90 out of 100 occasions. And on the remaining 10 out of 100 occasions inflation can fall 
anywhere outside the orange area of the fan chart. Over the forecast period, this has been depicted by the grey 
background. See the Box on pages 48–49 of the May 2002 Inflation Report for a fuller description of the fan chart and 
what it represents.
Table 1.C: The quarterly modal projection for CPI inflation (a)
(a) Four-quarter inflation rate.
Bank of England  
Page 20


In the modal projection conditioned on the alternative assumption of constant interest
rates at 5.25% over the forecast period, CPI inflation is expected to be 1.7% and 1.4% in
two years’ and three years’ time respectively. These are broadly similar to the Committee’s
forecasts at the same horizons conditioned on market rates, as the market curve is higher
than the constant rate assumption in coming quarters but then falls below it further out.
There remain considerable uncertainties around the pace at which CPI inflation will return
sustainably to the 2% target.
In the near term, a simple mapping between producer and consumer goods prices
suggests goods CPI inflation could fall faster than projected (Section 2.6). There are also
risks in both directions around the near-term path of wage inflation. Some forward-looking
indicators, such as the KPMG/REC UK Report on Jobs indicator, suggest wage growth
could slow more sharply in the latter half of 2023 (Section 2.5). It is also possible that
recent official earnings data have been boosted temporarily by one-off cost of living
payments. The recent run of upside surprises on pay growth could, however, persist.
In the medium term, there remain considerable uncertainties around the Committee’s
judgement that second-round effects in domestic prices and wages are likely to take
longer to unwind than they did to emerge. On the one hand, these risks may be more
balanced following the MPC’s decision this round to take greater account of persistent
price and wage-setting pressures in its modal projection. On the other hand, it is possible
that the medium-term equilibrium rate of unemployment could increase to a greater
degree, owing both to resistance to past losses in real income and to more persistent
labour market frictions and mismatch (Key judgement 2). All else equal, this would put
greater upward pressure on pay growth and domestic inflationary pressures over the
forecast period.
The pace at which CPI inflation falls back to the 2% target will also depend on inflation
expectations. An upside risk to the inflation outlook is that households and firms are less
confident that inflation will fall back quickly and do not factor such a decline into their
wage and price-setting behaviour. Developments in more visible components of inflation,
such as energy and food prices, are likely to have an important impact on inflation
perceptions and expectations. Since the May Report, most indicators of household and
corporate inflation expectations have tended to decline, while medium-term inflation
compensation measures in financial markets have risen slightly and remain above their
The path for inflation beyond the near term is uncertain, and the risks around the
modal projection are judged to remain skewed to the upside, but by less than in
the May Report.
Bank of England  
Page 21


long-term averages. The Committee will continue to monitor measures of inflation
expectations very closely and act to ensure that longer-term inflation expectations are well
anchored around the 2% target.
In addition, there are upside risks around the modal projection for UK CPI inflation from
international factors. There remains the possibility of more persistence in consumer price
inflation in the UK’s major trading partners, for similar reasons to the risks of stronger
domestic inflationary pressures at home including the tightness of labour markets, and
wage and services price inflation remaining elevated for longer than expected.
Geopolitical tensions also remain and could continue to cause disruption to the supply of
agricultural products.
Overall, the Committee continues to judge that the risks around the modal projection for
CPI inflation are skewed to the upside, primarily reflecting the possibility of more
persistence in domestic wage and price-setting. This pushes up on the mean, relative to
the modal, inflation projections in the forecast. Conditioned on market interest rates, mean
CPI inflation is 2.0% and 1.9% at the two and three-year horizons respectively.
Relative to the May Report, the magnitude of this skew is judged to be smaller throughout
the forecast period, reflecting the Committee’s decision in this forecast to bring some of
the upside risks to inflation from persistence into its modal projection. As the MPC is
learning about the extent of medium-term inflationary pressures from indicators of
persistence, such as wage growth and services inflation, it has reduced its upward skew
on inflation to a slightly greater degree in year two of the forecast period than in year
three.
In the mean projection conditioned on the alternative assumption of constant interest rates
at 5.25% over the forecast period, CPI inflation is expected to be 2.0% and 1.8% in two
years’ and three years’ time respectively.
Bank of England  
Page 22


Table 1.D: Indicative projections consistent with the MPC's modal forecast (a) (b)
World GDP
(UK-
weighted) (c)
3
2½
¾
3
1½ (1¾)
1¾ (1¾)
2 (2)
World GDP
(PPP-
weighted) (d)
4
3¾
1½
3½
2¾ (2¾)
2¾ (2¾)
3¼ (3¼)
Euro-area
GDP (e)
2¼
1½
-½
3½
½ (¾)
1 (1)
1½ (1½)
US GDP (f)
3
2¼
1½
2
1½ (1½)
¾ (1)
1½ (1½)
Emerging
market GDP
(PPP-
weighted) (g)
5½
5
2¼
4
4 (4)
3¾ (4)
4¼ (4¼)
of which,
China GDP (h)
10
7¾
5¼
3
5¼ (5½)
4½ (4½)
4¾ (4¾)
UK GDP (i)
2¾
2
-1¾
4
½ (¼)
½ (¾)
¼ (¾)
Household
consumption
(j)
3¼
2
-3½
5½
½ (¾)
¾ (¾)
¾ (1)
Business
investment (k)
3
3¾
-5½
10¾
1¾ (-¼)
-2 (0)
1¾ (1½)
Housing
investment (l)
3
4¼
¾
7½
-5¾ (-4¼)
-6¼ (-3¾)
-3 (-½)
Exports (m)
4¼
3½
-5
10
-2 (½)
¼ (0)
½ (½)
Imports (n)
6¼
4
-5
13½
-3½ (-3)
2 (¼)
1½ (1¼)
Contribution of
net trade to
GDP (o)
-½
-¼
¼
-1 ¼
½ (1 ¼)
-½ (0)
-¼ (-¼)
Real post-tax
labour income
(p)
3¼
1½
¾
-2¼
0 (-½)
¾ (1¼)
½ (1)
Average
Projection
1998–2007
2010–19
2020–21
2022
2023
2024
2025
Bank of England  
Page 23


Real post-tax
household
income (q)
3
1½
0
¾
1¼ (1)
-¼ (1)
¼ (1)
Household
saving ratio (r)
7¼
7¾
14¼
8½
9¼ (8¾)
8½ (9)
8 (8¾)
Credit spreads
(s)
¾
2½
1¾
1
½ (1)
¾ (1¼)
1¼ (1½)
Excess
supply/Excess
demand (t)
0
-1¾
-¾
1¼
½ (¼)
-¼ (-½)
-1¼ (-1)
Hourly labour
productivity (u)
2
¾
¼
½
-¼ (-½)
¼ (1)
¾ (¾)
Employment
(v)
1
1¼
-½
¾
1 (½)
-½ (0)
0 (0)
Average
weekly hours
worked (w)
32¼
32
30¾
31½
31¾ (31¾)
31¾ (31¾)
31¾ (31¾)
Unemployment
rate (x)
5¼
6
4¾
3¾
4 (3¾)
4½ (4)
4¾ (4½)
Participation
rate (y)
63
63½
63¼
63¼
63¾ (63¼)
63¼ (63)
63 (62¾)
CPI inflation
(z)
1½
2¼
2¾
10¾
5 (5)
2½ (2¼)
1½ (1)
UK import
prices (aa)
-½
1¼
2½
13½
-4½ (-8¼)
-3¼ (-2¾)
½ (0)
Energy prices
– direct
contribution to
CPI inflation
(ab)
¼
¼
½
3¾
-1½ (-1)
½ (0)
-¼ (-½)
Average
weekly
earnings (ac)
4¼
2¼
4¾
6
6 (5)
3½ (3½)
2½ (2½)
Unit labour
costs (ad)
3
1¼
5¼
5¾
4¾ (4¼)
3 (3)
1¾ (1½)
Bank of England  
Page 24


Private sector
regular pay
based unit
wage costs
(ae)
1¾
1½
3¾
8¼
7½ (6¾)
4 (3½)
2½ (2¼)
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg Finance L.P., Department for Energy Security and Net Zero, Eurostat, IMF World
Economic Outlook (WEO), National Bureau of Statistics of China, ONS, US Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bank
calculations.
(a) The profiles in this table should be viewed as broadly consistent with the MPC’s projections for GDP growth, CPI
inflation and unemployment (as presented in the fan charts).
(b) Figures show annual average growth rates unless otherwise stated. Figures in parentheses show the corresponding
projections in the May 2023 Monetary Policy Report. Calculations for back data based on ONS data are shown using
ONS series identifiers.
(c) Chained-volume measure. Constructed using real GDP growth rates of 188 countries weighted according to their
shares in UK exports.
(d) Chained-volume measure. Constructed using real GDP growth rates of 189 countries weighted according to their
shares in world GDP using the IMF’s purchasing power parity (PPP) weights.
(e) Chained-volume measure. Forecast was finalised before the release of the preliminary flash estimate of euro-area
GDP for Q2, so that has not been incorporated.
(f) Chained-volume measure. Forecast was finalised before the release of the advance estimate of US GDP for Q2, so
that has not been incorporated.
(g) Chained-volume measure. Constructed using real GDP growth rates of 155 emerging market economy countries, as
defined by the IMF WEO, weighted according to their relative shares in world GDP using the IMF’s PPP weights.
(h) Chained-volume measure.
(i) Excludes the backcast for GDP.
(j) Chained-volume measure. Includes non-profit institutions serving households. Based on ABJR+HAYO.
(k) Chained-volume measure. Based on GAN8.
(l) Chained-volume measure. Whole-economy measure. Includes new dwellings, improvements and spending on
services associated with the sale and purchase of property. Based on DFEG+L635+L637.
(m) Chained-volume measure. The historical data exclude the impact of missing trader intra‑community (MTIC) fraud.
Since 1998 based on IKBK-OFNN/(BOKH/BQKO). Prior to 1998 based on IKBK.
(n) Chained-volume measure. The historical data exclude the impact of MTIC fraud. Since 1998 based on IKBL-
OFNN/(BOKH/BQKO). Prior to 1998 based on IKBL.
(o) Chained-volume measure. Exports less imports.
(p) Wages and salaries plus mixed income and general government benefits less income taxes and employees’ National
Insurance contributions, deflated by the consumer expenditure deflator. Based on [ROYJ+ROYH-(RPHS+AIIV-
CUCT)+GZVX]/[(ABJQ+HAYE)/(ABJR+HAYO)]. The backdata for this series are available at Monetary Policy Report –
Download chart slides and data – August 2023.
(q) Total available household resources, deflated by the consumer expenditure deflator. Based on
[RPQK/((ABJQ+HAYE)/(ABJR+HAYO))].
(r) Annual average. Percentage of total available household resources. Based on NRJS.
(s) Level in Q4. Percentage point spread over reference rates. Based on a weighted average of household and
corporate loan and deposit spreads over appropriate risk-free rates. Indexed to equal zero in 2007 Q3.
(t) Annual average. Per cent of potential GDP. A negative figure implies output is below potential and a positive figure
that it is above.
(u) GDP per hour worked. Hours worked based on YBUS.
(v) Four-quarter growth in LFS employment in Q4. Based on MGRZ.
(w) Level in Q4. Average weekly hours worked, in main job and second job. Based on YBUS/MGRZ.
(x) LFS unemployment rate in Q4. Based on MGSX.
(y) Level in Q4. Percentage of the 16+ population. Based on MGWG.
Bank of England  
Page 25


(z) Four-quarter inflation rate in Q4.
(aa) Four-quarter inflation rate in Q4 excluding fuel and the impact of MTIC fraud.
(ab) Contribution of fuels and lubricants and gas and electricity prices to four-quarter CPI inflation in Q4.
(ac) Four-quarter growth in whole‑economy total pay in Q4. Growth rate since 2001 based on KAB9. Prior to 2001,
growth rates are based on historical estimates of AWE, with ONS series identifier MD9M.
(ad) Four-quarter growth in unit labour costs in Q4. Whole‑economy total labour costs divided by GDP at constant
prices. Total labour costs comprise compensation of employees and the labour share multiplied by mixed income.
(ae) Four-quarter growth in private sector regular pay based unit wage costs in Q4. Private sector wage costs divided by
private sector output at constant prices. Private sector wage costs are average weekly earnings (excluding bonuses)
multiplied by private sector employment.
Bank of England  
Page 26


Box A: Reviewing the process of quantitative tightening
Since the global financial crisis, quantitative easing (QE) has been an important
instrument of monetary policy for central banks, including the Bank of England. The
stock of assets held for monetary policy purposes in the Bank’s Asset Purchase
Facility (APF) peaked at £895 billion towards the end of 2021, at which time the
level of Bank Rate was 0.1%. Reducing that accumulated stock of purchased
assets – or quantitative tightening (QT) – was appropriate once Bank Rate moved
away from its effective lower bound. That reduction began in March 2022, and the
size of the APF currently stands at £786 billion.
As set out in the minutes of the August 2022 meeting, the MPC committed to
review the reduction in the APF annually, and as part of that to set out an amount
for the reduction in the stock of purchased UK government bonds (gilts) over the
subsequent 12-month period. This box forms part of this year’s review, including
what the MPC has learned about the impact of QT, and the factors that influence
the appropriate pace of stock reduction.
The Committee will vote on the target for gilt stock reduction over the 12-month
period from October 2023 to September 2024 at its September 2023 meeting.
In February 2022, the Committee voted to cease gilt reinvestments and initiate
sales of sterling non-financial investment-grade corporate bonds. In September
2022, the Committee voted to reduce the stock of gilts held in the APF by £80 billion
over the next 12 months, to a total of £758 billion.
This process is going smoothly. Sales of the corporate bond portfolio are now
complete, with a small number of very short maturity bonds remaining that will
mature fully by April 2024. At the conclusion of the current 12-month programme of
gilt stock reduction in September the APF will stand at £759 billion. The impact of
QT on financial markets, while difficult to measure precisely, is judged to have been
small, and there is no evidence of a negative impact of gilt sales on market
functioning across a range of financial market measures (see Ramsden (2023)).
That is in line with the MPC’s expectations, but the Committee will continue to learn
as the process progresses.
The process of unwinding the APF is going smoothly…
Bank of England  
Page 27


Reducing the size of the APF has the important benefit of reducing the risk of a
ratchet upwards in the size of the central bank balance sheet over time if
successive policy cycles encounter the effective lower bound on interest rates (for
further discussion, see Bailey et al (2020)). That in turn should increase the
headroom and flexibility for the central bank to be able to use its balance sheet in
the future should that be needed.
The strategy for this process, however, must take into account various economic
and market considerations.
The key principles for unwind were set out in the August 2021 Report, building on
earlier communications that began in 2014. The parameters of the unwind strategy
agreed last year were designed with these principles in mind.
First, the MPC intends to use Bank Rate as its active policy tool when adjusting the
stance of monetary policy. The parameters of the unwind strategy are amended at a
lower frequency than decisions on Bank Rate and are not calibrated with a view to
fine-tuning the monetary policy stance.
Second, sales are being conducted so as not to disrupt the functioning of financial
markets. Market conditions must be judged appropriate at the time, for example
sales are not taking place in periods of extreme volatility.
Third, to help achieve that, sales are being conducted in a relatively gradual and
predictable manner over a period of time.
When conducted in a manner consistent with the key principles, the impact of QT is
smaller than that of QE. That predominantly reflects the state contingency of the
transmission channels, set out in the 2022 Q1 Quarterly Bulletin. In the context of
the key principles, several channels are smaller or absent during the unwind
process.
First, the process of unwinding the APF is being undertaken only in appropriate
market conditions, and in a gradual and predictable manner that does not disrupt
the functioning of financial markets. That is illustrated by the experience last
…having been guided by a set of key principles.
Reflecting these key principles, the tightening impact of unwind has been,
and is expected to be, smaller than the loosening associated with asset
purchases.
Bank of England  
Page 28


autumn, where the Bank delayed the start of gilt sales given market conditions.
Asset purchases on the other hand, were at times deliberately made during periods
of market stress, such that they helped to improve liquidity and market functioning.
Second, as Bank Rate is the active tool of monetary policy, decisions on the
process for unwind are not signalling a need for a higher path for Bank Rate. That is
in contrast to QE, when increasing the target stock of purchased assets may have
depressed the expected path of Bank Rate.
There has now been over a year of evidence of the impact of QT, including nine
months of sales. The impact remains difficult to measure precisely, and the MPC
will continue to learn as the process progresses. Nonetheless, the empirical
evidence so far supports expectations that the impact of unwind on gilt yields would
be small.
First, models of UK term premia can decompose developments in gilt yields into
those driven by changes in the term premium, through which unwind is expected to
operate, and those reflecting shifts in the expected path of rates. The term premium
represents the additional compensation investors demand to hold a longer-term
bond relative to a series of shorter-term bonds, and is influenced by a range of
factors, including uncertainty around the outlook for the economy and interest rates,
as well as gilt supply and demand. These models point to an overall increase in the
term premium of around 40 basis points on the 10-year gilt yield since the
Committee voted to begin QT, accounting for only a very small proportion of the
overall rise in gilt yields (Chart A). QT may be one factor contributing to that
increase, but other factors have likely been more important.
That finding is supported by a range of empirical evidence which suggests
unwind is having some tightening effect on yields, but that this is small.
Bank of England  
Page 29


Indeed, analytical approaches that attempt to isolate the impact of QT specifically
suggest that this is likely to account for only part of the 40 basis point increase, in
the region of 10–15 basis points. Market intelligence, including from the Bank’s
Market Participants Survey in June 2022, is consistent with an impact of that
magnitude.
Event study estimates around QT auctions also point to a limited additional impact
from sales specifically. There has been no material difference in daily movements of
a range of financial market measures on auction days relative to non-auction days.
There is also evidence that unwind has had a limited impact on market functioning;
indeed there are some signs that sales may have had a positive effect by alleviating
collateral scarcity at short maturities.
All else equal, the tightening effect QT has on yields would be expected to lower
economic activity and inflation. It is too early to assess this broader impact yet, but
based on the UK’s experience of QE, a 10 basis point increase in yields would be
associated with a negative impact on activity and inflation of less than 0.2% and 0.1
percentage points respectively.
Chart A: Decomposition of UK 10-year government bond yield (a)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., Tradeweb and Bank calculations.
(a) The chart uses estimates from a range of internal models of UK term premia to split the 10-year gilt yield into
expected rates and term premia contributions. Expected rates reflect investors’ expectations of the average
short-term monetary policy rate over the next 10 years, and term premium is defined as the additional
compensation investors demand to hold a longer-term bond relative to a series of shorter-term bonds.
The impact on activity and inflation is also likely to have been small.
Bank of England  
Page 30


While it is hard to measure precisely the marginal effect of QT, the MPC’s economic
forecasts will be conditioned on asset prices that incorporate announced and
expected QT alongside other factors. The MPC will therefore take this effect into
account when setting the desired monetary policy stance using Bank Rate. Any
tightening effect from QT will lead to a slightly lower path for Bank Rate, all else
equal. Given that the impact of QT is judged to have been small, QT is unlikely to
have made a material difference to the appropriate path for Bank Rate over the past
year.
Alongside the reduction in the stock of purchased gilts, the process of unwinding
the portfolio of corporate bonds held in the APF is now largely complete. Similar to
gilt unwind, the impact on monetary conditions was expected to be small when
conducted at a time when markets were functioning relatively normally. This
process has been successful: sales were completed in June, with a small number
of very short maturity bonds remaining in the portfolio and maturing fully by 5 April
2024.
While there are benefits to reducing the size of the APF, the pace of reduction must
be judged appropriate in the context of the key principles. That involves both
economic and market considerations.
First, any economic impact must leave sufficient headroom in Bank Rate to deliver
the MPC’s desired monetary policy stance. Given a gradual pace of unwind is
associated with a small expected economic impact, any required adjustments in
Bank Rate are likely to be very small and this should therefore not be a material
factor in practice.
Second, the pace of sales should not disrupt the functioning of financial markets. An
important component of the annual review process is an updated staff assessment
of market capacity and conditions. Given a small economic impact, this becomes a
key consideration in determining the pace of stock reduction.
Third, sales must be conducted in a relatively gradual and predictable manner over
a period of time. The focus of the MPC is on total gilt stock reduction, comprising
both maturing gilts and sales, such that natural variation in maturities may also lead
Sales of the corporate bond portfolio have also been completed
successfully.
The appropriate pace of gilt stock reduction will continue to be guided by
the MPC’s key principles.
Bank of England  
Page 31


to variation in the pace of sales over time (Chart B). Notwithstanding that, the
Committee places some weight on continuity in sales.
The appropriate stock reduction target over the next year will weigh these different
factors, and will take into account the experience of the first year of unwind.
The Committee will vote on the target for gilt stock reduction over the 12-month
period from October 2023 to September 2024 at its September meeting. Bank Rate
remains the MPC’s active tool of monetary policy and will be set to meet the 2%
inflation target.
Chart B: Cash flows associated with APF maturities and sales this year, and
maturities in future years (a) (b)
(a) Each year shows maturities in the period between October and September the following year (ie a yearly QE
review cycle).
(b) The amount of APF stock reduction set by the MPC is expressed in terms of the initial proceeds paid to
purchase the APF holdings.
Bank of England  
Page 32


Box B: Monetary policy since the May Report
At its meeting ending on 21 June 2023, the MPC voted by a majority of 7–2 to
increase Bank Rate by 0.5 percentage points, to 5%. Two members preferred to
maintain Bank Rate at 4.5%.
Business surveys continued to suggest underlying quarterly GDP growth of around
¼% during the middle of this year. LFS employment had increased by 0.8% in the
three months to April, higher than expected at the time of the May Report. The
counterpart to this strong employment growth had been a further fall in the inactivity
rate. The unemployment rate had been flat at 3.8%, in line with the May Report.
The vacancies to unemployment ratio had fallen further but remained significantly
elevated.
Annual growth in private sector regular average weekly earnings (AWE) had
increased to 7.6% in the three months to April, 0.5 percentage points above the
expectation at the time of the May Report. Three-month on three-month growth in
this measure of pay had also picked up. Indications of future pay growth from the
KPMG/REC survey and the Bank’s Agents suggested that AWE growth would ease
over the rest of the year, however.
Twelve-month CPI inflation fell from 10.1% in March to 8.7% in April and had
remained at that rate in May. This was 0.3 percentage points higher than expected
in the May Report. Services CPI inflation had risen to 7.4% in May, 0.5 percentage
points stronger than expected at the time of the May Report, while core goods price
inflation had also been much stronger than projected.
CPI inflation was expected to fall significantly further during the course of the year,
in the main reflecting developments in energy prices. Services CPI inflation was
projected to remain broadly unchanged in the near term. Core goods CPI inflation
was expected to decline later this year, supported by developments in cost and
price indicators earlier in the supply chain. In particular, annual producer output
price inflation had fallen very sharply in recent months. Food price inflation was
projected to fall further in coming months.
The MPC recognised that the second-round effects in domestic price and wage
developments generated by external cost shocks were likely to take longer to
unwind than they did to emerge. There had been significant upside news in recent
Bank of England  
Page 33


data that indicated more persistence in the inflation process, against the
background of a tight labour market and continued resilience in demand.
The MPC would continue to monitor closely indications of persistent inflationary
pressures in the economy as a whole, including the tightness of labour market
conditions and the behaviour of wage growth and services price inflation. If there
were to be evidence of more persistent pressures, then further tightening in
monetary policy would be required.
Bank of England  
Page 34


2: Current economic conditions
Global consumer price inflation has been slowing, but remains above central banks’
targets in many countries. That slowing has mainly been driven by developments in
energy prices, although food and goods price inflation have also eased a little. In
contrast, services inflation has remained strong across advanced economies, which
may in part reflect tight labour markets. Market-implied paths for policy rates have
risen further since the May Report, particularly in the UK. Interest rates facing
households and firms have risen; the effects of this will transmit to economic activity
and inflation over time.
Underlying UK GDP growth, which abstracts from the impact of strikes and the
additional bank holiday in May, is estimated to have averaged around ¼% per
quarter in the first half of 2023, broadly in line with expectations in the May Report.
And, on average, indicators point to underlying growth continuing at a similar pace
in the second half of 2023.
Employment and participation have risen since the May Report. The labour market
remains tight, but there are some indications that it is loosening. Annual private
sector regular earnings growth has risen materially faster than projected in the May
Report to 7.7%. Wage growth is still expected to slow in the second half of the year,
but risks remain to the upside.
Since the May Report, CPI inflation has fallen, dropping from 10.1% in March to
7.9% in June, in line with the projection in May. It remains well above the MPC’s 2%
target, however. Inflation is expected to fall further – to 6.9% in 2023 Q3 and 4.9%
in Q4 – with three-quarters of that decline owing to a falling contribution from
household gas and electricity bills. Easing manufacturing producer price inflation is
likely to contribute to somewhat lower consumer goods price inflation, while food
price inflation is also expected to fall back. But services price inflation is projected to
remain elevated, averaging 7% through the second half of 2023.
Bank of England  
Page 35


Chart 2.1: GDP growth is expected to remain positive but low, the unemployment
rate is expected to rise slightly in 2023 Q3 and inflation is expected to have fallen
in July
Near-term projections (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
Bank of England  
Page 36


2.1: Global economy and financial markets
UK-weighted world GDP is expected to have grown by 0.5% in 2023 Q2, similar to that in
Q1. That expectation is broadly in line with the May Report. Four-quarter global GDP
growth in Q2 is expected to be 1.8%, lower than the average rate over 2010–19 of 2.4%.
The latest indicators, such as PMI surveys of business activity, suggest that global growth
is likely to remain subdued in Q3.
In the euro area, HICP inflation fell to 5.3% in the flash estimate for July, and in the US,
headline PCE inflation, the Federal Reserve’s preferred measure of inflation, eased by 0.8
percentage points to 3.0% in June (Chart 2.2). In both regions, the slowing primarily
reflects energy prices falling (orange bars in Chart 2.2). European wholesale gas prices
are much lower than a year ago, though they are only a little lower than in May. The Brent
crude oil price has also fallen over the past year and, at US$80 per barrel, is 5% lower
than in the lead up to the May Report. In the UK, although the contribution of energy to
CPI inflation has fallen, it remains positive. It is expected to fall further from July as lower
wholesale gas prices feed through to the prices facing households (Section 2.6).
To a lesser extent, the contributions to inflation from food and other goods prices in the
US and euro area have also declined (purple and aqua bars in Chart 2.2). Goods inflation
has been on a downward trend for over a year in the US; it has slowed more recently in
the euro area.
(a) The lighter diamonds show Bank staff’s projections at the time of the May 2023 Monetary Policy Report. The darker
diamonds show Bank staff’s current projections. Projections for GDP growth and the unemployment rate are quarterly
and show 2023 Q2 and 2023 Q3 (May projections show Q1 to Q3). Projections for CPI inflation are monthly and show
July to September 2023 (May projections show April to September 2023). GDP growth and unemployment rate 2023 Q2
projections are based on official data to May, the CPI inflation figure is an outturn.
Global GDP is expected to remain subdued in the near term, in line with the May
Report.
Headline inflation in the euro area and United States has continued to fall,
primarily reflecting lower energy prices, but inflation remains above central banks’
targets…
Bank of England  
Page 37


While headline consumer price inflation has been falling, services inflation has remained
strong across the UK, the US and the euro area. The contribution of services inflation to
the headline rate has been consistently larger in the UK and US than in the euro area
(gold bars in Chart 2.2). This may in part reflect tighter labour markets, for example the
vacancy to unemployment ratios in the UK and US are further above their pre-pandemic
averages than in the euro area. That has contributed to strong growth in wages, which
tend to make up a large proportion of services firms’ costs.
Chinese domestic inflation has been weak in 2023, with producer price inflation falling to
-5.4% in June. This weakness probably reflects lower commodity prices and some
softness in demand, with China’s economic recovery having lost momentum in 2023 Q2
Chart 2.2: Headline inflation has been falling but remains above central banks’
targets in the UK, US and euro area
Contributions to annual consumer price inflation (a)
Sources: Eurostat, ONS, Refinitiv Eikon from LSEG, US Bureau of Economic Analysis, US Bureau of Labor Statistics
and Bank calculations.
(a) Data are not seasonally adjusted. Energy includes fuel and household energy bills. Other goods is the difference
between overall inflation and the other contributions identified on the chart, and therefore includes alcohol and tobacco.
The latest data are May 2023 outturns for US PCE inflation and the associated contributions, and June 2023 outturns
for all other series.
…in part reflecting the strength of services inflation.
Alongside weak Chinese domestic inflation, global inflationary pressures are
expected to continue to ease.
Bank of England  
Page 38


following the end of its zero-Covid policy. Annual growth in Chinese export prices has
slowed sharply from a peak of 13% last year to -6.7% in the latest data. Taken together
with slowing export prices in other regions, the level of world export prices is expected to
continue to fall over the coming year (Section 1).
Central banks have continued to tighten policy. In the US, the FOMC raised the target
range for the federal funds rate by 25 basis points to 5.25%–5.5% at its July meeting. At
its meeting ending on 27 July 2023, the ECB Governing Council raised its key policy rates
by 25 basis points and the deposit facility rate now stands at 3.75%. Both central banks
noted that they would continue to take a data-dependent approach to setting monetary
policy. The MPC voted to increase Bank Rate by 50 basis points to 5% in June (Box B).
Market-implied expectations for policy rates in the US and euro area have risen since May
(Chart 2.3). On average, the US and euro-area paths are around 60 and 25 basis points
higher, respectively, than in the lead up to the May Report.
Many central banks have continued to tighten policy, and market-implied paths for
policy rates are higher than in May.
Chart 2.3: The market-implied path of UK policy rates has moved materially higher
since the May Report
International forward interest rates (a)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and Bank calculations.
(a) All data as of 25 July 2023. The May curves are estimated based on the 15 UK working days to 28 April 2023. The
August curves are estimated using the 15 working days to 25 July 2023. Federal funds rate is the upper bound of the
announced target range. ECB deposit rate is based on the date on which changes in policy rates are effective from.
Bank of England  
Page 39


The rise in market-implied policy rate expectations in the UK has been much larger than in
the US and euro area, with the expected path for Bank Rate on average around 130 basis
points higher than in May. While some of the repricing reflects global developments,
market intelligence suggests that the increase in short-term interest rates has been driven
largely by UK-specific developments. That is likely to relate to the strength in the
indicators of inflation persistence that the MPC have been focusing on, for example the
upside news in UK services inflation and wage growth since May (Sections 2.5 and 2.6).
Short-term interest rates fell back somewhat, however, following the June CPI inflation
release, reflecting the downside surprise in headline and core inflation. This has left the
latest path for policy rate expectations, on average, around 25 basis points below the 15-
day average underlying the MPC’s projections.
Longer-term interest rates have also risen, though the increases have been smaller than
in short-term rates. Since the May Report, yields on 10-year UK government bonds are 70
basis points higher, compared to around 40 and 10 basis points in the US and Germany
respectively. The movements at the longer end of the UK yield curve have been driven by
expected policy rates (Ramsden (2023)).
Partly reflecting the rising differential between expected policy rates in the UK compared
to the US and euro area, the sterling effective exchange rate has appreciated by 4% since
the May Report, and around 6% since the start of the year (Chart 2.4). Sterling has
appreciated by 3% against the euro and by 4% against the US dollar since May. All else
equal, a stronger exchange rate dampens activity and pushes down inflation (Section
2.3).
Since May, the increase in UK policy rate expectations has been larger than in the
US and euro area…
…which has driven the sterling ERI higher.
Bank of England  
Page 40


2.2: Interest rates facing households and firms
Having fallen around the end of last year, interest rates on UK owner-occupied new
mortgages have risen materially since the May Report. For example, the average quoted
rate on a two-year fixed-rate 75% loan to value (LTV) mortgage rose by around 75 basis
points to 5.5% in June, and by a further 75 basis points in July (left panel of Chart 2.5).
This rise reflects the pass-through of higher risk-free interest rates: the relevant reference
rate for this product is the two-year overnight index swap (OIS) rate (purple line in the left
panel of Chart 2.5), which has risen by around 150 basis points since May. Mortgage
rates appear to have repriced more rapidly than in the past, perhaps reflecting the scale
and speed of the increase in reference rates. The relationship between risk-free reference
rates and mortgage rates is set out in Box B of the May 2023 Report.
Chart 2.4: The sterling ERI has continued to appreciate, by 4% since May
Sterling ERI and selected bilateral exchange rates (a)
(a) Figures in parentheses show currency trade weights in the overall sterling ERI.
Reflecting the rise in risk-free interest rates, new mortgage rates have increased
sharply.
Bank of England  
Page 41


Quoted interest rates on buy-to-let (BTL) mortgages have also increased – a two-year
75% LTV BTL mortgage has risen by around 150 basis points to 6.2% since the May
Report and by around 280 basis points over the past year. These mortgages are typically
used by private landlords to finance their investments. It is likely that at least part of the
increase in landlords’ borrowing costs is being passed on to renters (Section 2.3). The
July 2023 Financial Stability Report sets out recent developments in the BTL market in
further detail.
In the latest Credit Conditions Survey (CCS), lenders reported that the availability of
secured credit to households had decreased in the three months to end-May 2023,
reflecting a worsening economic outlook and tighter wholesale funding conditions. The
number of products available to households has fallen recently, although this has been
small compared with the fall observed last autumn. The recent decline partly reflects
lenders repricing their products in response to relatively fast moves in reference rates.
Chart 2.5: Interest rates on fixed-rate mortgages and fixed-rate bonds have risen in
line with reference rates, but instant access rates have risen by less
Average quoted rates on two-year fixed-rate mortgages, fixed-rate savings bond, instant access
accounts and the respective reference rates (a)
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg Finance L.P. and Bank calculations.
(a) The Bank’s quoted rates series are weighted monthly average rates advertised by all UK banks and building
societies with products meeting the specific criteria. In February 2019 the method used to calculate these data was
changed. For more information, see Introduction of new Quoted Rates data – Bankstats article. Diamonds for
mortgage and saving products represent averages of daily quoted rates using data to 25 July and were provisional. The
final data were published on 31 July. OIS rate and Bank Rate show monthly averages and the respective diamonds
show the average of daily rates to 25 July.
Bank of England  
Page 42


Interest rates on fixed-rate bonds, a type of time deposit, have also increased in line with
reference rates. However, pass-through of increases in Bank Rate to instant access
savings accounts, which make up the majority of household deposits, has been limited
(right panel of Chart 2.5). The average quoted rate on an instant access account has
increased by around 180 basis points over the past year, compared to an increase in
Bank Rate of 375 basis points. This pattern of less pass-through to instant access deposit
rates compared to time deposit rates is also apparent in the euro area and the US.
Reflecting the better returns on offer, deposit volumes have continued to shift from instant
access accounts to time deposits since the May Report (left panel of Chart 2.6), although
in aggregate the outflows have been small compared with the overall stock of sight
deposits. Outflows from sight deposits have not been matched by inflows into time
deposits, so household money growth has slowed (right panel of Chart 2.6). That has
contributed to slowing aggregate broad money growth; the annual rate was 0.6% in the
latest data, well below the 2010–19 average of 3.9%.
Instant access deposit rates have risen by less than those on fixed-rate bonds,
with deposit volumes continuing to shift towards the latter products.
Bank of England  
Page 43


Around three quarters of the stock of corporate bank debt has a variable interest rate. This
means that changes in reference rates are reflected in the rates paid by companies
relatively quickly. The average effective rate on new bank lending to corporates was
around 45 basis points higher in June than in April, and around 60 basis points higher for
SMEs. These data may not fully reflect the increase in Bank Rate in June, and so may
increase a little further in the near term.
In the latest CCS, lenders expected the overall availability of credit to the corporate sector
to remain unchanged in Q3. Contacts of the Bank’s Agents reported that bank credit
availability remained tighter than normal as there continued to be greater lender caution
when assessing new loans (Box C).
Chart 2.6: Deposit volumes have been shifting from instant access accounts to
time deposits. Money growth has slowed sharply
Monthly change in household deposits and annual growth rate of household and aggregate
broad money (a)
(a) Right panel shows monetary financial institutions’ sterling M4 liabilities to the household sector and aggregate M4
excluding the deposits of intermediate other financial corporations. Data are to June 2023.
The cost of borrowing for UK firms has increased since the May Report, reflecting
the increase in reference rates.
Bank of England  
Page 44


2.3: The impact of interest rates on activity
Monetary policy affects the economy through a wide range of channels (for example as
set out by Mann (2023)). Interest rate rises have direct effects, for example increasing
debt repayments for borrowers and increasing the incomes of net savers, potentially
affecting households’ and firms’ spending choices. There are also important impacts on
the broader economy. For example, asset prices tend to fall as interest rates rise. This can
reduce the capacity of households and firms to take out secured loans as the value of
potential collateral falls. Another channel is that rising interest rates will, all else equal, be
accompanied with an appreciation in the exchange rate which can itself have a range of
effects on prices, consumption and trade. There are also behavioural effects, such as
shifting the timing of consumption and firms’ investment decisions. The following section
provides evidence on the impact of rises in Bank Rate since the end of 2021 through
some of these channels.
One way in which higher interest rates can weigh on consumption is via cash-flow effects
on mortgagor households. In May, Bank staff estimated that the rise in mortgage
payments had reduced consumer spending by around 0.3%, with this effect expected to
increase to a little over 0.5% by the end of the 2025, as many households on fixed-rate
mortgages refinanced (see Chart B in Box B in the May 2023 Report). The rise in
mortgage rates since then (Section 2.2) means the total effect on consumption will be
higher now at closer to 0.8%. Although higher mortgage rates have very significant
impacts on some households’ finances, this channel of monetary policy can be a smaller
part of the overall transmission of monetary policy to the economy, compared to other
channels. Indeed, monetary policy still affects activity and inflation significantly in
countries, such as the US, where the scope for a cash-flow effect on mortgagor
households is limited by the housing market being dominated by mortgages with fixed
rates that often last for as long as 30 years.
There are a number of uncertainties surrounding these estimates of how much higher
mortgage rates will weigh on consumption. One factor is the extent to which those on
fixed-rate mortgages will begin to adjust their consumption before they start paying higher
rates at the end of their fixed-rate period. Only around half of mortgagor households are
estimated to have faced an increase in mortgage repayments since rates started to rise in
late 2021. There are around four million more households who have not yet faced
increased mortgage costs but will do so by the end of 2026. Most households are likely to
Interest rate rises to combat high inflation will weigh directly on consumer
spending through the cash-flow impact on mortgagors, although this is only one
part of the overall impact of monetary policy on economic activity.
Bank of England  
Page 45


know that their mortgage costs will rise and so may anticipate that by adjusting
consumption in advance. In the Bank’s March NMG survey, the perceived impact of higher
mortgage rates on their finances over the past 12 months for mortgagors with a fixed rate
due to expire before the end of the year were similar to those mortgagors who have
already experienced a rate rise.
A further uncertainty is the extent to which households may choose to lengthen mortgage
terms in order to reduce monthly mortgage payments, and hence limit the hit to their
incomes. But Bank staff estimate that in 2023 Q1 only around 15% of those households
remortgaging chose to lengthen their term when refinancing (July 2023 Financial
Stability Report). Moreover, the aggregate effect on mortgage repayments has been
broadly offset by some households choosing to pay off their mortgage faster.
Rising interest rates increase costs for those BTL landlords who have a mortgage
(Section 2.2), which could also reduce aggregate consumption. This could be via lower
net income for landlords or higher housing costs for renters, if landlords are able to pass
on their costs through rent increases. Private rents are rising faster than usual which is
likely to reduce other forms of consumption for tenant households. The CPI measure of
rents rose by 5.5% over the year to 2023 Q2, the fastest pace since 1996. The increase in
the price of new lets alone, rather than the entire population of rental properties, has been
even faster: the Rightmove asking rent for UK properties outside of London increased by
9.3% in the year to 2023 Q2, and by 13.7% in London, outstripping average wage growth
(Section 2.5). The Bank’s Agents report that more BTL landlords have sold rental
properties, which appears to be reducing their supply. On average, renting households are
likely to have more precarious finances than those who are BTL owners; as Albuquerque
and Green (2022) show, households who are concerned about the state of their finances
change their consumption significantly more when incomes change compared to other
households.
Higher interest rates will also weigh on house prices, which can reduce consumption via a
collateral channel. The UK House Price Index rose significantly during the pandemic but in
the most recent data fell by 0.4% between April and May, leaving the level of prices 1.1%
below its peak in November 2022 (Chart 2.7). Given elevated consumer price inflation,
house prices have fallen by much more than that in real terms. More timely indicators of
house prices – for example, the Nationwide and Halifax house price indices that capture
prices at earlier stages of the house-buying process – have been flat in recent months.
Contacts of the Bank’s Agents noted that nominal house prices were expected to fall
A more material impact on the economy comes through broader housing market
channels…
Bank of England  
Page 46


modestly in the coming months. The latest RICS Residential Market Survey shows that
price expectations over the next 12 months declined in June, reflecting the recent sharp
rise in interest rate expectations (Section 2.2).
Since interest rates started to rise, there has been a slowdown in housing market
transactions. Fewer transactions will reduce economic activity directly, for example
through less demand for services relating to moving house, and indirectly, for example
through less demand for new furniture or household appliances. Although mortgage
approvals increased in May and June, they remain much lower than the average
observed over most of last year, albeit not as weak as in the winter (Chart 2.8).
Chart 2.7: Nominal house prices have been broadly flat and indicators suggest that
this will continue in the near term
House price indices (a)
Sources: Nationwide, ONS, Refinitiv Eikon from LSEG, Rightmove.co.uk, S&P Global/Halifax and Bank calculations.
(a) The latest data point for the ONS House Price Index is May 2023. Halifax, Nationwide and Rightmove data are
advanced to reflect the respective timing of each data source in the house-buying process.
Bank of England  
Page 47


Another housing market channel through which rate rises affect UK activity is via housing
investment. This makes up a little over 5% of total economic activity and includes
investment in existing homes. In general, higher interest rates cause demand for housing
to fall and lead to a reduction in investment in new dwellings. Investment plans for new
homes can be slow to adapt so this effect might happen quite slowly. However, overall
housing investment has already been weak, falling by 5.5% since its peak in 2022 Q2
(Chart 2.9). That weakness is projected to continue with housing investment falling a
further 10% between 2023 Q1 and 2024 Q4 (Section 1).
Chart 2.8: The number of mortgage approvals has fallen
Mortgage approvals for house purchases
Bank of England  
Page 48


As set out in Box B of the May 2023 Report, surveys suggest that higher interest rates
are weighing on business investment. In the official data, excluding a one-off rise in
business investment in 2023 Q1 which was accounted for by firms bringing forward
investment plans for tax purposes (ONS (2023)), business investment has not grown
since 2022 Q2. Evidence from the Decision Maker Panel (DMP) from November 2022 to
January 2023 shows interest rates are expected to reduce business investment by 8% on
average over the following year. That effect was concentrated in roughly a third of
businesses. The rise in interest rates since then may mean that these effects have
increased.
Increases in UK interest rates relative to other countries’ rates will, all else equal, cause
the pound to appreciate. An exchange rate appreciation makes imports cheaper and
exports more expensive, relative to the pre-existing prices. Cheaper imports reduce UK
inflation directly, because UK households consume imported products, and indirectly, as
imported goods and services are used by firms in supply chains. There are also effects on
UK activity through falling net trade as UK exports become less competitive globally.
Given most advanced economies have been raising rates at the same time as the UK, the
pound has only appreciated since the start of 2023 (Chart 2.4). That suggests the impacts
of monetary policy through this mechanism have been relatively limited to date.
Chart 2.9: Housing investment is falling, which is projected to continue
Real housing investment (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) The last data outturn is 2023 Q1. The last data point for the forecast is 2024 Q4.
…and also through business investment.
The impact of interest rates on exchange rates also affects the economy.
Bank of England  
Page 49


2.4: UK activity
UK GDP growth turned positive at the end of 2022, with three-month on three-month
growth averaging around 0.1% since then (Chart 2.10). The latest Bank staff projection is
for GDP to have grown by 0.1% in 2023 Q2, having been reduced by strikes, mostly in
public services sectors, and the additional bank holiday in May. Underlying growth, which
adjusts for these factors, was closer to ¼% over that period, in line with the steer from key
business surveys (Chart 2.11). The easing in post-pandemic supply constraints, the
extension of the Energy Price Guarantee, and the fall in energy prices have supported
underlying growth.
GDP growth in 2023 Q3, is projected to rise to 0.4% (Chart 2.1), largely reflecting a
bounce back from the additional bank holiday in May.
On average, indicators suggest underlying growth will continue at around ¼% in Q3. The
Lloyds Business Barometer reports business confidence is above its long-term average
level suggesting underlying growth could pick up. In contrast, the most recent PMI
surveys suggest growth has weakened (Chart 2.11). Measures of consumer confidence
have improved since the start of the year, which may reflect the ongoing strength of the
labour market (Section 2.5), as well as the easing in CPI inflation, both of which boost real
incomes. But the GfK survey of consumer confidence fell in July and the headline
measure remains historically low.
Economic growth has been slow but positive since the end of 2022.
Bank of England  
Page 50


Chart 2.10: GDP growth has been slow but positive since the end of 2022 despite
falling public sector output
Contribution to three-month on three-month GDP growth (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Public services includes: public administration and defence; education; and human health and social work activities.
Data do not sum to the total due to rounding.
Chart 2.11: Survey measures of economic activity suggest underlying growth is
likely to remain slow but positive in the near term
Survey indicators of UK output growth (a)
Sources: S&P Global/CIPS and Bank calculations.
(a) Measures of current monthly UK composite (services and manufacturing) output, new orders and future output. The
current output and new orders series are mean and variance adjusted between 1998 and 2023; the future output series
is adjusted between July 2012 and 2023. The latest data points are flash estimates for July 2023.
Bank of England  
Page 51


2.5: The labour market and wage growth
In the three months to May, the employment rate for those aged 16–64 was 76%, the
highest rate since early 2020. The number of people employed grew by 0.3% in the three
months to May (Chart 2.12), in line with the projection at the time of the May 2023
Report. These data can be volatile over short periods, and there is the possibility of some
additional variation in the most recent data because response rates to the Labour Force
Survey have dropped over time (ONS (2023)). Timelier and less volatile measures of
employment growth suggest that employment is growing at around the same rate. For
example, the purchasing managers’ index (PMI) employment index points to employment
growth of around 0.3%.
Employment and labour participation have increased.
Chart 2.12: Indicators of employment point to growth of around ¼% on average in
the near term
Indicators of three-month on three-month employment growth (a)
Sources: Bank of England Agents, KPMG/REC/S&P Global UK Report on Jobs, Lloyds Business Barometer, ONS, S&P
Global/CIPS and Bank calculations.
(a) ONS employment growth is the change in headline employment level for people aged 16+ over the value three
months earlier. The PAYE employees growth series is the three-month change in the monthly number of PAYE
employees. Indicators include surveys from: the Bank’s Agents (employment intentions over the next six months);
KPMG/REC/S&P Global (index of demand for staff); Lloyds Business Barometer (balance of higher staffing levels over
next 12 months); and S&P Global/CIPS (PMI composite employment index). Surveys are taken from a range of sources
with varying samples and questions but have been mean and variance adjusted to match the ONS employment growth
series between 2000 and 2019, and are therefore shown consistent with the three-month on three-month growth rate.
The final data point for ONS employment growth is the three months to May 2023.
Bank of England  
Page 52


The number of working-age people in the labour force has continued to recover since it
troughed in mid-2022. This trend is a continuation of that set out in Section 2.3 of the May
2023 Report, with a smaller number of students and a higher student participation rate
and, more recently, fewer people reporting retirement and looking after family or the home
as the reason for being outside the labour force (Chart 2.13). However, there continues to
be a marked increase in the number of people reporting being out of the labour force
owing to sickness, which is now a little under half a million more than at the end of 2019.
The overall net increase in the number of people in the labour force since mid-2022
suggests that some of the effects of the pandemic that reduced labour force participation
are reversing (Section 3 of the February 2023 Report).
Higher labour market participation has more than offset the rise in employment such that
the unemployment rate rose slightly to 4% in the three months to May. It is expected to
remain around that level during the second half of 2023, hitting 4.1% in 2023 Q3, up from
a forecast of 3.8% in the May 2023 Report (Chart 2.1).
Chart 2.13: Labour force participation continues to improve, although more
working-age people report sickness is preventing them from working
Change in inactivity since July 2022 by reason (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Changes from the three months to July 2022, based on those aged 16–64. Other reasons include: discouraged
workers; those awaiting the results of a job application; have not yet started looking for work; do not need or want
employment; have given an uncategorised reason; or have not given a reason. Sickness includes both those long-term
and temporarily sick.
Bank of England  
Page 53


The rise in employment and faster-than-expected average earnings growth have
increased household income growth, although it remains weak relative to historical
averages. Real household incomes grew by 0.9% over the year to 2023 Q1 (Chart 2.14).
The latest Bank projection is for four-quarter growth to pick up in 2023 Q2 and to average
1.4% for the rest of 2023. This is a small upward revision compared to the May forecast
as nominal labour income expectations have been revised up by more than inflation
forecasts (see Section 2.6). Taking a longer view, real income growth is now projected to
be materially higher than was projected in November 2022. The biggest driver of this
upward revision is the impact of falling energy prices and the extension of government
support for energy bills (for more details of changes in the Bank’s forecast over time see
Annex 2).
The strength in the labour market has improved the outlook for household
incomes.
Chart 2.14: Real incomes are projected to rise modestly in 2023
Four-quarter real household income growth (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Diamonds show Bank staff projections. The aqua diamonds show the latest projections for 2023 Q2, Q3 and Q4.
Income includes non-profit institutions serving households. See footnote (q) in Table 1.D for the definition of real post-tax
household income.
Bank of England  
Page 54


Labour market tightness is important because it is one of the key factors that affects wage
growth and domestic inflationary pressures. Tightness is not a directly observable
phenomenon; it depends on the interaction of labour supply and demand and the
structure of the labour market.
One important indicator of tightness, the ONS vacancies to unemployment ratio, has been
falling since early to mid-2022 (the aqua line in Chart 2.15), although it remains above its
2019 Q4 level. A high number of job vacancies compared to the number of unemployed
people suggests the labour market is tight. Timelier measures of job postings from Indeed
and Adzuna show similar dynamics although the number of vacancies in these series has
returned to closer to their pre-pandemic levels. However, these series measure the
number of job adverts rather than the total number of vacant jobs, and so may be affected
if businesses choose to place a single advert for multiple job openings. These series also
cover less of the job market than the ONS series so are less reliable in assessing the
overall level of tightness.
A composite measure of labour market tightness confirms that the labour market is
loosening but remains tighter than prior to the pandemic (the orange line in Chart 2.15).
This combined measure has moved in a similar way to the vacancies to unemployment
ratio, although it suggests that the peak in labour market tightness was not quite as high
in 2022.
One factor that could be adding to labour market tightness is a decline in the efficiency
with which workers are matched to job vacancies. There is some evidence that there has
been a decline in the flow of new hires compared to what would typically have been
expected given the number of vacancies.
There are some indications that the labour market is loosening, but it remains
tight.
Bank of England  
Page 55


At 7.7% in May, annual private sector regular average weekly earnings growth was at its
highest rate since the series began in 2001, after accounting for volatility during the
pandemic. This was around 1 percentage point higher than expected in the May Report,
while the annualised three-month on three-month growth rate was over 9% in May. As
with labour market tightness, wage growth is one of the key indicators that the MPC are
monitoring. This is because rapid growth could indicate more persistent domestic
inflationary pressure (Section 1). There are a number of potential drivers of strong nominal
wage growth, with past analysis highlighting that high inflation can itself feedback to faster
wage growth (for more detail see Section 3 of the May 2023 Report).
One factor potentially affecting average weekly earnings growth since April is the increase
in the National Living Wage (NLW). In 2022, 5.4% of employees were paid the minimum
wage (Low Pay Commission Report 2022 (2023)). This proportion probably fell prior to
the 2023 increase in NLW rates because some employers had raised pay above those
rates in response to high inflation. This relatively low level of coverage, combined with the
Chart 2.15: The labour market remains tight, although has loosened since mid-2022
Measures of labour market tightness (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) The composite non-vacancy measure is calculated as the first principal component of seven series: the short-term
unemployment rate; quarterly resignations as a share of employment; the share of employed people who report wanting
more hours in their current job; the number of redundancies as a share of employment; the Bank’s Agents composite
company visit score for recruitment difficulty; and the rate of flows out of unemployment and inactivity into employment
respectively. Quarterly series are linearly interpolated to monthly data. These measures can vary for reasons unrelated
to a strict definition of labour market tightness however the first principal component is intended to capture the
comovement of these series, which is likely to be similar to a measure of labour market tightness. The ONS vacancies
and composite non-vacancy measure series are mean and variance adjusted using data from 2002 to 2023.
Nominal wage growth has risen further.
Bank of England  
Page 56


low rate of pay compared to average wages, means that the direct effect on aggregate
wage growth is likely to have been limited, particularly in the context of already elevated
aggregate wage growth.
Labour market tightness has played a role in elevated nominal wage growth, and there is
tentative evidence that it explains some of the wide variation in pay across some sectors.
In May 2023, average annual pay growth for those in the finance and business services
sector was 9.0%, significantly above the 5.2% rate of growth across the wholesale, retail
and hospitality sectors (Chart 2.16). The finance and professional services sector – and
within that the professional and scientific sector in particular – has the highest ratio of
vacancies to unemployed people in the private sector.
Some forward-looking indicators suggest that nominal wage growth will fall in the latter
half of 2023. For example, the KPMG/REC/S&P Global UK Report on Jobs indicator of
wage growth (aqua line in Chart 2.17) suggests annual wage growth is currently around
its peak. The REC measure is an indication of the monthly change in wages for new hires
and tends to lead changes in the official measure of annual wage growth; in the chart, the
Chart 2.16: Wage growth varies widely by sector
Annual regular pay growth, by broad sector (a)
(a) Pay growth is measured as the average wage level over three months compared to the corresponding period a year
earlier. The data are not adjusted for pandemic-related composition effects.
Some forward-looking indicators suggest wage growth will fall back in the second
half of 2023 but the outlook is particularly uncertain.
Bank of England  
Page 57


series is shifted forward 12 months to reflect the strongest correlation with the private
sector regular pay growth series. A similar measure, the Indeed Wage Tracker (gold line in
Chart 2.17), which measures the average annual change in the wages stated in job
adverts, suggests wage growth has not fallen back for new hires. But this measure has
been closest to contemporaneous private sector wage growth rather than being a reliable
leading indicator.
The outlook for wage growth is particularly uncertain. The REC series has been among
the best-performing indicators in predicting future wage growth over the past two decades
but there are uncertainties about how accurate the current steer from the measure is. For
example, changes in how frequently people move jobs might affect the relationship with
the official data, although Bank staff analysis suggests that the impact of this on the
current outlook is small.
Overall, the latest projection for private sector regular earnings growth is for it to fall to
6.9% in 2023 Q3 and then 6.2% in Q4. This broadly matches intelligence from the Bank’s
Agents, whose contacts generally expect wage growth to fall from current levels but
remain higher than usual at the end of the year at around 5% to 6%. Nonetheless, the
recent pattern of upwards surprises in wages suggests that risks may lie to the upside in
the near term. Given the role that the rise in headline inflation appears to have played in
the increase in wage growth, the projected easing in wage growth is consistent with the
projected fall in inflation (Section 2.6), which has typically affected short-term inflation
expectations (Section 2.7).
Bank of England  
Page 58


2.6: Inflation
Twelve-month CPI inflation remains well above target, at 7.9% in June, down from the
11.1% peak in October 2022. This decline is more than accounted for by a falling
contribution from fuel prices, which have declined, and electricity and gas bills, which
have stabilised at a high level (Chart 2.18). The contribution from those categories to
headline inflation fell from 3.9 percentage points in October to 0.4 percentage points in
June. In contrast, the contribution from other goods and services rose by 0.3 percentage
points.
Chart 2.17: Twelve-month private sector regular pay growth was 7.7% in May, but
forward-looking indicators suggests growth will slow this year
Measures of annual wage growth (a)
Sources: Indeed Hiring Lab, KPMG/REC/S&P Global UK Report on Jobs, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Definitions of wage growth vary between each of the measures. Private sector regular pay growth is Bank staff’s
estimate of underlying pay growth between January 2020 and November 2022 and ONS private sector regular pay
growth otherwise. REC shows average starting salaries for permanent staff compared to the previous month. Pay as
You Earn (PAYE) Real Time Information (RTI) shows median of employee pay growth. Indeed shows annual average
job title matched pay growth for UK job vacancies. The REC index is mean-variance adjusted to ONS private sector
regular pay growth over March 2001–19 and is advanced by 12 months, which coincides with the greatest correlation
with private sector regular pay growth. Latest data points are June 2023 for Indeed, PAYE RTI and the REC index, and
the three months to May 2023 for private sector regular pay.
Consumer price inflation remains very high but has started to fall, largely due to
household energy bills stabilising.
Bank of England  
Page 59


Inflation is projected to fall further in the coming months, to 4.9% by 2023 Q4, largely
reflecting falling energy bills. From October 2022, households’ gas and electricity prices
were set by the Government’s Energy Price Guarantee, which meant that the typical
household was paying an annualised bill equivalent to £2,500 per year. Wholesale gas
prices have fallen materially since then (Chart A in Annex 2). These falls have been large
enough that Ofgem’s price cap is now below the Energy Price Guarantee and so, since
July 2023, the typical household has been paying an equivalent bill of around £2,000.
Based on the latest energy futures prices, the Ofgem price cap is expected to fall a little
further from October to around £1,900 per year. However, the rate of inflation, which is
calculated as an annual comparison, falls more materially because prices in 2022 Q4
were at the Energy Price Guarantee ceiling of £2,500. This means electricity and gas
prices will start to drag on overall CPI inflation, by around 1.1 percentage points in 2023
Q4. Gas prices remain volatile and so there is uncertainty around this projection.
Lower household energy prices are expected to help push CPI inflation down to
around 5% in Q4.
Chart 2.18: Consumer price inflation has fallen since last year’s peak and is
projected to fall further as energy prices moderate
Contributions to CPI inflation (a)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., Department for Energy Security and Net Zero, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Figures in parentheses are CPI basket weights in 2023. Data to June 2023. Bank staff projections from July to
December 2023. Fuels and lubricants estimates use Department for Energy Security and Net Zero petrol price data for
July 2023 and then are based on the sterling oil futures curve.
Bank of England  
Page 60


Overall CPI inflation in June was in line with the May Report projection (Chart 2.1).
However, services price inflation was stronger than expected. This was offset by lower-
than-projected energy prices.
Services price inflation has risen since the May Report, reaching 7.2% in June, down only
slightly from the 31-year high reached the previous month (Chart 2.19). The June outturn
was 0.5 percentage points higher than previously projected, and some of that increase is
projected to persist. Services price inflation is one of the key metrics the MPC is
monitoring as a signal of underlying inflationary pressure in the economy.
The strength of services price inflation suggests higher inflation may be somewhat more
persistent. However, some of the key components accounting for the upward surprise are
factors that have historically been less informative about underlying inflationary pressure.
The upward surprise since May has been accounted for by a small number of
components, in particular Vehicle Excise Duty and package holidays. Vehicle Excise Duty
rises each year in April and is set by the Government and so has little relationship to
underlying macroeconomic developments, although its effect on inflation will remain for
twelve months. The price of package holidays will to some extent reflect changes in prices
abroad, but to the extent that it reflects higher domestic demand and the strong labour
market, it could signal more inflationary pressure.
Consumer price inflation in June 2023 was in line with the projection in the May
Report, but services price inflation has been higher than projected.
The near-term projection for services price inflation has been revised up since the
May Report, suggesting stronger domestic inflationary pressure.
Bank of England  
Page 61


Strong goods price inflation is relatively broad-based. Chart 2.20 shows the consumption-
weighted distribution of price rises across the 49 disaggregated categories of goods
prices in June 2023, compared to the distribution of average price rises between 2012
and 2019. The median price rise over the three months to June 2023 was 2.2%. This
means that for half of goods categories average prices rose by over 9% on an annualised
basis, far above a level that would be consistent with the 2% inflation target.
Chart 2.19: Services price inflation is projected to remain high
Twelve-month services inflation (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) The latest data point is June 2023 and the projection is shown to December 2023.
Goods price inflation continues to be broad-based across products…
Bank of England  
Page 62


The broad-based price increases suggest that goods price inflation has been driven by a
common factor and might continue at a relatively high level in the near term. Indeed, the
latest projection for the contribution of goods prices excluding energy to overall inflation
falls from 4.3 percentage points to a still elevated 3.1 percentage points over the next six
months.
However, output producer price inflation, which measures the change in the price of
goods sold by UK manufacturers, has slowed significantly since its peak in mid-2022. This
should help to reduce consumer price inflation once cost pressures have fully passed
through supply chains (Chart 2.21). Producer price inflation for services has also slowed,
though by less than the output PPI series, falling from 6.2% at its peak in 2022 Q3 to
4.8% in 2023 Q2.
Chart 2.20: Higher goods price inflation is affecting a larger-than-typical share of
product categories
Weighted histogram of three month on three month goods price inflation, excluding energy (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) The June 2023 data shows the weighted share of goods components of the CPI basket which have experienced
price changes within each band. Weights are based on the latest published CPI weights. For example, just under 20%
of goods components experienced average increases in prices of between 3% and 4%. The 2012–19 average shows
the equivalent distribution averaged over all months between 2012 and 2019.
…but slowing producer price inflation indicates goods price inflation is likely to
start to ease towards the end of 2023, although the outlook remains very
uncertain.
Bank of England  
Page 63


Output PPI inflation and CPI goods inflation have typically had a tight correlation (Chart
2.21), which is unsurprising given that in a competitive market producer cost changes
would be expected to be passed onto consumers. That relationship would suggest that
CPI goods price inflation could decline sharply in the near term. But the sharp slowdown
in PPI inflation has not coincided with a material slowdown in goods price inflation to date.
There are a number of candidate explanations for this recent divergence between PPI and
CPI inflation.
First, it is possible that consumer-facing firms have sought to rebuild margins. But as
discussed below, there is not much evidence at the whole-economy level that firms have
increased their margins so far.
Second, the scale of the recent economic shock may have slowed the transmission of
producer price changes to consumer prices. For example, the large rise in energy prices
was accompanied by a significant increase in the volatility of those prices. If firms
throughout the supply chain chose to enter fixed-price contracts to reduce this uncertainty,
that could slow the pace at which cost falls can move through those supply chains and
Chart 2.21: Producer price inflation suggests cost pressures for goods are easing
Annual output producer price and CPI goods excluding energy inflation (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) The output PPI series is the headline ONS measure for manufacturing output producer prices. The PPI series has
been mean and variance adjusted to match the corresponding CPI series between 2012 and 2019. The latest data point
is June 2023 and the forecast is to September 2023.
Bank of England  
Page 64


ultimately reach consumer prices. As noted by Dhingra (2023), there is historical
precedent for large shocks to producer prices being associated with a change in the lag to
consumer prices.
Third, there are also important differences between the coverage of consumer and
producer price data. In particular, producer prices include non-consumer facing firms (for
example, those operating business-to-business). Differences in cost pressures between
consumer and non-consumer products would therefore result in an increasing wedge
between these series. There are also costs in the supply of consumer goods which are
not captured in the PPI, for example retailer’s energy and labour costs. Producer prices
data are calculated for the domestic economy but import prices, which have not slowed in
line with PPI inflation, have an important role in consumer products. That means more
persistent import price growth would not be captured fully in the PPI data.
Food price inflation, which has a particularly large impact on the living costs of lower-
income families due to it making up a larger share of these families’ budgets, remains
extremely high. The annual rate hit 19.1% in March and only fell back a little, to 17.3% in
June, in line with the projection in the May Report. Month-on-month food price inflation
provides a clearer picture on the current pace of price increases. This has slowed to
around 10% in the latest data but remains high (Chart 2.22).
Evidence from the Bank’s Agents suggests that food price inflation is likely to continue to
slow, albeit only gradually. Industry contacts expect annual food inflation to fall to around
or a little below 10% by the end of the year (Box D). This reflects a moderation in input
prices, which are taking time to transmit through the supply chain. For example, many
companies are on fixed-term energy contracts and so falling wholesale prices will only
benefit them when their contracts end.
Overall, the contribution of food prices to CPI inflation is projected to fall from around 2
percentage points in June to 1.3 percentage points in 2023 Q4.
Food price inflation appears to have peaked, although it is likely to remain high
throughout 2023.
Bank of England  
Page 65


In aggregate, corporate profits have been little changed as a share of GDP over the past
two years, suggesting that firms increasing prices to raise their margins is not currently a
significant contributor to inflation (see Haskel (2023)). An accounting decomposition of the
GDP deflator, a measure of prices across the entire economy (unlike CPI which measures
consumer prices) shows that the majority of the increase in prices has resulted from
increases in labour costs, reflecting the fact that the largest share of income goes to
labour (Chart 2.23). In contrast, the contribution from corporate profits has only risen
slightly over 2023. So the latest data suggest there has been little change in the overall
share of income accounted for by corporate profits or labour costs.
This is broadly consistent with evidence based on firms’ self-reported margins. Evidence
from the 2023 Q2 DMP suggests that margins have been more likely to fall, on average,
rather than rise over the past year. However, this evidence does not rule out the possibility
that margins may have contributed to inflation in particular sectors. The Competition and
Chart 2.22: Food inflation remains high but has started to slow slightly
Annualised monthly food and non-alcoholic beverages inflation (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) The latest data points are for June 2023.
Firms’ margins do not appear to be a major factor in current high levels of
aggregate inflation, but if firms try to increase margins in coming months that
may push up inflation.
Bank of England  
Page 66


Markets Authority (CMA) have found that competition between road fuel supply retailers
has weakened in recent years and margins in fuel retail have risen significantly since
2019. The CMA are conducting further work on the groceries sector – see Box D.
There is some evidence that firms are expecting to increase margins, which could mean
inflation remains elevated for longer. Most respondents to the Bank’s DMP Survey expect
to maintain or increase margins in the coming year. The Bank’s Agency network also
report that firms in some sectors are expecting to increase margins, particularly where
they have previously been squeezed.
2.7: Inflation expectations
Household inflation expectations are an important indicator of inflationary pressure, as
they, alongside business inflation expectations, can affect wage-setting behaviour.
Household inflation expectations have fallen back since the peak in 2022, with the short-
term expectations series showing a more marked fall (Chart 2.24). Medium-term
Chart 2.23: In aggregate, corporate profits have made relatively little contribution
to rising prices over the past year
Contribution to the four-quarter change in the GDP deflator (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) The corporate gross operating surplus is defined as the contribution of the sum of private non-financial gross
operating surplus, net of the alignment adjustment, and financial corporations gross operating surplus. For more detail
on this topic, see Haskel (2023).
Household inflation expectations have continued to decline.
Bank of England  
Page 67


expectations are now in line with historical averages at 3.2%. Short-term inflation
expectations tend to be related to current inflation levels, so if inflation falls back in the
coming months, they could continue to decline.
In the DMP Survey, firms’ expectations for own-price growth have been declining and now
stand at a little over 5% on average over the coming year (Chart 2.25). This remains
above a level consistent with the 2% target and is somewhat higher than the MPC’s latest
projection for inflation in 2024 Q2 at 3.3%, although the DMP measure includes non-
consumer facing firms and so is not directly comparable to CPI.
Chart 2.24: Household inflation expectations have fallen back from the peak in
2022
Household inflation expectations (a)
Sources: Citigroup, YouGov and Bank calculations.
(a) Data are not seasonally adjusted. ‘Short-term expectations’ refers to expectations in the next 12 months and
‘medium-term expectations’ refers to expectations five to ten years ahead. The household surveys ask about expected
changes in prices but do not reference a specific price index. Summarised as a weighted median. The latest data points
are for June 2023.
Firms are also expecting to raise their own prices at a slower rate over the coming
year, albeit still faster than the inflation target.
Bank of England  
Page 68


A measure of medium-term inflation compensation in financial markets has risen
somewhat since the start of the year but remains below the peak in the first half of 2022
(Chart 2.26). This is a measure of RPI inflation compensation, so has been adjusted for
the impact of RPI reform on market pricing. There are difficulties in interpreting these data
given that they can move for reasons unrelated to inflation expectations, for example due
to illiquidity in markets and the use of these instruments in hedging pension liabilities. Any
changes in the outlook for the wedge between RPI and CPIH can also affect these data.
Chart 2.25: Firms’ expectations of price growth continue to fall back
Firms’ own realised and expected price inflation (a)
Sources: DMP Survey and Bank calculations.
(a) Solid lines show three-month moving averages and dashed lines show the single-month value. Realised price
growth are responses to the question: ‘Looking back, from 12 months ago to now, what was the approximate % change
in the average price you charge, considering all products and services?’. Expected price growth are responses to the
question: ‘Looking ahead, from now to 12 months from now, what approximate % change in your average price would
you expect in each of the following scenarios: lowest, low, middle, high and highest?’, and respondents are asked to
assign a probability to each scenario which is used to create a weighted average expectation of price growth. The latest
data are for July 2023.
Indicators of medium-term inflation expectations in financial markets have
increased slightly since May.
Bank of England  
Page 69


Chart 2.26: A measure of medium-term inflation expectations in financial markets
has been drifting up
RPI-reform adjusted measure of five-year, five-year forward inflation compensation (a)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and Bank calculations.
(a) Market-derived inflation compensation rates for average UK RPI inflation over a five-year period starting five years
into the future. It is derived by adjusting the five-year, five-year rate to account for UK RPI reform. From 2030, UK RPI
will be aligned with the CPIH measure of consumer prices. At present, the wedge between the current definition of RPI
and CPIH affects the unadjusted series. This measure is calculated by adding a scaled market-derived estimate of the
impact of RPI reform onto the unadjusted rate. That is calculated as the difference between the closest one-year forward
rates before and after the planned RPI reform date (currently the five-year, one-year rate and the seven-year, one-year
rate) on a three-month daily rolling average basis, and the adjustment is applied to the five-year forward period
impacted by the reform.
Bank of England  
Page 70


Box C: Agents’ update on business conditions
The key information from Agents’ contacts considered by the Monetary Policy
Committee at its August meeting is presented in this box, which summarises
intelligence gathered in the six weeks to mid-July.
High inflation and increases in Bank Rate have slowed activity across the economy.
Looking ahead, contacts remained concerned about inflation proving more
persistent, requiring tighter monetary policy. This had weakened their view of the
outlook, although employment intentions were still positive.
For goods such as clothing and footwear, demand was increasingly being driven by
discounting. Demand for durable goods was declining and it remained weak for
home improvements owing to rising interest rates and cost of living pressures.
Demand for new cars continued to fall, while it remained strong for used cars as
consumers chose less expensive options.
For consumer services, contacts in restaurants and pubs reported that sales growth
was mainly being driven by higher prices. Volumes were slightly down as people
were eating out less due to higher prices. In the tourism sector, there were fewer
staycations and demand from lower income consumers was falling, but older
generations were spending more as pandemic-related caution diminished.
Overall, the outlook for consumption had softened as contacts became more
pessimistic.
Business services contacts reported falling revenue growth, although price inflation
had partly offset slightly lower volumes. In contrast, strong growth continued in the
IT, insurance, law and audit sectors. Expectations for 2023 H2 growth had
moderated owing to uncertainty around the future path of interest rates.
Manufacturing output was broadly flat. Supply chain constraints had eased, export
demand had improved, but domestic demand was subdued.
Consumer spending values growth remained strong, mainly driven by high
price inflation. But cost of living pressures were leading to slightly weaker
sales volumes across goods and services.
Business services revenue growth softened slightly, manufacturing volumes
were broadly flat and construction output declined further.
Bank of England  
Page 71


Construction output remained at relatively low levels and had declined further due
to softer demand and higher financing costs. There was a modest increase in the
number of construction firms entering insolvency procedures.
Contacts reported that the outlook for manufacturing and construction output in
2023 H2 was weaker and demand could fall further due to increased uncertainty
around further interest rate increases.
Contacts reported rising interest costs were reducing demand for new loans. More
firms were paying down debt, but the need for working capital finance was still
elevated especially for small firms with squeezed cash flow.
Banks were still willing to lend to well-established companies with strong finances,
but credit supply remained tighter than normal. Some small and medium-sized
enterprises were increasingly turning to non-bank lenders at a higher cost. Contacts
expected insolvencies to rise over the coming year.
Contacts reported that higher interest rates, alongside uncertainty about the
economic outlook, were continuing to weigh on investment plans. Rising costs,
labour shortages and planning issues in particular were still delaying or disrupting
building projects. However, contacts continued to invest in IT and digital services to
improve production efficiencies.
Contacts reported that buyers reliant on mortgages were constrained on
affordability, mostly reflecting higher interest rates. Some house builders were
downgrading build plans and pausing some schemes. Estate agents reported an
increase in the stock of existing homes for sale and a number of buy-to-let landlords
were selling their properties. House prices had fallen only slightly, and contacts
generally expected a decline of no more than 5% in 2023 H2. Acute supply
shortages were leading to private rental prices increasing sharply, particularly for
new lettings. So far, mortgage and rental arrears were not picking up.
Higher interest rates and uncertainty around the economic outlook were
leading to a softening in credit demand and investment intentions.
In the owner-occupied housing market, demand was gradually falling and
supply increasing, while there were supply shortages in the rental market.
Commercial real estate property values continued to fall and investor
demand remains subdued.
Bank of England  
Page 72


Employment intentions pointed to modest headcount growth over the next 12
months but with variation across sectors. Some business services and
manufacturing sector contacts were continuing to expand the workforce owing to
demand growth.
Recruitment remained more difficult than normal but had eased somewhat since
earlier in the year, with lower vacancies and attrition rates. The loosening in the
labour market was mainly evident for less skilled workers and in sectors where
demand was falling such as real estate and construction. Recruitment, retention
and skills shortages continue to be a challenge in the IT, engineering and finance
sectors.
Pay settlements had remained stable in recent months, averaging 6%–6.5%.
Average awards were higher in consumer services, driven by the rise in the NLW.
Contacts reported that pay awards in 2023 H2 were expected to be slightly lower as
inflation was expected to fall back, the labour market loosened, and firms increased
their focus on containing costs.
Input cost inflation had fallen, but energy costs remained high, and most commodity
prices had stabilised rather than fallen. Import cost inflation remained high but had
come down too, supported by a stronger exchange rate and by freight costs falling
back to more normal levels. Many companies had not been able to pass on all
previous cost increases into prices, and producers may seek to recover some of
that squeeze in profit margins over time. Combined with lags in the supply chain,
this may delay pass-through of lower input cost pressures into consumer price
inflation.
Manufacturers’ domestic price inflation was historically high but continued to
decrease with easing cost pressures. Firms expect to return to more normal pricing
patterns in the coming year, with fewer and smaller price increases. Business
services inflation remained very high, particularly in the professional services,
insurance and IT sectors.
Employment intentions had rose slightly. Recruitment remained more
difficult than normal, but conditions had eased slightly. Pay settlements
were expected to fall back gradually in 2023 H2.
Input cost inflation was easing. Supply chain lags and producers looking to
recover lost margins may delay pass-through into consumer prices. But
consumer price inflation had peaked, particularly for goods.
Bank of England  
Page 73


Consumer services inflation remained high in the face of pressures from energy
and other input costs and pay.
Contacts judged that consumer goods inflation had peaked, including for food (Box
D), and was likely to come down faster than consumer services inflation, where staff
costs are a bigger portion of the cost structure. The clearest evidence of easing
inflationary pressures was for durable goods and clothing and footwear but used
car prices remained high and are not expected to fall back quickly.
Bank of England  
Page 74


Box D: Key messages from external meetings on food
price inflation
This box sets out the main themes emerging from meetings in June and July that
Bank staff held with a range of external experts and contacts of the Bank’s Agency
network in the food sector, covering food producers, processors and retailers. They
discussed why food price inflation had risen so much in recent quarters, and the
main factors affecting the short-term outlook. The meetings supplemented the
Agencies’ usual intelligence gathering from contacts, which is summarised in Box
C.
Consumers had responded to pressures on real incomes by switching to cheaper
goods, as well as by buying fewer goods. Within sales at the major supermarkets,
consumers had switched from branded to own-label goods, or from fresh to frozen
produce. And consumers had changed where they shop, spending more at
supermarkets with lower average prices.
Input cost inflation experienced by food producers had fallen, but still remained
much higher than usual. So far only a few inputs had seen actual reductions in
costs. And it may take longer for some producers to see lower cost pressures,
particularly where there are annual contracts with suppliers or group buying
arrangements.
Many food producers were also facing significant cost pressures from wages and
energy. Although there was considerable uncertainty, wage growth was expected to
remain higher than normal into 2024. While energy costs had started to fall, many
businesses would not benefit from the reduction in wholesale gas prices until their
energy contracts come up for renewal, which was likely to be this autumn for many
smaller businesses.
For food retailers, the cost of products was by far the largest element of overall
costs. They reported a consistent picture of easing product cost inflation, which was
expected to be much lower next year, if still a bit above normal. However, retailers
also discussed significant overheads from property and staff costs. They had faced
Consumers continued to trade down.
Cost inflation was coming down, but remains high for now.
Bank of England  
Page 75


higher wage pressure in the face of recruitment difficulties over the past few years.
Staff pay had risen materially above the National Living Wage, and annual
increases had remained high this year.
In the light of easing cost inflation, there was quite wide agreement among
discussants that food price inflation had now peaked. It was expected to be
significantly lower by the end of the year, perhaps around 10% or slightly lower. On
average, it was thought to take around five to nine months for changes in
commodity prices to work through to shop prices. But there was some discussion of
the possibility that food price inflation may come down more slowly than it went up,
partly because of the impact of non-product costs.
Food price inflation was expected to fall further in 2024. But uncertainty was a
common theme in discussions, including continuing geo-political risks, and there
was a range of views on prospects. Some thought that food price inflation would
remain slightly higher than normal, but others thought there could be modest falls in
prices by the end of the year.
Discussions also highlighted some differences within the overall picture:
Many discussions touched on the high degree of competition between the major UK
supermarkets, which was said to result in profit margins that were relatively thin
across much of the food sector, and were likely to have declined further recently.
Food producers said their margins had been squeezed, as they had not been able
to pass on all of recent cost increases to their retailer customers. Businesses in the
agricultural sector feared they would face additional pressure over time, as they
Food price inflation was expected to be significantly lower by the end of the
year.
Price falls were more likely for goods that are simple to process, such as butter,
milk and bread. These staples might be a focus of competition for supermarkets,
and margins on those goods could become significantly squeezed.
Inflation had been higher for own-label products, because the cost of ingredients
is a much larger proportion of the retail price than for branded equivalents.
For similar reasons, inflation tended to be higher for products sold by the
discount retailers. Their operating models (fewer product ranges, smaller and
lower-cost stores) meant their profit margins tend to be lower than those of the
major grocers, so they have less scope to absorb cost pressures.
Profit margins had been squeezed across much of the food sector.
Bank of England  
Page 76


expected the replacement for the Common Agricultural Policy to offer a lower
overall level of funding. However, some discussants thought that the market power
of large manufacturers of branded products could mean those businesses
experienced less margin erosion in the face of cost pressures.
Retailers too said they had seen their margins fall, despite implementing a range of
cost-saving initiatives. The need to operate stores and distribution networks meant
that retailers tended to have a higher proportion of fixed costs than producers. A
change in sales volumes would therefore tend to have a larger impact on profits for
a retailer than for a producer. So there was pressure to give up some margin to
remain competitive in such a concentrated market.
Expected future price increases would be consistent with a slight recovery in margin
in the coming quarters for the sector as a whole. But for some businesses, it might
take significantly longer, perhaps years, to get back to more normal margins.
A recent report by the Competition and Markets Authority on competition in
groceries found that retailer operating margins for groceries (including food) fell in
2022–23 on average compared with the previous year, indicating that not all cost
increases had been passed through to consumers. Retailers were hoping to
increase their margins this year, but the competitive environment might limit the
extent to which that could be achieved without losing market share.
Bank of England  
Page 77


Annex 1: Other forecasters’ expectations
This annex reports the results of the Bank’s most recent survey of external forecasters.
Responses were submitted in the two weeks to 21 July and are summarised in Chart A.
These are compared with the MPC’s modal projections, which are conditioned on a range
of assumptions (Section 1.1) that may differ from those made by external forecasters.
On average, respondents expected GDP to rise by 0.6% in the four quarters to 2024 Q3
(left panel, Chart A). Responses ranged from -1.2% to 2.3%. Four-quarter GDP growth
was then expected to rise, on average, to 1.4% in 2025 Q3 and 1.6% in 2026 Q3. These
forecasts are higher than the MPC’s modal projections of 0.3% in 2025 Q3 and 1.1% in
2026 Q3.
External forecasters expected an unemployment rate of 4.5% in 2024 Q3, higher than the
MPC’s projection of 4.3% (middle panel, Chart A). The average external forecast remains
at 4.5% in 2025 Q3 and 2026 Q3. By comparison, in the MPC’s projection, the
unemployment rate rises to 4.8% in 2025 Q3 and remains there in 2026 Q3.
CPI inflation was expected to fall, on average, to 2.6% in 2024 Q3, a slightly faster decline
than the MPC’s projection of 2.8% (right panel, Chart A). The average forecasts for 2025
Q3 and 2026 Q3 were broadly in line with the 2% target at 2.1% and 1.9% respectively,
both a little above the MPC’s modal projection, but broadly in line with the MPC’s mean
projection.
Bank of England  
Page 78


Chart A: At the three-year horizon, external forecasters expected four-quarter
GDP growth to be 1.6%, the unemployment rate to be 4.5%, and CPI inflation to be
1.9%
Projections for GDP, the unemployment rate and CPI inflation
Bank of England  
Page 79


Annex 2: How has the economy evolved recently
relative to the MPC’s projections?
The MPC regularly assesses how the economy has performed relative to its forecasts and
this is detailed on an annual basis in the Monetary Policy Report. In recent years, the UK
economy has been subject to a sequence of supply shocks, as set out in Bailey (2023).
These have driven inflation outturns well above the MPC’s modal projections made at the
start of 2021 – as discussed in the May 2022 Report – and the forecast made at the start
of 2022, which is the focus of this annex. The Court of the Bank of England has
commissioned a broad review of the Bank’s forecasting and related processes during
times of significant uncertainty. This review will be led by Dr Ben Bernanke, supported by
the Bank’s Independent Evaluation Office, and conclude next year with the findings to
be published in the spring.
The MPC’s projections are conditional forecasts. They are based on assumptions about
how energy prices, asset prices (including Bank Rate) and fiscal policy will evolve.
Changes in these assumptions, particularly for energy prices (Chart A), have had large
effects on the MPC’s projections in recent years.
The MPC’s February 2022 forecast preceded Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. This shock
had a significant impact on energy and other prices, notably food. CPI inflation was 10.2%
in 2023 Q1, 5 percentage points higher than the MPC’s central projection in February
2022. Around half of this news in inflation is accounted for by the direct impact of higher
energy, and non-energy import prices (Chart E). In addition, there have been more
persistent second-round effects on domestic inflation as these external shocks have
interacted with the state of the UK economy, including the tightness of the labour market.
Bank of England  
Page 80


How have outturns differed from the MPC’s February 2022 central
projections?
GDP growth since 2022 has been weaker than projected in the February 2022 Report
(Chart B). After Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, the outlook for world and UK activity was
downgraded materially, as the sharp rise in energy prices was expected to squeeze
household real incomes and weigh heavily on demand. This was reflected in the MPC’s
subsequent projections, though recent GDP outturns have been a little stronger than
those (Chart B).
Chart A: Gas prices have been volatile, which has been reflected in changes to the
MPC’s conditioning assumptions
Wholesale gas spot price and forecast conditioning assumptions for futures prices (a)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and Bank calculations.
(a) Spot price is the one-day forward price of UK natural gas. Projections made prior to November 2022 were
conditioned on wholesale gas prices following the futures curve for the first six months and then remaining constant.
GDP growth has been weaker than the MPC’s February 2022 central projection…
Bank of England  
Page 81


At the time of the February 2022 Report, the LFS unemployment rate was 4.1% and
expected to fall slightly in the first half of 2022, before rising to around 4.4% by the middle
of 2023. The unemployment rate has been a little lower than that projection. It declined to
3.8% in 2023 Q1, before picking up to 4.0% in the latest data, which cover the three
months to May 2023.
At the time of the February 2022 Report, CPI inflation had already risen markedly and
stood at 5.4% in December 2021. This overshoot relative to the 2% target mainly reflected
sharp increases in energy prices and global traded goods prices. Sustained disruption to
supply chains, and the shift in global demand towards goods and away from services, had
put significant upward pressure on tradable goods prices since the pandemic. These
effects were expected to continue pushing up inflation to a peak of 7¼% in April 2022,
Chart B: GDP growth has been weaker than projected in February 2022, but a little
stronger than subsequent MPC projections
GDP outturns and projections (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) The aqua line is the MPC’s modal projection for GDP growth based on the conditioning assumptions underlying the
February 2022 projections. The grey swathe is the MPC’s central projection for GDP growth using the conditioning
assumptions on which the August 2022, November 2022 and February 2023 projections were based. The orange line
represents ONS data outturns. The diamond represents Bank staff’s latest estimate of GDP growth in 2023 Q2 based
on data to May 2023.
…but the unemployment rate has been a little lower.
CPI inflation has been materially higher than the MPC’s February 2022 projection,
and even higher than expected by external forecasters.
Bank of England  
Page 82


after which it was projected to decline. Following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine, inflation
rose much quicker and higher than projected, peaking at 11.1% in October 2022, before
falling back to 8.4% in 2023 Q2.
Inflation outturns have been outside the MPC’s February 2022 fan chart since 2022 Q2
(Chart C), something which would be expected to happen 10% of the time. The gap
between inflation outturns and the projections of external forecasters contained in the
February 2022 Report has been even larger than the gap with the MPC’s central
projection (Chart D).
Chart C: Inflation has been materially higher than the February 2022 central
projection, rising outside of the fan chart
CPI inflation outturns and projection in the February 2022 Report (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) For the conditioning assumptions on which the February 2022 projections were based, see the footnotes to Table 1.A
of the February 2022 Report. See footnotes to Chart 1.3 of this Report for information on how to interpret the fan
charts. The final data point of the CPI outturn is 2023 Q2 and the fan extends to 2023 Q4.
Bank of England  
Page 83


Why have outturns differed from the MPC’s February 2022 central
projections?
The February 2022 CPI inflation projection was conditioned on oil prices remaining at
around US$80 per barrel over the forecast period, while gas prices (the purple line in
Chart A) were assumed to fall from around 200 pence per therm to around 150 pence
over six months and then stay at that level. In the months after Russia’s invasion of
Ukraine, oil prices rose to over US$100 a barrel, and by the time of the August 2022
forecast the MPC’s conditioning assumption for wholesale gas prices had more than
doubled (the orange line in Chart A).
Chart D: Inflation in 2023 Q1 was much higher than the MPC’s modal projection,
and even higher than the projections of external forecasters
Projections for CPI inflation made at the time of the February 2022 Report and outturn (a)
Sources: Bank of England, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Results from the Bank’s Survey of Economic Forecasters ahead of the February 2022 Report. These are compared
to the MPC’s modal projections at that time, which were conditioned on a range of assumptions which may have differed
from those made by external forecasters.
The direct effects of higher energy prices, combined with higher non-energy
import prices, account for around half of the difference between inflation outturns
and the February 2022 central projection.
Bank of England  
Page 84


The direct contribution of energy prices, which largely comprise household energy bills
and motor fuel prices, to CPI inflation across most of 2022 and 2023 Q1 was over 1
percentage point higher than projected in February 2022 (orange bars in Chart E).
Non-energy import prices have also contributed to CPI inflation being higher than
projected in February 2022. That reflects higher-than-expected world export prices
combined with a weaker-than-expected sterling exchange rate. Bank staff estimate that
non-energy import prices account for around 1½ percentage points of the upside news by
2023 Q1 (aqua bars in Chart E).
In total, these two channels account for around half of the difference between inflation
outturns and the February 2022 central projection.
In addition to their direct effects on utilities and fuel prices, higher energy prices have
produced additional inflationary pressure via indirect supply chain effects on firms’ input
costs. As energy is an input to production for nearly all goods and services in the
Chart E: Energy and non-energy import prices explain around half of the upside
news in inflation since February 2022
Decomposition of CPI inflation forecast errors relative to February 2022 (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) The total inflation error and direct effects of energy price contributions are based on the difference between the
headline CPI inflation data, the contribution of the energy component (ONS code DK9T) and the respective projections
consistent with the February 2022 Report. The contributions from non-energy import prices are based on Bank staff
estimates.
Some of the remaining difference between forecasts and outturns reflects the
indirect effects of energy prices…
Bank of England  
Page 85


economy, higher energy prices are likely to have increased costs for many firms (see Box
B in the November 2022 Report).
Such indirect effects of higher energy prices are one of the reasons why there has been a
substantial increase in food prices, as they have added to the cost of producing, storing
and transporting food. Food and non-alcoholic beverage price inflation climbed to a record
high of 19.1% in March 2023 and most recently contributed 2 percentage points to
headline inflation in June 2023 (Chart F). Upward pressure on food prices has also come
from a reduction in the supply of food commodities due to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine,
and adverse weather conditions.
Over the past 18 months, the labour market has remained tight, with the unemployment
rate lower than projected in February 2022. Other indicators of labour market tightness,
such as the ratio of vacancies to unemployment, have also been elevated (Chart 2.15).
…which partly explains why food prices are so high, although disruptions to the
supply of agricultural products have also played a key role.
Chart F: Food prices have contributed much more to inflation than had been
expected in February 2022
Contribution of food and non-alcoholic beverages to CPI inflation (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) This chart shows the contribution of the food and non-alcoholic beverages component (ONS code D7BU) to annual
CPI inflation. The final outturn data point is June 2023.
Inflation has picked up against the backdrop of a tight labour market…
Bank of England  
Page 86


Part of the tightness observed in the labour market is likely to have been accounted for by
weakness in labour supply. As discussed in the February 2023 Report, there had been a
notable drop in participation (or ‘higher inactivity’) in the labour market over the past three
years.
In addition to weakness in labour supply, labour demand has been resilient despite the
slowdown in output growth. Employment growth has generally remained positive across
most measures over the past 18 months (Chart 2.12). This could reflect some hoarding of
labour by companies to avoid the costs associated with rehiring workers.
The resilience of the labour market may partly help to explain why recent GDP outturns,
while weaker than the February 2022 projections, have been stronger than the MPC’s
central projections between August 2022 and February 2023 (Chart B). Part of that latter
news also reflects the recent fall in energy prices which has reduced the drag on real
incomes and consumer spending.
In February 2022, the MPC’s central projection was that a margin of excess supply would
open up by the end of the year. But, in part reflecting the labour market remaining tight,
the economy is estimated to have been operating with a significant degree of excess
demand since then, despite the slowdown in output growth.
The tightness of the labour market and the presence of excess demand helps to explain
why the response of inflation to the series of adverse external inflationary shocks has
persisted, even as the direct effects of higher energy prices have started to fade. The
second-round effects generated by changes in domestic prices and wages as a result of
these external cost shocks are likely to have led to some ‘intrinsic’ inflation persistence in
the UK (Pill (2023)).
Against the backdrop of a tight labour market, annual growth in private sector pay has
been significantly higher than expected in the Bank’s forecasts in February 2022. In a tight
labour market, firms are more likely to agree to higher pay settlements for their
employees. So when those employees observe higher prices for the goods and services
they buy, as well as a fall in their real incomes, they may feel that attempts to offset these
losses through higher nominal pay are more likely to be successful (Bruno and Sachs
(1985) and Layard et al (2005)). That may be particularly true if they think higher inflation
is likely to persist. Models of wage growth indicate that inflation expectations have been a
key factor driving nominal pay growth higher over the past year.
…which is likely to have contributed to more persistent second-round effects in
domestic wage and price developments.
Bank of England  
Page 87


Pay growth has also been higher than the MPC’s recent projections (Section 2.5). This
persistence in wage growth may be consistent with the existence of potential non-
linearities in the relationship between wages and labour market slack. In other words,
there is greater wage growth when spare capacity is limited, which may in turn be
affecting the degree of inflation persistence. Indeed, Bank staff analysis, which allows for
these types of non-linear relationships, suggests that pay growth had played an important
role in pushing up services prices recently (Chart 3.9 of the May 2023 Report).
There is also some evidence to indicate that recent inflationary pressures have influenced
firms’ price-setting behaviour, which may be contributing to the persistence of higher
inflation. If companies sense that their customers will bear higher prices, they may be
more willing to pass higher labour and other input costs on to them. As discussed in
Section 3 of the May Report, around 60% of firms in DMP Surveys conducted earlier this
year reported that in the high-inflation environment, they were changing prices in
response to events or thresholds, rather than at fixed time intervals (see Chart 3.3 of the
May 2023 Report).
In recent Reports, the MPC has judged that there have been significant upside risks to the
inflation outlook, which has pushed up the mean projection relative to the modal
projection. These risks reflect the possibility that the second-round effects of external cost
shocks on inflation may take longer to unwind than they did to emerge. The MPC’s latest
projections and the balance of risks around these are set out in Section 1.
The MPC has judged that there have been significant upside risks to the inflation
outlook for some time.
Bank of England  
Page 88


Glossary and other information
AWE – average weekly earnings.
CPI – consumer prices index.
CPI inflation – inflation measured by the consumer prices index.
CPIH – consumer prices index including owner-occupiers’ housing costs.
DMP – Decision Maker Panel.
ERI – exchange rate index.
GDP – gross domestic product.
HICP – harmonised index of consumer prices.
LFS – Labour Force Survey.
M4 – UK non-bank, non-building society private sector’s holdings of sterling notes and
coin, and their sterling deposits (including certificates of deposit, holdings of commercial
paper and other short-term instruments and claims arising from repos) held at UK banks
and building societies.
OIS – overnight index swap.
PCE – personal consumption expenditure.
PMI – purchasing managers’ index.
RPI – retail prices index.
Glossary of selected data and instruments
APF – Asset Purchase Facility.
BTL – buy-to-let.
CCS – Credit Conditions Survey.
Abbreviations
Bank of England  
Page 89


CIPS – Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply.
CMA – Competition and Markets Authority.
ECB – European Central Bank.
FCA – Financial Conduct Authority.
FOMC – Federal Open Market Committee.
GfK – Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung, Great Britain Ltd.
IMF – International Monetary Fund.
ISA – individual savings account.
LTV – loan to value.
MPC – Monetary Policy Committee.
MTIC – missing trader intra-community.
NLW – National Living Wage.
OBR – Office for Budget Responsibility.
Ofgem – Office of Gas and Electricity Markets.
ONS – Office for National Statistics.
PAYE – Pay As You Earn.
PPI – payment protection insurance.
PPP – purchasing power parity.
QE – quantitative easing.
QT – quantitative tightening.
REC – Recruitment and Employment Confederation.
RICS – Royal Institution of Chartered Surveyors.
RTI – Real Time Information.
Bank of England  
Page 90


S&P – Standard & Poor’s.
SME – small and medium-sized enterprise.
WEO – IMF World Economic Outlook.
Except where otherwise stated, the source of the data used in charts and tables is the
Bank of England or the Office for National Statistics (ONS) and all data, apart from
financial markets data and results from the Decision Maker Panel (DMP) Survey, are
seasonally adjusted.
n.a. = not available.
Because of rounding, the sum of the separate items may sometimes differ from the total
shown.
On the horizontal axes of graphs, larger ticks denote the first observation within the
relevant period, eg data for the first quarter of the year.
Symbols and conventions
Bank of England  
Page 91
