BANK: BOE
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: Monetary Policy Report - May 2023
DATE: 01/06/2023
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/monetary-policy-report/2023/may/monetary-policy-report-may-2023.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Bank of England
Monetary Policy Report 
Monetary Policy Committee 
May 2023


Monetary policy at the Bank of England 
The objectives of monetary policy 
The Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) sets monetary policy to keep inflation low and 
stable, which supports growth and jobs. Subject to maintaining price stability, the MPC is also 
required to support the Government’s economic policy. 
The Government has set the MPC a target for the 12-month increase in the Consumer Prices 
Index of 2%. 
The 2% inflation target is symmetric and applies at all times. 
The MPC’s remit recognises, however, that the actual inflation rate will depart from its target 
as a result of shocks and disturbances, and that attempts to keep inflation at target in these 
circumstances may cause undesirable volatility in output. In exceptional circumstances, the 
appropriate horizon for returning inflation to target can vary. The MPC will communicate how 
and when it intends to return inflation to the target. 
The instruments of monetary policy 
The MPC currently uses two main monetary policy tools. First, we set the interest rate that 
banks and building societies earn on deposits, or ‘reserves’, placed with the Bank of England 
– this is Bank Rate. Second, we can buy government and corporate bonds, financed by the
issuance of central bank reserves – this is asset purchases or quantitative easing.
The Monetary Policy Report 
The MPC is committed to clear, transparent communication. The Monetary Policy Report 
(MPR) is a key part of that. It allows the MPC to share its thinking and explain the reasons for 
its decisions. 
The Report is produced quarterly by Bank staff under the guidance of the members of the 
MPC.  
This Report has been prepared and published by the Bank of England in accordance with 
section 18 of the Bank of England Act 1998. 
Page 1
Bank of England  


The Monetary Policy Committee 
•
Andrew Bailey, Chair
•
Ben Broadbent
•
Jon Cunliffe
•
Swati Dhingra
•
Jonathan Haskel
•
Catherine L Mann
•
Huw Pill
•
Dave Ramsden
•
Silvana Tenreyro
PowerPoint™ versions of the Monetary Policy Report charts and Excel spreadsheets of the 
data underlying most of them are available at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetary-
policy-report/2023/may-2023. 
© Bank of England 2023 
ISSN 2633-7819 
Page 2
Bank of England  


 Contents  
Monetary Policy Summary 
4 
1: The economic outlook 
7 
  1.1: The conditioning assumptions underlying the MPC’s projections 
8 
  1.2: Key judgements and risks 
12 
Box A: Monetary policy since the February 2023 Report 
32 
2: Current economic conditions 
34 
  2.1: Global economy and financial markets 
36 
  2.2: Domestic credit conditions 
42 
  2.3: Demand, output and the labour market 
45 
  2.4: Prices 
54 
Box B: The cash-flow channel of monetary policy 
59 
Box C: Agents’ update on business conditions 
70 
3: In focus – The outlook for inflation 
74 
  3.1: Why has inflation been above target? 
74 
  3.2: How have some of the indicators of inflation persistence been evolving? 
79 
  3.3: The MPC’s forecast for inflation 
87 
Annex: Other forecasters’ expectations 
88 
Glossary and other information 
90 
 
 
Page 3
Bank of England  


Monetary Policy Summary
The Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) sets monetary policy to meet
the 2% inflation target, and in a way that helps to sustain growth and employment. At its
meeting ending on 10 May 2023, the MPC voted by a majority of 7–2 to increase Bank
Rate by 0.25 percentage points, to 4.5%. Two members preferred to maintain Bank Rate
at 4.25%.
The Committee’s updated projections for activity and inflation are set out in the
accompanying May Monetary Policy Report. They are conditioned on a market-implied
path for Bank Rate that peaks at around 4¾% in 2023 Q4 before ending the forecast
period at just over 3½%.
There has been upside news to the near-term outlook for global activity, with UK-weighted
world GDP now expected to grow at a moderate pace throughout the forecast period.
Risks remain but, absent a further shock, there is likely to be only a small impact on GDP
from the tightening of credit conditions related to recent global banking sector
developments. Headline inflation has been falling in the United States and euro area,
although core inflation measures remain elevated.
UK GDP is expected to be flat over the first half of this year, although underlying output,
excluding the estimated impact of strikes and an extra bank holiday, is projected to grow
modestly. Economic activity has been less weak than expected in February, and the
Committee now judges that the path of demand is likely to be materially stronger than
expected in the February Report, albeit still subdued by historical standards. The
improved outlook reflects stronger global growth, lower energy prices, the fiscal support in
the Spring Budget, and the possibility that a tight labour market leads to lower
precautionary saving by households.
Although there are indications that the labour market has started to loosen, it is expected
to remain tighter than in the February Report in the near term. The unemployment rate is
now projected to remain below 4% until the end of 2024, before rising over the second
half of the forecast period to around 4½%.
CPI inflation was 10.2% in 2023 Q1, higher than expected at the time of the February and
March MPC meetings, with the upside surprise concentrated in core goods and food
prices. Although still elevated, nominal private sector wage growth and services CPI
inflation have been close to expectations.
Page 4
Bank of England  


CPI inflation is expected to fall sharply from April, in part as large rises in the price level
one year ago drop out of the annual comparison. In addition, the extension in the Spring
Budget of the Energy Price Guarantee and declines in wholesale energy prices will both
lower the contribution from household energy bills to CPI inflation. However, food price
inflation is likely to fall back more slowly than previously expected. Alongside news in
other goods prices, this explains why the Committee’s modal expectation for CPI inflation
now falls back more slowly than in the February Report.
In the MPC’s latest modal projection conditioned on market interest rates, CPI inflation
declines to a little above 1% at the two and three-year horizons, materially below the 2%
target. This reflects the emergence of an increasing degree of economic slack and
declining external pressures that are expected to reduce CPI inflation. However, there
remain considerable uncertainties around the pace at which CPI inflation will return
sustainably to the 2% target. The Committee continues to judge that the risks around the
inflation forecast are skewed significantly to the upside, reflecting the possibility that the
second-round effects of external cost shocks on inflation in wages and domestic prices
may take longer to unwind than they did to emerge. The mean CPI inflation profile, which
incorporates this risk, is at or just below the 2% target in the medium term.
The MPC’s remit is clear that the inflation target applies at all times, reflecting the primacy
of price stability in the UK monetary policy framework. The framework recognises that
there will be occasions when inflation will depart from the target as a result of shocks and
disturbances. The economy has been subject to a sequence of very large and overlapping
shocks. Monetary policy will ensure that, as the adjustment to these shocks continues,
CPI inflation will return to the 2% target sustainably in the medium term. Monetary policy
is also acting to ensure that longer-term inflation expectations are anchored at the 2%
target.
The Committee has voted to increase Bank Rate by 0.25 percentage points, to 4.5%, at
this meeting. In doing so the MPC is continuing to address the risk of more persistent
strength in domestic price and wage setting, as represented by the upward skew in the
projected distribution for CPI inflation.
The pace at which domestic inflationary pressures ease will depend on the evolution of
the economy, including the impact of the significant increases in Bank Rate so far.
Uncertainties around the global financial and economic outlook remain elevated.
The MPC will continue to monitor closely indications of persistent inflationary pressures,
including the tightness of labour market conditions and the behaviour of wage growth and
services price inflation. If there were to be evidence of more persistent pressures, then
Page 5
Bank of England  


further tightening in monetary policy would be required.
The MPC will adjust Bank Rate as necessary to return inflation to the 2% target
sustainably in the medium term, in line with its remit.
Page 6
Bank of England  


1: The economic outlook
CPI inflation remains well above the 2% target and, at 10.2% in 2023 Q1, was
higher than projected in the February Report. Inflation is expected to fall sharply
from April, as large rises in the price level one year ago drop out of the annual
comparison. This also reflects the extension in the Budget of the Energy Price
Guarantee and further falls in wholesale energy prices. Food and other goods price
inflation have recently surprised on the upside. They are still expected to decline,
but food price inflation in particular is projected to do so at a slower pace than in the
February Report. Services CPI inflation has been in line with expectations in
February and is projected to remain elevated in the near term.
There remain considerable uncertainties around the pace at which CPI inflation will
return sustainably to the 2% target. In the modal forecast conditioned on market
interest rates, and taking account of stronger paths for food prices and demand
growth, CPI inflation is expected to decline somewhat less rapidly compared with
the February Report. An increasing degree of economic slack and declining
external pressures nonetheless lead CPI inflation to fall to materially below the 2%
target, to a little above 1% at the two and three-year horizons. However, the
Committee continues to judge that the risks around the inflation forecast are
skewed significantly to the upside, primarily reflecting the possibility of more
persistence in domestic wage and price setting. The mean CPI inflation profile,
which incorporates these risks, is at or just below the 2% target in the medium term.
Global GDP is expected to grow at a moderate pace throughout the forecast period,
albeit a little more rapidly than expected previously in the near term. Risks remain
but, absent a further shock, there is likely to be only a small impact on GDP from
the tightening of credit conditions related to recent global banking sector
developments. Domestically, past increases in Bank Rate and the path of market
interest rates, alongside a waning boost from looser fiscal policy and relatively weak
potential supply, weigh on UK GDP in the medium term. But the Committee judges
that growth over much of the forecast period will be materially stronger than in the
February Report. This reflects stronger global growth, lower energy prices, the fiscal
support in the Spring Budget, and the possibility of lower precautionary saving by
households than previously assumed in turn related to a lower risk of job loss.
Although there are indications that the labour market has started to loosen,
employment growth has been stronger than expected and the path of
Page 7
Bank of England  


unemployment is projected to be lower than in the February Report. The UK
economy is judged to have been in excess demand over recent quarters, but a
degree of economic slack is expected to emerge from the end of this year.
Table 1.A: Forecast summary of the MPC’s modal projections (a) (b)
2023 Q2
2024 Q2
2025 Q2
2026 Q2
GDP (c)
0 (-0.7)
0.9 (-0.3)
0.7 (0.2)
1.1
CPI inflation (d)
8.2 (8.5)
3.4 (1.0)
1.1 (0.8)
1.2
LFS unemployment rate
3.8 (4.1)
3.9 (4.6)
4.3 (5.1)
4.5
Excess supply/Excess demand (e)
¼ (-¾)
-½ (-1¾)
-1 (-2¼)
-1
Bank Rate (f)
4.4 (4.3)
4.4 (4.1)
3.8 (3.5)
3.6
1.1: The conditioning assumptions underlying the MPC’s
projections
As set out in Table 1.B, the MPC’s projections are conditioned on:
(a) Figures in parentheses show the corresponding projections in the February 2023 Monetary Policy Report.
(b) Unless otherwise stated, the projections shown in this section are conditioned on the assumptions described in
Section 1.1. The main assumptions are set out in Monetary Policy Report – Download the chart slides and data –
May 2023.
(c) Four-quarter growth in real GDP.
(d) Four-quarter inflation rate.
(e) Per cent of potential GDP. A negative figure implies output is below potential and a positive that it is above.
(f) Per cent. The path for Bank Rate implied by forward market interest rates. The curves are based on overnight index
swap rates.
The paths for policy rates implied by financial markets, which are higher than in the
February Report, as captured in the 15-working day average of forward interest rates to
28 April (Chart 2.5). In the United Kingdom, the market-implied path for Bank Rate now
peaks at around 4¾% in 2023 Q4, up from just under 4½% at the time of the February
Report, and ends the forecast period at just over 3½%. This latest UK interest rate path
is still below the level prevailing at the time of the November 2022 Report, which
Page 8
Bank of England  


followed the volatility in UK interest rate markets seen in late September and early
October, but well above levels seen earlier last year.
A path for the sterling effective exchange rate index that is nearly 1½% stronger on
average than in the February Report, but is depreciating gradually over the forecast
period given the role for expected interest rate differentials in the Committee’s
conditioning assumption.
Fiscal policy that evolves in line with announced Government policies to date. Since the
February Report, the Government has announced a range of additional fiscal support in
the Spring Budget, including further energy support measures for households and
businesses, temporary 100% capital allowances for qualifying business investment
undertaken between 2023–24 and 2025–26, a package of measures aimed at
increasing labour market participation, higher defence spending and a freeze in fuel
duty in 2023–24. Regarding energy policy, the Government announced that the Energy
Price Guarantee (EPG) is now being maintained at £2,500 for a household with typical
energy use, for the three months from April, rather than increasing to £3,000 as was
planned in the Autumn Statement. During the forecast period, the overall impact of
fiscal policy on the economy includes the news in the Budget alongside all previous
measures, some of which were only a temporary loosening in fiscal policy (Key
judgement 2).
Wholesale energy prices that follow their respective futures curves over the whole
forecast period, as was the case in the February 2023 and November 2022 Reports.
Since February, spot gas prices have declined further, to below the level seen before
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in early 2022 though not to the average price prevailing
prior to mid-2021, and the gas futures curve has also moved lower (Chart 2.2). Over the
longer period since last summer, the end point of the MPC’s wholesale gas price
conditioning assumption has fallen back notably (Chart 1.1), reducing the scale of the
external cost shock facing the UK economy. Significant uncertainty remains around the
outlook for wholesale energy prices, and the Committee will keep its wholesale energy
price conditioning assumption under review.
Page 9
Bank of England  


Chart 1.1: Wholesale gas spot price and forecast conditioning assumptions for
wholesale gas prices (a)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and Bank calculations.
(a) Spot price is the one-day forward price of UK natural gas. The projections in May 2023, February 2023 and
November 2022 are conditioned on wholesale gas prices following futures curves. These futures curves are the 15
working day averages to 28 April 2023 and 24 January respectively for May and February 2023 and the seven working
day average to 25 October 2022 for November 2022. The projections in August 2022 were conditioned on wholesale
gas prices following the futures curve in the 15 working days to 26 July for the first six months and then remaining
constant.
The EPG ceasing to bind on household energy prices from 2023 Q3 onwards, as was
the case in the February Report. Instead, household prices are assumed to fall back in
line with Bank staff estimates of the Ofgem price cap implied by the lower path of
wholesale energy prices.
Page 10
Bank of England  


Table 1.B: Conditioning assumptions (a) (b)
Average
1998–2007
Average
2010–19
Average
2020–21
2022
2023
2024
2025
Bank Rate
(c)
5.0
0.5
0.1
2.8
4.8 (4.4)
4 (3.7)
3.7 (3.4)
Sterling
effective
exchange
rate (d)
100
82
80
78
79 (78)
79 (78)
78 (77)
Oil prices
(e)
39
78
62
88
81 (81)
76 (77)
72 (73)
Gas prices
(f)
29
52
169
201
137 (189)
148 (174)
123 (136)
Nominal
government
expenditure
(g)
7½
2¼
9
4¼
4½ (3½)
2¾ (2¼)
1½ (1¾)
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg Finance L.P., Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR), ONS, Refinitiv Eikon from
LSEG and Bank calculations.
(a) The table shows the projections for financial market prices, wholesale energy prices and Government spending
projections that are used as conditioning assumptions for the MPC’s projections for CPI inflation, GDP growth and the
unemployment rate. Figures in parentheses show the corresponding projections in the February 2023 Monetary Policy
Report.
(b) Financial market data are based on averages in the 15 working days to 28 April 2023. Figures show the average
level in Q4 of each year, unless otherwise stated.
(c) Per cent. The path for Bank Rate implied by forward market interest rates. The curves are based on overnight index
swap rates.
(d) Index. January 2005 = 100. The convention is that the sterling exchange rate follows a path that is half way between
the starting level of the sterling ERI and a path implied by interest rate differentials.
(e) Dollars per barrel, based on monthly Brent futures prices.
(f) Pence per therm, based on monthly natural gas futures prices.
(g) Annual average growth rate. Nominal general government consumption and investment. Projections are based on
the OBR’s March 2023 Economic and Fiscal Outlook. Historical data based on NMRP+D7QK.
Page 11
Bank of England  


1.2: Key judgements and risks
Key judgement 1: global GDP is expected to grow at a moderate pace throughout
the forecast period, albeit a little more rapidly than expected previously in the near
term. Risks remain but, absent further shocks, there is likely to be only a small
impact on GDP from the tightening of credit conditions related to recent global
banking sector developments.
Bank failures have, alongside broader macroeconomic developments, resulted in global
financial market asset price volatility since the February Report. Equity prices have
generally recovered after experiencing sharp falls in March (Chart 2.6), and 10-year
government bond yields have ended the period broadly unchanged since February in the
United States and slightly higher in the euro area. Banks’ bond spreads initially widened
by around 40 to 80 basis points in these economies, before falling back to some degree.
In the MPC’s modal projections, the impact of recent banking stresses on global financial
conditions and the international economic outlook is expected to be quite small. Credit
conditions in the United States are assumed to tighten to some extent in response to
recent events, with a peak impact on US GDP of around -¼% next year. That reflects
developments in aggregate bank funding costs and an additional judgement that smaller
US banks are likely to restrict their business lending activity to help to offset recent deposit
outflows, with some potential borrowers unable to substitute away from small bank credit
in the short term. The impact of recent banking sector developments on growth in the euro
area is expected to be considerably smaller.
The Bank of England’s Financial Policy Committee (FPC) has continued to brief the MPC
about recent banking sector developments. The FPC continues to judge that the UK
banking system is resilient, maintaining robust capital and strong liquidity positions. It is
resilient to the current economic outlook, and has the capacity to support the economy in
a period of higher interest rates even if economic conditions are worse than forecast. The
FPC is monitoring developments in other jurisdictions closely in light of the risk that
indirect spillovers from overseas banks impact the wider UK financial system.
Spreads on UK banks’ wholesale funding also rose in March before falling back. The
impact of recent global banking sector developments on domestic credit conditions, and
hence UK GDP growth, is expected to be small (Section 2.2). The MPC will continue to
monitor closely any effects on the credit conditions faced by households and businesses.
Global growth has been more resilient than expected to the headwinds from a range of
shocks hitting the world economy. In the May Report projections, UK-weighted world GDP
is estimated to have grown by 0.6% in 2023 Q1 and to grow by around 0.4% in Q2, both
Page 12
Bank of England  


stronger than expected in the February Report with broad-based upward revisions across
regions (Section 2.1).
Alongside its judgement to push up UK GDP growth in this forecast (Key judgement 2),
the Committee also expects somewhat stronger world GDP growth. The euro-area
economy in particular appears to be more resilient to the shock from energy prices, which
has in any case unwound further. High current storage levels of gas reduce any potential
downside risks to euro-area growth if energy supplies were to come under threat again.
Euro-area GDP is expected to grow at a moderate pace over the first half of the forecast
period, as real incomes remain squeezed and tighter monetary policy weighs on activity.
In the United States, growth is projected to slow in the middle of this year, in part reflecting
the expected impact of tighter monetary policy and credit conditions, before recovering
over the remainder of the forecast period. Following an earlier-than-anticipated rebound in
activity after the end of its zero-Covid policy, Chinese growth is projected to slow to trend
over the remainder of 2023.
Overall, in the MPC’s modal projection, UK-weighted world GDP growth is projected to
slow from 3% in 2022, to 1¾% in 2023 and 2024, before rising to just over 2% in 2025
(Table 1.D). That compares with average annual growth of around 2½% in the decade
prior to the pandemic. Growth is expected to be stronger this year than in the February
Report.
Growth in advanced economies could be stronger than expected if recent resilience in
demand and tightness in labour markets were to continue to a greater extent than
assumed in the May modal projections. There is a downside risk to international activity if
recent overseas banking sector stresses were to spread more widely through the global
financial system, or if the stresses were to have larger impacts on activity in their domestic
economies than in the modal projections, including via broader channels onto business
and household confidence.
Key judgement 2: the Committee judges that UK GDP growth over much of the
forecast period will be materially stronger than in the February Report, although
past increases in Bank Rate and the path of market interest rates, alongside a
waning boost from looser fiscal policy and relatively weak potential supply, weigh
on UK GDP in the medium term.
There are risks in both directions around the projection for world GDP growth.
Page 13
Bank of England  


UK GDP is expected to be broadly flat during the first half of this year. However, excluding
the impact of idiosyncratic factors such as public sector strikes and the additional bank
holiday for the King’s Coronation, the economy is projected to grow by around 0.2% in
both 2023 Q1 and Q2. This rate of underlying growth is materially stronger than expected
in the February Report. The Bank’s Agents have also reported recently that activity has
been stronger than their contacts previously expected (Box C). In the March Bank/NMG
survey, households were more optimistic about the general economic situation and their
income and employment prospects than in the previous survey last September. The final
S&P Global/CIPS UK composite PMI data for April reinforced recent signs of a
strengthening in underlying activity in the economy.
The downward adjustment to the EPG in 2023 Q2 and the continued fall in wholesale, and
hence prospective household and business, energy prices since the February Report
(Section 1.1) are reducing further the drag on GDP from the real income squeeze and are
likely to explain some of the upside news in near-term growth.
The Committee has made a material judgement in this forecast to boost the expected path
of demand. This reflects a number of factors, including the possibility in the short term that
the economy is more resilient to the energy price shock than expected previously. This
channel is also judged to be relevant for the outlook for euro-area growth (Key judgement
1) and so stronger world activity spills back on to the United Kingdom via both trade and
investment channels.
Stronger demand in this forecast also reflects the possibility of lower precautionary saving
by households than previously assumed, in turn related to a lower risk of job loss. Given
the strength of the labour market and the historically very large number of vacancies in the
economy, the Committee made a judgement in the February Report that any reduction in
labour demand was likely to lead to fewer redundancies than in previous cycles. Some of
the latest upside news in near-term GDP could be consistent with such a channel
operating to a greater degree than anticipated.
The MPC’s latest judgement on demand also means that growth excluding idiosyncratic
factors is expected to remain positive beyond the first half of this year, consistent with
business surveys and other indicators of near-term growth prospects.
The pass-through of past increases in Bank Rate and the latest, slightly higher, market-
implied interest rate path (Section 1.1) continue to push down on GDP over the forecast
period. As set out in Box B, the direct cash-flow channel of monetary policy, which tends
to reduce spending when interest rates rise, is operating broadly as expected during the
current tightening cycle, although the greater share of fixed-rate mortgages means that it
Page 14
Bank of England  


is likely to operate more slowly than in the past. Given such lags in monetary policy
transmission, the rise in Bank Rate since December 2021 is expected to weigh to an
increasing degree on the economy in coming quarters.
The fiscal measures announced in the Spring Budget (Section 1.1) are expected to boost
GDP over the forecast, building to a peak impact of around ½% by the end of the period.
This is a slightly larger impact than the 0.3% provisional estimate noted in the March MPC
minutes, following a fuller staff assessment during this forecast round. The bulk of the
boost to GDP is assumed to come from the temporary 100% capital allowances for
qualifying business investment undertaken between 2023–24 and 2025–26, and from the
package of measures aimed at increasing labour market participation (Key judgement 3),
both of which are assumed to have some positive effects on potential supply in the
forecast.
Taking account of all announced government plans, fiscal policy generally pulls down on
GDP growth over much of the forecast period, as the positive impacts of past loosening
measures, some of which were only temporary, on the level of GDP at the start of the
forecast unwind.
In the Committee’s May modal projection, underlying GDP growth is projected to remain
slightly positive in 2023 Q3 and over the rest of the forecast period, picking up a little
further during the final year of the projection. This is a materially stronger profile than in
the February Report, when quarterly growth rates were expected to be negative until 2024
Q1. The path of market interest rates, including the impact of increases in Bank Rate to
date, and a waning boost from looser fiscal policy continue to weigh on GDP, however,
and the path of demand also reflects the relatively weak potential supply projection (Key
judgement 1 in the February 2023 Report). Calendar-year GDP growth is expected to be
¼% in 2023, and ¾% in 2024 and 2025 (Table 1.D). Four-quarter GDP growth picks up to
almost 1¼% by 2026 Q2 (Chart 1.2), although this remains below pre-pandemic rates.
Relative to the February projection, GDP is around 2¼% higher by the end of the forecast
period, with around half of that change reflecting demand news and the MPC’s judgement,
and the other half accounted for by positive news in potential supply. That, in turn, reflects
in part developments in fiscal policy, including the package of labour participation
measures, as well as a stronger population forecast (Key judgement 3). Relative to the
very downbeat GDP projections that the Committee published during the second half of
last year, the outlook is now considerably less weak, in large part reflecting successive
reductions in the wholesale energy price assumptions conditioning the forecast (Chart 1.1)
as well as fiscal support.
Page 15
Bank of England  


Within the components of GDP underpinning the May modal projection, calendar-year
household spending is expected to rise by ¾% in both 2023 and 2024 and by 1% in 2025
(Table 1.D). Real post-tax household income is projected to grow by 1% in each of these
calendar years, and the household saving ratio is expected to be broadly flat over the
forecast period. The paths of both consumption and disposable income are materially
stronger than in the February Report.
Business investment is expected to fall by ¼% in 2023 and to be flat in 2024, before
recovering by 1½% in 2025. This profile is much stronger than in the February Report,
reflecting news in recent data, the stronger demand profile and an estimated boost of 3%
to 3½% in 2024–25 and 2025–26 from the announcement in the Budget of a temporary
increase in capital allowances for investment (Section 2.3).
In large part reflecting the transmission of tighter monetary policy, housing investment is
expected to fall by 4½% in 2023, by 3¾% in 2024 and by ½% in 2025. Some recent
housing and mortgage data have been less weak than in previous months, however.
Page 16
Bank of England  


In the GDP projection conditioned on the alternative assumption of constant interest rates
at 4.5%, growth is weaker than in the MPC’s forecast conditioned on market rates.
As set out in the Annex of this Report, external forecasters’ average medium-term
projections for GDP remain stronger than the MPC’s, even after the upward revision to
demand in this projection. This could imply an upside risk to the MPC’s growth projection,
although it is difficult to make precise comparisons due to potential differences in
conditioning assumptions between forecasters. Conversely, demand could be weaker than
Chart 1.2: GDP growth projection based on market interest rate expectations, other
policy measures as announced
The fan chart depicts the probability of various outcomes for GDP growth. It has been conditioned on Bank Rate
following a path implied by market yields, but allows the Committee’s judgement on the risks around the other
conditioning assumptions set out in Section 1.1, including wholesale energy prices, to affect the calibration of the fan
chart skew. To the left of the shaded area, the distribution reflects uncertainty around revisions to the data over the past.
To the right of the shaded area, the distribution reflects uncertainty over the evolution of GDP growth in the future. If
economic circumstances identical to today’s were to prevail on 100 occasions, the MPC’s best collective judgement is
that the mature estimate of GDP growth would lie within the darkest central band on only 30 of those occasions. The fan
chart is constructed so that outturns are also expected to lie within each pair of the lighter aqua areas on 30 occasions.
In any particular quarter of the forecast period, GDP growth is therefore expected to lie somewhere within the fan on 90
out of 100 occasions. And on the remaining 10 out of 100 occasions GDP growth can fall anywhere outside the aqua
area of the fan chart. Over the forecast period, this has been depicted by the grey background. See the Box on page 39
of the November 2007 Inflation Report for a fuller description of the fan chart and what it represents.
The risks around the projection for UK GDP growth are judged to be balanced.
Page 17
Bank of England  


expected if some people become more worried about their job security and try to build up
their savings to a greater extent, or if some mortgagors who need to refinance in the
future take advance actions to prepare for spending more on interest costs.
More generally, the MPC’s aggregate projections are constructed based in large part on
the average relationships over the past between Bank Rate, other financial instruments
and economic activity. The Committee will continue to keep these relationships under
review, including how they may have changed during the current monetary policy
tightening cycle.
Key judgement 3: the UK economy is judged to have been in excess demand over
recent quarters, but a degree of economic slack is expected to emerge from the end
of this year.
The Committee judges that there has been a significant margin of excess demand in the
economy over recent quarters, in part reflecting the weakness of potential supply. In the
latest forecast, excess demand has been accounted for by both a higher than normal
degree of capacity utilisation within companies and by the tightness of the labour market.
Relative to the February Report, there is judged to have been a slightly greater margin of
excess demand near the end of last year than estimated previously, with more upside
news during the first half of this year.
There are indications that the labour market has started to loosen but it is expected to
remain tighter than in the February Report (Section 3.2). The unemployment rate was
3.8% in the three months to February, slightly below the MPC’s assessment of the
medium-term equilibrium rate of unemployment. A fall in the inactivity rate has been the
counterpart to a faster-than-expected rise in employment in recent data (Section 2.3). But
a stronger near-term outlook for employment is also reflected in a lower expectation for
the unemployment rate, which is now projected to remain at 3.8% in 2023 Q2, compared
to the 4.1% forecast at the time of the February Report. While the ratio of vacancies to
unemployment remains elevated, it has fallen from its peak in 2022, and job-to-job flows
have declined (Chart 3.4). The Bank’s Agents have also reported an easing in recruitment
difficulties.
Reflecting the measures in the Budget, including reforms to funding for childcare, the
Committee judges that the potential participation rate is likely to be somewhat higher than
it would otherwise have been in the medium term, pushing up on potential labour supply.
Supply is also being boosted over the forecast period by stronger population growth, as
the ONS has revised up its population projections.
Page 18
Bank of England  


Although supply is expected to remain relatively weak, the headwinds to demand from
both the path of market interest rates and fiscal policy lead to some degree of economic
slack emerging in the Committee’s projections from the end of this year. As has been the
case in recent forecasts, companies are expected to respond to this weakness in demand
by retaining their existing workers, while using them less intensively and hoarding labour
for a prolonged period. That is broadly consistent with capacity utilisation falling back
rapidly at the start of this year and remaining some way below normal for much of the
remainder of the forecast period. As a result, the labour market is expected to remain
fairly tight in the near term. In the MPC’s May modal projection, the unemployment rate is
projected to remain below 4% until the end of 2024, rather than rising towards 5% as
expected in the February Report.
During the second half of the forecast period, unemployment is expected to increase
somewhat, with the jobless rate rising to around 4½% by 2026 Q2 (Chart 1.3). Even
though this is accompanied by some rise in the medium-term equilibrium rate of
unemployment, the increase in the actual unemployment rate leads to a widening degree
of spare capacity in the labour market. Overall, the margin of aggregate excess supply is
expected to widen to -1% of potential GDP by the final year of the forecast period (Table
1.A). Both aggregate spare capacity and particularly the unemployment rate increase by
much less in the Committee’s latest projections than in the February Report.
Page 19
Bank of England  


In projections conditioned on the alternative assumption of constant interest rates at 4.5%,
the unemployment rate rises by more in the medium term than in the MPC’s forecast
conditional on market rates.
As discussed in the February Report, it remains difficult to distinguish the extent to which
developments in labour market participation are persistent or temporary, and the extent to
which they may be having an impact on spare capacity in the economy.
It is possible that there has been more persistence in labour market frictions and
mismatch than assumed, pushing up on the medium-term equilibrium rate of
unemployment to a greater degree than in the modal projection. This would suggest that
the labour market has been tighter than the Committee has assumed and would be
consistent with greater upward pressure on wage growth (Key judgement 4).
Chart 1.3: Unemployment rate projection based on market interest rate
expectations, other policy measures as announced
The fan chart depicts the probability of various outcomes for LFS unemployment. It has been conditioned on Bank Rate
following a path implied by market yields, but allows the Committee’s judgement on the risks around the other
conditioning assumptions set out in Section 1.1, including wholesale energy prices, to affect the calibration of the fan
chart skew. The coloured bands have the same interpretation as in Chart 1.2, and portray 90% of the probability
distribution. The fan begins in 2023 Q1, a quarter earlier than for CPI inflation. That is because Q1 is a staff projection
for the unemployment rate, based in part on data for January and February. The unemployment rate was 3.8% in the
three months to February, and is also projected to be 3.8% in Q1 as a whole. A significant proportion of this distribution
lies below Bank staff’s current estimate of the long-term equilibrium unemployment rate. There is therefore uncertainty
about the precise calibration of this fan chart.
The risks around the unemployment rate projection are judged to be broadly
balanced.
Page 20
Bank of England  


The labour market could remain tight for longer than assumed for a number of other
reasons, including the upside risks around the outlook for demand themselves (Key
judgement 2). For a given demand profile, an increase in labour hoarding could prolong
the tightness in the labour market, although it may not affect the overall degree of slack in
the economy. Conversely, the labour market could loosen more rapidly than assumed,
again including because of any downside risks to demand themselves.
Key judgement 4: CPI inflation is expected to fall sharply as energy costs begin to
ease. In the modal forecast conditioned on market interest rates, an increasing
degree of economic slack and declining external pressures lead inflation to fall to
materially below the 2% target in the medium term, but the Committee continues to
judge that the risks to that forecast are skewed significantly to the upside. The
mean projection for CPI inflation, which incorporates these risks, is at or just below
the 2% target in the medium term.
CPI inflation remains well above the 2% target and, at 10.2% in 2023 Q1, was higher than
projected in the February Report. Inflation is expected to fall sharply from April, declining
to an average of 8.2% in 2023 Q2, 7.0% in Q3 and 5.1% in Q4 (Table 1.C). That near-
term fall in inflation reflects three main factors: large rises in the price level one year ago
dropping out of the annual comparison, domestic energy prices starting to fall and a wider
decline in input cost pressures (Section 2.4).
The direct contribution of energy prices to CPI inflation is expected to decline rapidly over
coming quarters and to turn negative by the end of the year, based on recent wholesale
energy price developments (Section 1.1). The adjustment to the EPG in the Budget
represents immediate downside news to the outlook for household energy prices, lowering
directly the forecast for CPI inflation in 2023 Q2 by around 1 percentage point relative to
the February Report. The Ofgem price cap is assumed to operate thereafter, with
household energy costs falling back in line with the lower path of wholesale gas prices.
Over the second and third years of the forecast period, the direct energy contribution to
inflation is expected to be either around zero or slightly negative, based on the downward
slope of wholesale futures curves.
Almost all of the upside news in CPI inflation data since the February Report has been
accounted for by developments in food and other goods prices. Food price inflation picked
up to almost 20% in March (Section 2.4). Bank staff analysis suggests food inflation has
been stronger than implied by developments in global agricultural commodity prices alone,
reflecting Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and wider pressures along the supply chain.
Indicators continue to suggest that food price inflation will decline in coming months, but it
is now forecast to do so at a slower pace than expected in the February Report. As a
Page 21
Bank of England  


result, the Committee judges that food prices will boost CPI inflation by around an
additional 1 percentage point in the middle of the forecast period relative to the February
Report, although this is not expected to persist further out.
Core goods price inflation has remained around 5½% to 5¾%, in contrast to the decline to
just over 4% expected in the February Report, with particular strength in clothing prices.
Other, potentially leading, indicators of goods prices have continued to weaken, however.
Global supply chain conditions have loosened further. Shipping rates have stabilised at
around pre-pandemic levels and so well below the rates available last year. The Bank’s
Agents have reported growing confidence among many non-food retail contacts that
goods price inflation will ease through the year, reflecting improved supply and lower
transport costs. In the latest Decision Maker Panel Survey, companies’ expectations of
their own-price inflation for the year ahead were stable over the past three months, around
2 percentage points lower than their estimates of realised inflation, implying that
businesses expect their own-price inflation to fall over the coming year.
Four-quarter UK-weighted world export price inflation, excluding the direct effect of oil
prices, is expected to turn negative in 2023 Q2, before picking back up to be slightly
positive in the second half of the forecast period. This is a somewhat stronger medium-
term profile for world export prices than in the February Report, reflecting a judgement
that some determinants of global prices are unlikely to return to their pre-pandemic trends.
The recent appreciation of the sterling exchange rate (Section 1.1) will put some
downward pressure on UK import price inflation, and over time on CPI inflation, relative to
the February Report. Taken together, import prices are projected to fall by 8¼% in 2023,
by 2¾% in 2024 and to be flat in 2025, weaker in the near term and somewhat stronger in
the medium term than in the February Report (Table 1.D).
Domestic inflationary pressures have remained elevated, reflecting indirect effects from
past energy price increases and some second-round effects. Services CPI inflation was
6.6% in March, in line with expectations in the February Report, and reflecting the strength
of nominal pay growth and, to a lesser degree, non-labour input costs. Services CPI
inflation is projected to remain elevated in the near term (Chart 3.8), although the
moderation of energy and other input cost pressures could start to exert some downward
pressure quite soon.
Annual private sector regular pay growth has eased slightly, to 6.9% in the three months
to February (Chart 3.5), close to expectations in the February Report. On a three-month
on three-month annualised basis, private sector regular pay growth has fallen significantly,
from a peak of 9.0% in July to 5.6% in February. Annual growth is expected to continue to
decline, to around 5½% by the end of this year and to around 3% by the end of the
Page 22
Bank of England  


forecast period, as short-term inflation expectations are assumed to fall back and a margin
of spare capacity is expected to open up in the labour market in the medium term. The
Committee has retained its judgement from recent Reports that, owing to the pressures
from pay growth, CPI inflation is a little higher throughout the projection than would
otherwise be the case. The medium-term path of pay growth is somewhat stronger in the
latest projection than in the February Report.
The much less negative output gap profile in the latest forecast, in part reflecting the
MPC’s judgement to push up demand (Key judgement 2), increases CPI inflation and pay
growth throughout the forecast period. In the medium term, the inflation projection is just
under ½ percentage point higher due to this channel, relative to the February Report.
In the MPC’s modal projection conditioned on the path of market interest rates, CPI
inflation declines to materially below the 2% target in the medium term, as an increasing
degree of economic slack is expected to reduce domestic inflationary pressures,
alongside a slightly negative contribution from energy and other import prices. CPI
inflation is projected to fall to around 2% by the end of next year, and to be 1.1% at the
two-year horizon and 1.2% in three years (Table 1.C and Chart 1.4).
Compared with the equivalent February Report projection, CPI inflation is expected to fall
back to the 2% target somewhat less rapidly in the middle of the forecast period and
hence return to target around three quarters later. This is accounted for in large part by
higher expected food price inflation. CPI inflation is somewhat higher in the medium term
than in February, largely reflecting the reduction in the projected margin of excess supply
in this forecast, although it is still below target in the modal projection.
Page 23
Bank of England  


Chart 1.4: CPI inflation projection based on market interest rate expectations, other
policy measures as announced
The fan chart depicts the probability of various outcomes for CPI inflation in the future. It has been conditioned on Bank
Rate following a path implied by market yields, but allows the Committee’s judgement on the risks around the other
conditioning assumptions set out in Section 1.1, including wholesale energy prices, to affect the calibration of the fan
chart skew. If economic circumstances identical to today’s were to prevail on 100 occasions, the MPC’s best collective
judgement is that inflation in any particular quarter would lie within the darkest central band on only 30 of those
occasions. The fan chart is constructed so that outturns of inflation are also expected to lie within each pair of the lighter
orange areas on 30 occasions. In any particular quarter of the forecast period, inflation is therefore expected to lie
somewhere within the fans on 90 out of 100 occasions. And on the remaining 10 out of 100 occasions inflation can fall
anywhere outside the orange area of the fan chart. Over the forecast period, this has been depicted by the grey
background. See the Box on pages 48–49 of the May 2002 Inflation Report for a fuller description of the fan chart and
what it represents.
Page 24
Bank of England  


Table 1.C: The quarterly modal projection for CPI inflation (a)
2023 Q2
2023 Q3
2023 Q4
2024 Q1
2024 Q2
CPI inflation
8.2
7.0
5.1
4.4
3.4
2024 Q3
2024 Q4
2025 Q1
2025 Q2
CPI inflation
2.9
2.3
1.5
1.1
2025 Q3
2025 Q4
2026 Q1
2026 Q2
CPI inflation
1.0
1.0
1.1
1.2
In the modal projection conditioned on the alternative assumption of constant interest
rates at 4.5%, CPI inflation is projected to be 0.7% and 0.9% in two years’ and three
years’ time respectively, lower than the Committee’s forecasts at the same horizons
conditioned on market rates.
Against the backdrop of limited spare capacity in the economy, sharp rises from 2021 in
world export and commodity prices have resulted in indirect effects and second-round
effects on domestic costs and prices. Since last summer most of these global prices have
stopped rising. More significantly, given its recent contribution to CPI inflation, there have
also been declines in wholesale gas prices in recent months. Nevertheless, there remain
considerable uncertainties around the pace at which CPI inflation will return sustainably to
the 2% target. The Committee has considered a range of analysis by Bank staff
concerning the persistence of inflation in wages and domestic prices.
Some of this analysis supports the view that there are non-linearities in the way inflation
reacts to changes in demand. In particular, there is some evidence that the response is
greater, to any given increase in demand, when spare capacity is more limited to begin
with. Such non-linearities might help to explain some of the recent strength in domestic
inflation, given the low level of unemployment. In and of themselves, however, they would
not result in greater persistence of inflation. Were the labour market to loosen, equally
marked effects in the other direction would be expected.
(a) Four-quarter inflation rate.
The path for inflation beyond the near term is uncertain, and the risks around the
modal projection are judged to remain skewed significantly to the upside.
Page 25
Bank of England  


More relevant may be the potential asymmetry in the second-round effects of changes in
import prices. The steep rises in global goods prices weighed heavily on UK real incomes
in 2021 and much of 2022. In an effort to protect these incomes, whether wages or profits,
employees and domestic firms have sought compensation in the form of higher nominal
pay and domestic selling prices. As global prices cease to rise, and in some cases
reverse, this should in time reduce the corresponding pressure on domestic inflation. But,
to the extent that employees and firms are still seeking to recoup lost incomes, this
unwinding of second-round effects may take longer than it did for them to emerge. The
current circumstances are highly unusual. As such, it is hard to be precise about the
extent of this asymmetry. Nevertheless, the Committee has for this reason judged that,
relative to a modal expectation of significant declines in domestic inflation, there remain
material upside risks over the medium term.
The pace at which CPI inflation falls back to the 2% target will also depend on inflation
expectations. An upside risk to the inflation outlook is that households and firms are less
confident that inflation will fall back quickly and do not factor such a decline into their wage
and price-setting behaviour. Developments in more visible components of inflation, such
as energy and food prices, will have an important impact on inflation perceptions and
expectations. Since the February Report, indicators of household inflation expectations
have been broadly unchanged at elevated levels (Chart 3.7). Companies’ inflation
expectations have fallen back a little. Medium-term inflation compensation measures in
financial markets have risen somewhat and remain above their long-term averages. The
Committee will continue to monitor measures of inflation expectations very closely and act
to ensure that longer-term inflation expectations are well anchored around the 2% target.
In addition, there are upside risks around the modal projection for UK CPI inflation from
international factors. There remains the possibility of more persistence in consumer price
inflation in the UK’s major trading partners, for similar reasons to the risks of stronger
domestic inflationary pressures at home. Any fragmentation of global supply chains and
hence extra costs associated with reshoring production could also lead to stronger world
export price inflation in the medium term.
The Committee has considered incorporating some of the additional factors suggesting
more persistence into the modal projection for CPI inflation in this forecast, but judges that
those are better reflected in a large upside skew as they are inherently difficult to quantify
more precisely. Overall, the Committee therefore continues to judge that the risks around
the modal projection for CPI inflation are skewed significantly to the upside, primarily
reflecting the possibility of more persistence in domestic wage and price setting. This
Page 26
Bank of England  


pushes up on the mean, relative to the modal, inflation projections in the forecast.
Conditioned on market interest rates, mean CPI inflation falls back to 1.9% and 2.0% at
the two and three-year horizons respectively.
Page 27
Bank of England  


Table 1.D: Indicative projections consistent with the MPC’s modal forecast (a) (b)
World GDP
(UK-weighted)
(c)
3
2½
¾
3
1¾ (1)
1¾ (1¾)
2 (2)
World GDP
(PPP-
weighted) (d)
4
3¾
1½
3¼
2¾ (2¼)
2¾ (3¼)
3¼ (3¼)
Euro-area
GDP (e)
2¼
1½
-½
3½
¾ (0)
1 (½)
1½ (1½)
US GDP (f)
3
2¼
1½
2
1½ (¾)
1 (1¼)
1½ (1¾)
Emerging
market GDP
(PPP-
weighted) (g)
5½
5
2¼
3¾
4 (3¼)
4 (4¾)
4¼ (4¼)
of which,
China GDP (h)
10
7¾
5¼
3
5½ (3¾)
4½ (6)
4¾ (4¾)
UK GDP (i)
2¾
2
-1¾
4
¼ (-½)
¾ (-¼)
¾ (¼)
Household
consumption (j)
3¼
2
-3½
5½
¾ (-½)
¾ (½)
1 (½)
Business
investment (k)
3
3¾
-5½
10¾
-¼ (-5½)
0 (-5¾)
1½ (¾)
Housing
investment (l)
3
4¼
¾
7½
-4¼ (-6¼)
-3¾ (-8½)
-½ (0)
Exports (m)
4¼
3½
-5
10
½ (-2¼)
0 (-1¾)
½ (¼)
Imports (n)
6¼
4
-5
13½
-3 (-1)
¼ (-¾)
1¼ (¾)
Contribution of
net trade to
-½
-¼
¼
-1¼
1¼ (-¼)
0 (-¼)
-¼ (-¼)
Average
Projection
1998–2007
2010–19
2020–21
2022
2023
2024
2025
Page 28
Bank of England  


GDP (o)
Real post-tax
labour income
(p)
3¼
1½
¾
-2½
-½ (-1½)
1¼ (2¼)
1 (¾)
Real post-tax
household
income (q)
3
1 ½
0
¾
1 (-½)
1 (1½)
1 (¾)
Household
saving ratio (r)
7¼
7¾
14¼
8½
8¾ (8)
9 (9)
8¾ (9¼)
Credit spreads
(s)
¾
2½
1¾
1
1 (1¼)
1¼ (1¼)
1½ (1¼)
Excess
supply/Excess
demand (t)
0
-1¾
-¾
1¼
¼ (-¾)
-½ (-1¾)
-1 (-2¼)
Hourly labour
productivity (u)
2
¾
¼
½
-½ (¼)
1 (0)
¾ (½)
Employment
(v)
1
1 ¼
-½
¾
½ (-½)
0 (-¼)
0 (0)
Average
weekly hours
worked (w)
32¼
32
30¾
31½
31¾ (31½)
31¾ (31½)
31¾ (31½)
Unemployment
rate (x)
5¼
6
4¾
3¾
3¾ (4¼)
4 (4¾)
4½ (5¼)
Participation
rate (y)
63
63½
63¼
63¼
63¼ (63)
63 (62¾)
62¾ (62½)
CPI inflation
(z)
1½
2¼
2¾
10¾
5 (4)
2¼ (1½)
1 (½)
UK import
prices (aa)
-½
1¼
2½
13½
-8¼ (-5)
-2¾ (-2¼)
0 (-1½)
Energy prices
– direct
contribution to
¼
¼
½
3¾
-1 (0)
0 (-¼)
-½ (-½)
Page 29
Bank of England  


CPI inflation
(ab)
Average
weekly
earnings (ac)
4¼
2¼
4¾
6
5 (4)
3½ (2¼)
2½ (1½)
Unit labour
costs (ad)
3
1¼
5¼
6
4¼ (4)
3 (2)
1½ (¾)
Private sector
regular pay
based unit
wage costs (ae)
1¾
1½
3¾
8¼
6¾ (7¾)
3½ (2¼)
2¼ (1¼)
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg Finance L.P., Department for Business, Energy and Industrial Strategy, Eurostat,
IMF World Economic Outlook (WEO), National Bureau of Statistics of China, ONS, US Bureau of Economic Analysis
and Bank calculations.
(a) The profiles in this table should be viewed as broadly consistent with the MPC’s projections for GDP growth, CPI
inflation and unemployment (as presented in the fan charts).
(b) Figures show annual average growth rates unless otherwise stated. Figures in parentheses show the corresponding
projections in the February 2023 Monetary Policy Report. Calculations for back data based on ONS data are shown
using ONS series identifiers.
(c) Chained-volume measure. Constructed using real GDP growth rates of 188 countries weighted according to their
shares in UK exports.
(d) Chained-volume measure. Constructed using real GDP growth rates of 189 countries weighted according to their
shares in world GDP using the IMF’s purchasing power parity (PPP) weights.
(e) Chained-volume measure. Forecast was finalised before the release of the preliminary flash estimate of euro-area
GDP for Q1, so that has not been incorporated.
(f) Chained-volume measure. Forecast was finalised before the release of the advance estimate of US GDP for Q1, so
that has not been incorporated.
(g) Chained-volume measure. Constructed using real GDP growth rates of 155 emerging market economy countries, as
defined by the IMF WEO, weighted according to their relative shares in world GDP using the IMF’s PPP weights.
(h) Chained-volume measure.
(i) Excludes the backcast for GDP.
(j) Chained-volume measure. Includes non-profit institutions serving households. Based on ABJR+HAYO.
(k) Chained-volume measure. Based on GAN8.
(l) Chained-volume measure. Whole-economy measure. Includes new dwellings, improvements and spending on
services associated with the sale and purchase of property. Based on DFEG+L635+L637.
(m) Chained-volume measure. The historical data exclude the impact of missing trader intra‑community (MTIC) fraud.
Since 1998 based on IKBK-OFNN/(BOKH/BQKO). Prior to 1998 based on IKBK.
(n) Chained-volume measure. The historical data exclude the impact of MTIC fraud. Since 1998 based on IKBL-
OFNN/(BOKH/BQKO). Prior to 1998 based on IKBL.
(o) Chained-volume measure. Exports less imports.
(p) Wages and salaries plus mixed income and general government benefits less income taxes and employees’ National
Insurance contributions, deflated by the consumer expenditure deflator. Based on [ROYJ+ROYH-(RPHS+AIIV-
CUCT)+GZVX]/[(ABJQ+HAYE)/(ABJR+HAYO)]. The backdata for this series are available at Monetary Policy Report –
Download the chart slides and data – May 2023.
Page 30
Bank of England  


(q) Total available household resources, deflated by the consumer expenditure deflator. Based on
[RPQK/((ABJQ+HAYE)/(ABJR+HAYO))].
(r) Annual average. Percentage of total available household resources. Based on NRJS.
(s) Level in Q4. Percentage point spread over reference rates. Based on a weighted average of household and
corporate loan and deposit spreads over appropriate risk-free rates. Indexed to equal zero in 2007 Q3.
(t) Annual average. Per cent of potential GDP. A negative figure implies output is below potential and a positive figure
that it is above.
(u) GDP per hour worked. GDP data based on the mode of the MPC's GDP backcast. Hours worked based on YBUS.
(v) Four-quarter growth in LFS employment in Q4. Based on MGRZ.
(w) Level in Q4. Average weekly hours worked, in main job and second job. Based on YBUS/MGRZ.
(x) LFS unemployment rate in Q4. Based on MGSX.
(y) Level in Q4. Percentage of the 16+ population. Based on MGWG.
(z) Four-quarter inflation rate in Q4.
(aa) Four-quarter inflation rate in Q4 excluding fuel and the impact of MTIC fraud.
(ab) Contribution of fuels and lubricants and gas and electricity prices to four-quarter CPI inflation in Q4.
(ac) Four-quarter growth in whole‑economy total pay in Q4. Growth rate since 2001 based on KAB9. Prior to 2001,
growth rates are based on historical estimates of Average Weekly Earnings, with ONS series identifier MD9M.
(ad) Four-quarter growth in unit labour costs in Q4. Whole‑economy total labour costs divided by GDP at constant
prices. Total labour costs comprise compensation of employees and the labour share multiplied by mixed income.
(ae) Four-quarter growth in private sector regular pay based unit wage costs in Q4. Private sector wage costs divided by
private sector output at constant prices. Private sector wage costs are average weekly earnings (excluding bonuses)
multiplied by private sector employment.
Page 31
Bank of England  


Box A: Monetary policy since the February 2023 Report
At its meeting ending on 22 March 2023, the MPC voted by a majority of 7–2 to
increase Bank Rate by 0.25 percentage points, to 4.25%. Two members preferred
to maintain Bank Rate at 4%.
Global growth was expected to be stronger than projected in the February Monetary
Policy Report, and core consumer price inflation in advanced economies had
remained elevated. Wholesale gas futures and oil prices had fallen materially.
There had been large and volatile moves in global financial markets, in particular
since the failure of Silicon Valley Bank and in the run-up to UBS’s purchase of
Credit Suisse, and reflecting market concerns about the possible broader impact of
these events. Overall, government bond yields were broadly unchanged and risky
asset prices were somewhat lower than at the time of the Committee’s previous
meeting. Bank wholesale funding costs had risen in the United Kingdom and other
advanced economies.
GDP was still likely to have been broadly flat around the turn of the year, but was
now expected to increase slightly in the second quarter, compared with the 0.4%
decline anticipated in the February Report. As the Government’s Energy Price
Guarantee (EPG) would be maintained at £2,500 for three further months from
April, real household disposable income could remain broadly flat in the near term,
rather than falling significantly. The labour market had remained tight, while the
news since the MPC’s previous meeting pointed to stronger-than-expected
employment growth in 2023 Q2 and a flat rather than rising unemployment rate.
Twelve-month CPI inflation fell from 10.5% in December to 10.1% in January but
then rose to 10.4% in February, 0.6 percentage points higher than expected in the
February Report. Services CPI inflation was 6.6% in February, 0.1 percentage
points weaker than expected at the time of the February Report, but food and core
goods price inflation had been significantly stronger than projected. Most of the
surprising strength in the core goods component was accounted for by higher
clothing and footwear prices, which tend to be volatile and could therefore prove
less persistent. Annual private sector regular earnings growth had eased, to 7% in
the three months to January, 0.1 percentage points below the expectation in
February.
Page 32
Bank of England  


CPI inflation was still expected to fall significantly in 2023 Q2, to a lower rate than
anticipated in the February Report. This lower-than-expected rate was largely due
to the near-term news in the Budget including on the EPG, alongside the falls in
wholesale energy prices. Services CPI inflation was expected to remain broadly
unchanged in the near term, but wage growth was likely to fall back somewhat more
quickly than projected in the February Report.
The extent to which domestic inflationary pressures ease would depend on the
evolution of the economy, including the impact of the significant increases in Bank
Rate so far. Uncertainties around the financial and economic outlook had risen.
The MPC would continue to monitor closely indications of persistent inflationary
pressures, including the tightness of labour market conditions and the behaviour of
wage growth and services inflation. If there were to be evidence of more persistent
pressures, then further tightening in monetary policy would be required.
Page 33
Bank of England  


2: Current economic conditions
Headline inflation in the US and euro area has been falling in recent months,
although core inflation has been more stable at elevated levels. Lower gas prices
combined with reduced supply chain pressures should ease global inflationary
pressures further in the near term. They should also support activity: global growth
has been stronger at the start of 2023 than projected in February. Bank failures
have nonetheless resulted in asset price volatility since the February Report.
Spreads on UK banks’ wholesale funding rose but then fell back. The overall impact
on domestic credit conditions is expected to be small.
UK GDP is expected to be broadly flat over 2023 H1 from the level in 2022. Once
factors such as strikes in the health and education sectors and an additional bank
holiday have been excluded from the headline numbers, the underlying picture is
more positive and stronger than expected in February. One driver of this
improvement is a further fall in wholesale gas futures prices, reversing some of the
terms of trade shock that has been the primary cause of falling real incomes and
slow consumption growth. Part of the improvement may also reflect the strength of
the labour market. Employment growth has been stronger than projected in
February.
Four-quarter CPI inflation remained high at 10.2% in 2023 Q1, well above the 2%
target. That was higher than projected in February, largely accounted for by higher
food and other goods price inflation. Inflation is expected to fall sharply to 8.4% in
April and then fall further to around 7% by July. That fall predominantly reflects past
increases in energy and other goods prices dropping out of the annual comparison,
and lower household energy bills from July due to falling wholesale gas futures
prices. The contribution of gas and electricity prices to CPI inflation is projected to
fall from 3.1 percentage points in March 2023 to 0.5 percentage points in July. A
broader slowing in the pace of manufacturing output price rises should also help
reduce goods price inflation. However, the latest evidence suggests food price
inflation is likely to remain elevated for longer than previously expected, partly
because lower producer costs are projected to pass through to consumer prices
more slowly than for other goods.
Page 34
Bank of England  


Chart 2.1: GDP and the unemployment rate are expected to be broadly flat in 2023
H1 but inflation is expected to fall sharply
Near-term projections (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) The lighter diamonds show Bank staff’s projections at the time of the February 2023 Monetary Policy Report. The
darker diamonds show Bank staff’s current projections. Projections for GDP growth and the unemployment rate are
Page 35
Bank of England  


2.1: Global economy and financial markets
UK-weighted world GDP is expected to have grown by 0.6% in 2023 Q1, 0.6 percentage
points stronger than expected in the February Report. This outperformance has been
broad-based and Bank staff expect all of the UK’s main trading partners to have
performed more strongly than previously forecast. Staff expect world GDP growth in 2023
Q2 to be around 0.4%, slightly stronger than the February Report. Nevertheless, while
global growth has been more resilient than expected, it is still subdued. Four-quarter
growth in 2023 Q2 is expected to be 1.9%, a little below its average rate over 2010–19 of
2.1%.
Euro-area GDP grew by 0.1% in 2023 Q1 according to the preliminary flash release,
stronger than the decline expected in the February Report. The economy has been more
resilient than expected to the previous sharp rise in energy prices, while stronger growth
in China has supported exports. GDP growth is expected to be 0.2% in 2023 Q2.
In the United States, GDP grew by 0.3% in 2023 Q1 which was also stronger than
expected in the February Report. This outperformance was more than accounted for by
household consumption, which has been supported by both strength in the labour market
and increased income tax thresholds that came into effect in January. Staff expect GDP
growth to slow to 0.1% in 2023 Q2, as tighter credit conditions and the effects of tighter
monetary policy weigh on activity.
In China, GDP grew by 2.2% in 2023 Q1, much stronger than the contraction expected in
the February Report. The wave of Covid cases that followed the lifting of restrictions has
dissipated faster than expected, and the resulting impact on activity has been smaller.
GDP is expected to grow by 1.1% in 2023 Q2, led by services activity and consumption
growth.
Since the February Report, gas prices have fallen further. European wholesale spot gas
prices, as indicated by the Dutch Title Transfer Facility price, have fallen by nearly 40% to
€40 per MWh (Chart 2.2). This leaves spot gas prices below the level seen before
Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in February 2022, although still over three times above their
quarterly and show 2023 Q1 and 2023 Q2 (February projections show Q4 to Q2). Projections for CPI inflation are
monthly and show April to June 2023 (February projections show January to June 2023). GDP growth and
unemployment rate 2023 Q1 projections are based on official data to February, the CPI inflation figure is an outturn.
Global growth has been stronger in early 2023 than expected in the February
Report.
Wholesale gas prices have fallen since February…
Page 36
Bank of England  


average level in 2020. The gas futures curve has also moved lower as milder weather,
reduced energy consumption and fuel switching have bolstered storage levels. In the UK,
wholesale gas prices have also moved lower in line with continental European prices.
Brent crude oil spot prices fell in the days following the failure of Silicon Valley Bank as
fears of economic disruption and reduced demand weighed on prices. Oil prices are now
broadly unchanged from their February levels. Among non-energy commodities,
agricultural goods prices have risen slightly since February while industrial metals prices
are around 6% lower.
Measures of global supply chain pressures have continued to ease since February (Chart
2.3), aided by the reopening of the Chinese economy. Measures of shipping costs have
fallen significantly and are now around pre-pandemic levels. These developments suggest
that the marked decline in world export price inflation over the course of 2023 that was
projected in the February Report is broadly on track.
Chart 2.2: Gas prices have declined since the February Report
International wholesale gas spot and futures prices (a)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and Bank calculations.
(a) The Dutch Title Transfer Facility pricing point is used for the European price. UK prices have been converted to
euros. Dashed lines refer to the 15-day average to 24 January 2023. Dotted lines refer to the 15-day average to 28 April
2023.
…and supply-chain pressures continue to ease.
Page 37
Bank of England  


Headline inflation has continued to decline in the euro area and the United States (Chart
2.4). In the euro area, HICP inflation had declined for five consecutive months to March,
taking it to 6.9%, and the flash estimate for April was broadly unchanged at 7.0%. Energy
price increases in the euro area last year were earlier than in the UK, and as a result,
base effects have weighed on euro-area inflation earlier than in the UK. Base effects from
energy prices will pull down UK CPI inflation in April (Section 2.4). In the US, headline
PCE inflation, on which the Federal Reserve focuses, declined to 4.2% in March, from
5.1% in February. Recent falls have also been driven primarily by lower contributions from
energy and core goods prices, with the contribution from energy turning negative in the
latest release for the first time since early 2021. CPI inflation in the US has also been
declining in recent months and stood at 5.0% in March.
Chart 2.3: Supply chain constraints have continued to ease
Indicators of supply constraints (a)
Sources: Refinitiv Eikon from LSEG, S&P Global/CIPS and Bank calculations.
(a) Indicators are estimated by Bank staff using principal component analysis on a range of PMIs for supply constraints
in the manufacturing sector (supplier delivery times, stocks of purchases, stocks of finished goods, input prices and
backlogs of work). Before principal components are estimated, these indicators are regressed on the new orders PMI to
control for movements in demand. Latest data for the Global and China series are for March 2023, and April 2023 for the
US and the euro-area series.
Headline inflation has been falling in the US and euro area…
Page 38
Bank of England  


Core inflation, which excludes food and energy prices, has been more stable in the US
and has risen in the euro area recently. Services inflation remains strong in both regions
(Chart 2.4). As with UK services inflation (Section 3), this strength will partly reflect the
indirect effects of higher input costs such as energy, particularly in the euro area. But
given that wage bills are a large share of costs for service sector firms, another likely
driver of services price inflation is the tightness of labour markets. Unemployment rates in
the US and euro area are still very low by historical standards. Similarly, the ratio of
vacancies to the number of unemployed people remains close to record highs in both
economies. Wage growth in both regions has remained higher than respective pre-crisis
averages, although it has been easing in the US.
Chart 2.4: Inflation has fallen in the US and euro area in recent months
Contributions to annual consumer price inflation (a)
Sources: Eurostat, ONS, Refinitiv Eikon from LSEG, US Bureau of Economic Analysis, US Bureau of Labor Statistics
and Bank calculations.
(a) Energy includes fuel and household energy bills. Other goods is the difference between overall inflation and the other
contributions identified on the chart, and therefore includes alcohol and tobacco. The latest data are March 2023
outturns.
…although core inflation has been slower to decline.
Page 39
Bank of England  


In the US, the FOMC increased the target range for the federal funds rate by 25 basis
points to 5.0%–5.25% at its meeting ending on 3 May, following a 25 basis point increase
in March. At its meeting ending on 4 May, the ECB Governing Council raised its key policy
rates by 25 basis points, which leaves the deposit rate at 3.25%. Both central banks
stated that they would continue to judge the appropriateness of monetary policy
depending on incoming data and its implications for the economic outlook.
Until early March, positive news on global growth had contributed to increased market-
based expectations of future policy rates. Subsequently, Silicon Valley Bank (SVB), the
16th largest US bank, failed following a rapid and very large withdrawal of uninsured
deposits. As a result, the Bank of England placed SVB’s UK subsidiary into resolution
proceedings. Another smaller US bank, Signature Bank, failed and some other regional
banks in the US came under stress. Elsewhere, Credit Suisse experienced intensified
liquidity stress and client outflows during March. These ultimately led to an agreed
Central banks have continued to tighten policy since the February Report…
Chart 2.5: Market participants think that policy rates are nearing their peaks
International forward interest rates (a)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and Bank calculations.
(a) All data as of 28 April 2023. The February curves are estimated based on the 15 working days to 24 January 2023.
The May curves are estimated using the 15 working days to 28 April 2023. Federal funds rate is the upper bound of the
target range.
…but market participants’ policy rate expectations moderated after some banks
failed in early March.
Page 40
Bank of England  


takeover by UBS, following an intervention by the Swiss authorities. The implications of
these events for the UK financial system are discussed in the FPC’s Summary and
Record March 2023.
Investors’ concerns that these developments would lead to tighter credit conditions and
weaker economic activity contributed to lower expectations for the path of policy rates.
These concerns have since receded such that market expectations for the near-term path
of policy rates in the United States are now broadly unchanged compared to the February
Report (Chart 2.5). In the UK and euro area, the expected path for policy rates has moved
a little higher again, such that markets now expect rates to peak around 30 basis points
higher this year than they did in February. Across the three regions, policy rates are
expected to fall from the end of 2023 onwards, albeit more strongly in the US than the
euro area or UK. Expectations for policy rates at the three-year horizon are a little higher
compared to the February Report.
Similar to these movements at the shorter-end of the yield curve, 10-year government
bond yields in the US, UK and euro area rose following the February Report, and then fell
back such that they are now broadly unchanged in the US and 15–25 basis points higher
in the UK and euro area.
Bank failures led to a fall in global equity prices in March. The FTSE All-Share index and
Euro Stoxx each fell by around 5% (Chart 2.6). Equity prices have since recovered such
that the FTSE All-Share is broadly unchanged since the February Report, while the S&P
500 and Euro Stoxx indices are around 5% higher. Following initial falls around the time of
SVB’s failure, banking sector equity prices in the euro area and UK have recovered
somewhat. The equity prices of US banks have seen much larger declines and remain
well below February levels, with very large falls among smaller regional banks where
investor concerns have been concentrated.
Asset prices have been volatile since the February Report, falling sharply before
recovering.
Page 41
Bank of England  


Following a temporary increase, spreads on aggregate investment-grade and high-yield
corporate debt in the US and euro area are now little changed since the February Report.
Moves in UK corporate spreads have been similar (Section 2.2).
2.2: Domestic credit conditions
Banks rely on several sources of funding; in addition to taking deposits from households
and firms, they also borrow from wholesale funding markets. In the UK, banks’ reliance on
wholesale funding has fallen since the 2008 financial crisis. Nonetheless, wholesale
funding remains a key source of funding, and does influence the interest rates banks
charge on loans to households and companies (see Box 1 of the February 2019 Report).
Spreads on UK banks’ wholesale funding rose sharply in the wake of the SVB failure but
have retraced in the past few weeks (Chart 2.7). Spreads on senior unsecured bonds
have retraced most of the increase seen after the failure of SVB. Spreads on other
sources of wholesale funding, such as covered bonds, have risen slightly. Since wholesale
Chart 2.6: Global equity prices fell following the failure of SVB, but have since
recovered. But banking stocks, in particular in the US, remain lower
International equity prices and banking sector indices (a)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., Refinitiv Eikon from LSEG and Bank calculations.
(a) Daily data to 28 April 2023. The banking sector series for the UK, Europe and US are: FTSE UK Banks Index, the
Stoxx Europe 600 Banks, S&P 500 Banks and the KBW Regional Banking Index.
The increase in spreads on UK banks’ wholesale funding was short-lived,
implying little impact on the interest rates facing households and companies.
Page 42
Bank of England  


funding costs would need to rise for an extended period of time to have an impact on the
interest rates facing households and companies, this recent episode of volatility in
domestic bank funding costs is unlikely to exert upward pressure on retail rates.
In terms of retail deposit funding, rates on time deposits have been rising by more than for
instant access accounts (Box B). In response, there has been a shift in deposit volumes
from instant access accounts to time deposits over the past six months. While annual
growth in household and corporate deposit volumes has slowed, growth has been much
more stable than for firms in the financial sector.
There has been a further reduction in UK owner-occupied fixed-term mortgage rates since
the MPC’s previous meeting and the February Report. The average quoted rate on a two-
year fixed-rate 75% loan to value mortgage fell slightly in March and these rates have
fallen by a further 13 basis points in April, to just over 4.6%.
Chart 2.7: UK wholesale funding spreads rose sharply after the failure of SVB, but
have since fallen back
UK banks’ indicative funding spreads (a)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and Bank calculations.
(a) Constant-maturity weighted average of secondary market spreads to mid-swaps for the major UK lenders’ five-year
bonds or a suitable proxy when unavailable. Holding company bonds and covered bonds are denominated in US dollars
and euros respectively. For more detail on unsecured bonds issued by operating and holding companies, see the 2017
Q3 Credit Conditions Review. Latest data points are 28 April 2023.
Mortgage rates have declined a little since the February Report.
Page 43
Bank of England  


Despite declining in recent months, mortgage rates are still much higher than they were a
year ago. This factor, combined with broader weakness in real incomes (Chart 2.12),
continues to weigh on house prices. The official UK House Price Index has now declined
for three consecutive months, with annual house price inflation falling to 5.5% in February.
Timelier indicators of house prices, which also capture prices at earlier stages of the
house buying process, have been mixed but suggest that prices have fallen further since
then. There have been signs that housing market activity has picked up recently –
mortgage approvals rose in March to their highest level since October 2022 – and
contacts of the Bank’s Agents expect house prices to stabilise.
The latest Credit Conditions Survey (CCS) was conducted between 27 February and 17
March. As a result, the impact of SVB’s failure on 10 March and the subsequent banking
sector stress may not be fully captured in its results. Banks reported that the availability of
secured credit to households was unchanged on the quarter, but lenders expect
Chart 2.8: Mortgage rates have fallen slightly further since the February Report
Average quoted rates on two-year fixed-rate mortgages and two-year OIS rate (a)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., Moneyfacts.co.uk and Bank calculations.
(a) The Bank’s quoted rates series are weighted monthly average rates advertised by all UK banks and building
societies with products meeting the specific criteria. In March 2019 the method used to calculate these data was
changed. For more information, see Introduction of new Quoted Rates data – Bankstats article. Diamonds for
mortgage products represent averages of daily quoted rates using data to 28 April and were provisional. The final data
were published on 9 May.
Banks expect to tighten the availability of household secured credit in Q2.
Page 44
Bank of England  


availability to decrease over the next three months. Among the reasons banks cited for
this were the weaker economic outlook, reduced risk appetite and expectations for house
prices.
Respondents to the CCS reported little change in corporate credit availability over the
previous three months and expected this to remain the case over the next three months.
The Deloitte CFO survey, which was conducted after the failure of SVB, also suggests that
credit availability for large firms is little changed. The Bank’s Agents suggest that SME
credit availability remains tight.
The cost of bank lending to corporates has risen in recent months: average rates on new
debt for PNFCs rose by nearly 60 basis points in February, to 5.8%, and remained broadly
stable in March. The cost of borrowing from corporate bond markets has also increased
since February, with risk-free rates up and spreads on both investment-grade and high-
yield debt a little higher.
2.3: Demand, output and the labour market
Monthly GDP outturns have been volatile since the middle of 2022 (the orange line in
Chart 2.9 shows this volatility for market sector output). This reflects the impact of a
combination of factors: additional bank holidays for the Platinum Jubilee and the Queen’s
state funeral; strike action; and unusually high levels of sickness during the winter.
Smoothing through this volatility, economic activity is estimated to have been broadly flat
in the second half of 2022 (the aqua line in Chart 2.9).
Credit availability appears little changed for corporates. The cost of borrowing has
risen since the February Report.
Economic activity was broadly flat in the latter half of 2022.
Page 45
Bank of England  


GDP is expected to be flat in 2023 Q1 and Q2 (Chart 2.1). This is partly driven by further
strikes and the additional bank holiday in May for the King’s coronation.
Adjusting for these temporary factors, underlying growth is expected to be higher than
headline GDP growth. It is projected to be roughly 0.2% per quarter in 2023 Q1 and Q2.
This is low compared to historical average growth rates, but in Q2 it is around half a
percentage point stronger than projected in February.
Business surveys such as the S&P Global/CIPS UK composite PMI have improved
compared to levels seen at the end of last year (Chart 2.10). These measures point to low
but positive underlying growth in 2023 Q2. The most forward-looking measure in this
survey, the future output index, has improved more than other measures and is now
above its long-term average level.
Chart 2.9: GDP, adjusted for temporary factors, was flat in 2022 H2, but has picked
up in early 2023
Change in UK market sector GDP since 2019 Q4 (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Market sector output is total GDP excluding public sector output. The adjusted measure removes Bank staff
estimated impacts of the Platinum Jubilee, the Queen’s state funeral, and strike action.
Headline GDP is projected to be broadly flat in the first half of 2023 but, adjusting
for temporary factors, growth is slightly positive and stronger than projected in
the February Report.
Page 46
Bank of England  


Since the February Report, wholesale gas futures prices have fallen by around 20% on
average over the next two years (Chart 2.2). This will directly reduce energy costs for
some businesses, and may indirectly reduce other input costs along the supply chain.
Some other input costs have also fallen since February, for example some other
commodity prices, as well as easing supply constraints. In the latest Decision Maker
Panel (DMP) Survey, firms have revised down their expectations for cost growth over the
coming year, which may encourage business spending now. That said, some businesses
will not have felt the benefit of lower wholesale prices yet, as they will be on fixed
contracts set when wholesale costs were particularly high.
Lower energy prices may also have reduced uncertainty. In the DMP, more than a quarter
of firms reported that their overall level of uncertainty was very high in October 2022. That
has fallen to around 10% in the latest data, with the survey suggesting that this is at least
partly due to reduced uncertainty about future prices (Chart 2.11). That could reflect a
Chart 2.10: Business surveys suggest the outlook for growth has improved
Survey indicators of UK output growth (a)
Sources: S&P Global/CIPS and Bank calculations.
(a) Measures of current monthly UK composite (services and manufacturing) output, new orders and future output. All
data series are mean-adjusted: zero represents the average level for that measure between 1998 and 2023 (for the
future output series this is done between July 2012 and 2023). The series are also adjusted to show the distance from
average level based on historic variation in the series over the same period. The latest data points are flash estimates
for April 2023; the final release of these data was more positive, suggesting faster economic growth than represented in
this chart.
One driver of faster-than-expected growth is lower energy prices, which have
reduced some firms’ costs and may have reduced uncertainty…
Page 47
Bank of England  


lower risk of another spike in energy prices. Measures of European gas storage utilisation
show that levels post-winter are at or close to their high point from recent years, and that
means it will be easier to reach full storage ahead of next winter.
Households’ energy bills in Q2 will be lower than projected in the February Report,
boosting real incomes. On 15 March 2023, the Government announced that the Energy
Price Guarantee (EPG) would be kept at £2,500 per year, as calculated for a typical
household’s energy usage, for an additional three months, until the end of June 2023. The
MPC’s projections in February had been conditioned on Government policy at the time,
which was for the EPG to rise to £3,000 per year in April.
The right panel of Chart 2.12 shows the estimated impact of the direct effect of the
reduction in the EPG on the four-quarter growth rate of real household incomes in 2023
Q2. The lower EPG will boost real incomes by around one percentage point, as shown by
the purple line. From 2023 Q3 onwards, the EPG will no longer be the price households
Chart 2.11: Businesses are reporting lower uncertainty about price growth
Firms' uncertainty about sales and price growth (a)
Sources: DMP Survey and Bank calculations.
(a) The indices for sales and price growth uncertainty are three-month moving averages based on the average standard
deviation in firms’ own expectations for sales and prices respectively – 100 represents the average level in 2019. Data
are weighted by industry and firm size to match the population of UK firms with at least 10 employees. The latest data
points are for March 2023. Sales growth and price growth series are based on responses to the respective questions:
‘Looking a year ahead from the first/second/third/fourth quarter of this year to the first/second/third/fourth quarter of next
year, by what percentage do you expect your sales revenue to have changed in each of the following scenarios: lowest,
low, middle, high and highest?’ and ‘Looking ahead, from now to 12 months from now, what approximate percentage
change in your average price would you expect in each of the following scenarios: lowest, low, middle, high and
highest?’, and respondents were then asked to assign a probability to each scenario.
…and boosted households’ real incomes.
Page 48
Bank of England  


pay for energy, as the Ofgem price cap is very likely to fall below this level (discussed
further in Section 2.4). The price cap is based primarily on wholesale energy costs, which
have fallen further since the February Report, representing a further boost to real income
growth.
The boost from the lower EPG is not the only factor pushing up the real income forecast,
as shown by the gold line in Chart 2.12. One key contributor to the increase is stronger
growth in household labour income, partially driven by higher employment levels. It also
partly reflects a strong outturn in household income in 2022 Q4, driven by a range of
factors including a higher than anticipated level of fiscal transfers.
Higher household incomes are expected to support stronger consumption growth over
2023 than had been projected in February. Nonetheless, spending growth remains weak
in an absolute sense: consumption remained below pre-pandemic levels in 2022 Q4 and
the projected growth rates in 2023 are modest by historical standards.
Chart 2.12: Higher nominal income growth in 2022 Q4 and lower energy prices
mean real household incomes are no longer expected to fall in 2023
Four-quarter real household income growth (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Diamonds show Bank staff projections. The orange diamonds show projections from the February Report for 2022
Q4, 2023 Q1 and Q2. The aqua diamonds show the latest projections for 2023 Q1, Q2 and Q3. Income includes non-
profit institutions serving households. See footnote (q) in Table 1.D for the definition of real post-tax household income.
But lower energy prices may not explain all of the upward revision to the growth
forecast.
Page 49
Bank of England  


It is difficult to estimate precisely the contribution that falling energy prices have made to
the somewhat brighter economic picture but there is some evidence that it is not the only
explanation. Some data were improving prior to the EPG announcement in March. For
example, real income growth in 2022 Q4 materially exceeded the February Report
projection, with upside news of more than 2 percentage points (left chart in Chart 2.12).
Consumer confidence has been improving since September 2022 (Chart 2.13). Evidence
from the latest NMG survey suggests that workers’ perceptions of job security have
improved and are now the most secure since the survey began in 2015 (Box B).The MPC
judged in February that additional resilience in the labour market was likely to result in
lower precautionary saving and stronger consumption than would otherwise be the case.
Some of the latest upside news in near-term GDP could be consistent with such a channel
operating to a greater degree than anticipated.
Consistent with stronger output growth, employment growth has been positive in recent
months. The number of people employed grew by 0.5% in the three months to February,
somewhat higher than previous outturns (Chart 2.14). Most business surveys point to
Chart 2.13: Consumer confidence has improved but remains low
UK consumer confidence (a)
Sources: GfK, Refinitiv Eikon from LSEG and Bank calculations.
(a) GfK Consumer Confidence Index is based on the net balances of respondents reporting how their personal financial
situation and the general economic situation have improved over the past 12 months or how the situations are expected
to change in the next 12 months. The orange line shows one of the five sub-indices that make up the overall measure.
Averages calculated over 1996 to 2023. Latest data points are for April 2023. Data are not seasonally adjusted.
Positive underlying GDP growth has been accompanied by stronger employment
growth.
Page 50
Bank of England  


further employment growth in the near term, although the relationship between these
surveys and the official data is not always close. Employment growth is expected to be
around 0.2% in 2023 Q2, higher than projected in the February Report.
Stronger employment growth suggests labour demand may have strengthened a little.
This is reflected in the levelling-off of job vacancies, which have been falling since
reaching a record high in mid-2022 (Chart 2.15). Somewhat stronger labour demand
suggests that unemployment will be lower than previously expected. The unemployment
rate is now projected to be 3.8% in 2023 Q2, compared to the 4.1% forecast at the time of
the February Report (Chart 2.1).
Chart 2.14: Employment growth has been positive, and surveys of employment
intentions point to further growth in the near term
Measures of employment growth (a)
Sources: Bank of England Agents, KPMG/REC/S&P Global UK Report on Jobs, Lloyds Business Barometer, ONS, S&P
Global/CIPS and Bank calculations.
(a) ONS employment growth is the change in headline employment level for people aged 16+ over the value three
months earlier. The PAYE employees growth series is the three-month change in the monthly number of PAYE
employees. Indicators include surveys from: the Bank’s Agents (employment intentions over the next six months);
KPMG/REC/S&P Global (index of demand for staff); Lloyds Business Barometer (balance of higher staffing levels over
next 12 months); and S&P Global/CIPS (PMI composite employment index). Surveys are taken from a range of sources
with varying samples and questions but have been mean and variance adjusted to match the ONS employment growth
series between 2000 and 2019, and are therefore shown consistent with the three-month on three-month growth rate.
Labour demand may have strengthened somewhat...
Page 51
Bank of England  


During the pandemic, the number of working-age people who were outside the labour
force, for example due to being in education or sick, rose significantly (see Section 3 in
the February 2023 Report). Between the end of 2019 and July 2022, the size of this
group rose by around 800,000 people. But there are tentative signs that some drivers of
this trend are now reversing. Since that peak, there are over 200,000 fewer working-age
people outside the labour force (white line in Chart 2.16). A larger labour force means that
supply in the economy increases and allows firms to hire more workers, raising overall
employment levels, without contributing to faster wage growth. This may explain why
companies report an easing in recruitment difficulties, even as demand may be increasing
(see Section 3 for further discussion of labour market tightness).
The recent trend has been driven primarily by students (purple bars in Chart 2.16). That
may reflect an unwinding of the increase during the pandemic, as well as the impact of the
cost of living squeeze. During the pandemic, more young people chose to enter education
rather than enter the labour market at a time when jobs were scarce. Increasingly, that
cohort will reach the end of their courses and rejoin the labour market. In addition, there is
evidence that some university students are choosing to work or work longer hours in order
to cope with increased living costs (The Sutton Trust (2023)). Overall labour participation
rates for younger groups are back to levels seen in 2019.
Chart 2.15: The number of vacancies has fallen but the pace of decline has slowed
Vacancies (a)
(a) The aqua line shows the ONS’s headline vacancy measure which is a moving three-month average, aligned to the
middle month. The orange line is the more volatile single month measure, which is not designated a national statistic
and is not seasonally adjusted. The last data points are the three months to March 2023 and March 2023 respectively.
…although some of the additional employment growth could reflect somewhat
faster labour supply growth.
Page 52
Bank of England  


There are also some tentative signs of a rise in participation from older workers (for
example in the gold bars in Chart 2.16). The latest Labour Force Survey data on labour
market flows showed a significant increase in the share of 50–64 year olds who were
previously out of the labour market moving back into the workforce (Sturrock and Xu
(2023)), although these data tend to be volatile and can be affected by poor sample
coverage. This has also coincided with a fall in the proportion of 50–64 year olds reporting
that they did not expect to work again, from around 69% in 2021 to a little over 66% in
2022 Q4. In contrast, the increased prevalence of people outside the labour force citing
sickness as the main cause has yet to show signs of reversing.
In the longer term, labour supply is also likely to be supported by slightly faster population
growth than previously expected. Population growth is now expected to be higher as the
ONS have revised up their population projections. This contributes to a somewhat higher
GDP level throughout the Bank’s forecast period.
Chart 2.16: The trend of fewer working-age people being outside the labour force 
since mid-2022 has mostly been driven by students
Change in inactivity since July 2022 by reason (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Changes from the three months to July 2022, based on those aged 16–64. Other reasons include: discouraged
workers; those awaiting the results of a job application; have not yet started looking for work; do not need or want
employment; have given an uncategorised reason; or have not given a reason. Sickness includes both those long-term
and temporarily sick.
Page 53
Bank of England  


The Spring Budget 2023 introduced reforms to funding for childcare, in part to encourage
higher labour market participation among parents. These reforms will take several years
to implement. There are large uncertainties over the total impact of the policy. Although
the reforms are likely to provide some boost to the level of GDP, they are expected to
have relatively little impact within the MPC’s forecast period, as the full rollout takes place
only in 2025–26. The OBR forecasts that the changes will increase employment by
around 110,000 by 2027–28.
Other measures announced at the Spring Budget 2023 are likely to have a larger impact
on GDP growth over the coming years. In particular, the Government announced a
temporary change in capital allowances for business investment. For qualifying
investments, 100% of the cost can be deducted from taxable income between 2023–24
and 2025–26. The impact of the policy is hard to predict but is likely to temporarily
increase investment as firms are incentivised to bring forward investment plans. Using
forecasts from the OBR, the policy is projected to increase the level of business
investment by up to 3.5% in 2024–25 and 2025–26. Qualifying business investment is a
small part of total GDP and some of the higher investment will lead to greater demand for
imports so the overall impact is relatively small, raising the level of GDP by around 0.2%
while in effect.
Overall, the measures in the Spring Budget 2023 are expected to increase the level of
GDP by around 0.5% over coming years.
2.4: Prices
UK inflation remains well above the 2% target, and was stronger than projected in the
February Report in Q1. Twelve-month CPI inflation was 10.1% in March 2023, down from
the 11.1% reached in October 2022. But that was a little under 1 percentage point higher
than forecast in February, with food and clothing prices accounting for most of the upside
news. In contrast, the forecast for inflation in 2023 Q2 is 0.3 percentage points below the
February forecast. This change in the forecast largely reflects news on energy prices and
policies, specifically the Government’s decision at the Spring Budget to keep the EPG at
£2,500 between April and June rather than raising it to £3,000 as was previous
government policy.
Measures in the Spring Budget 2023 should provide some support to UK GDP
over the forecast period.
Inflation remains well above the 2% target, although it is expected to fall
materially…
Page 54
Bank of England  


In the near term, CPI inflation is expected to fall sharply but remain well above the 2%
target. It is expected to fall to 8.4% in April before declining further to around 7% in July
2023 (Chart 2.17). This is driven by three key factors: large price rises one year ago
dropping out of the annual comparison, domestic energy prices falling, particularly from
July, and a wider decline in input cost pressures.
In March 2023, electricity and gas prices were contributing 3.1 percentage points to the
overall annual CPI inflation rate. That contribution is expected to fall significantly in April to
1.3 percentage points and then to 0.5 percentage points in July. The fall in the energy
price contribution between March and April is not driven by a fall in the price of
households’ energy bills. Indeed, a typical bill will remain at an annualised level of £2,500
because the EPG will be unchanged between 2023 Q1 and Q2. Rather, the change in the
contribution results from the 47% rise in electricity and gas prices that occurred in April
2022 falling out of the annual comparison. These ‘base effects’ are not only isolated to
energy prices, some goods prices also rose strongly a year ago (see Chart 2.24 of the
February 2023 Report).
The falls in wholesale gas futures prices over recent months (Chart 2.2) will feed through
into lower gas and electricity prices from July onwards. The Ofgem price cap is expected
to fall to a little over £2,000 in 2023 Q3 (calculated based on the typical household’s
energy usage). That is below the EPG and so will become the price that most households
pay for gas and electricity. This will be the first time in two years that household energy
bills have fallen. The projected fall in the contribution from gas and electricity prices to
overall CPI inflation is shown in the orange bars in Chart 2.17.
The fall in oil prices relative to one year ago is also reducing the cost of fuel for
consumers. The average petrol pump price has been stable at around 145p per litre since
the end of March 2023. This compares to an average price of a little over 160p per litre a
year earlier in April 2022. The contribution of fuel prices to annual CPI inflation (green
bars in Chart 2.17) turned negative in March and is expected to fall a little further in
coming months.
…as previous large rises in energy and other goods prices drop out of the annual
comparison…
…falls in wholesale gas futures prices feed through to domestic energy bills…
Page 55
Bank of England  


In addition to lower energy prices, some supply chain cost pressures are moderating, for
example shipping costs (Section 2.1). That should also support the near-term fall in
consumer price inflation. As shown in the left panel of Chart 2.18, producer output price
inflation, a measure of the change in the prices of goods sold by manufacturers, has a
close relationship with consumer price inflation for goods excluding energy. It tends to lead
changes in consumer prices by a couple of months. This relationship has not been stable
over time and changes in producer prices may currently take longer to pass through to
consumer prices than is typical. Nevertheless, the marked fall in annual output price
inflation seen recently should contribute to the expected decline in goods inflation at some
point.
Chart 2.17: CPI inflation is expected to fall to around 7% by mid-2023
Contributions to CPI inflation (a)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., Department for Energy Security and Net Zero, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Figures in parentheses are CPI basket weights in 2023. Data to March 2023. Bank staff projections from April to
September 2023. Fuels and lubricants estimates use Department for Energy Security and Net Zero petrol price data for
April 2023 and then are based on the sterling oil futures curve.
…and easing supply chain pressures pass-through into CPI inflation.
Page 56
Bank of England  


Annual consumer price inflation for food and non-alcoholic beverages has been
particularly high, reaching 19.1% in March 2023 (right chart in Chart 2.18). Other
European countries currently have similar food price inflation rates to the UK (Chart 2.19),
suggesting common cost increases from energy price rises, the Russian invasion of
Ukraine, and poor harvests from unfavourable weather in some areas of Europe. In the
US, where the effects of these shocks have been smaller, food price inflation is lower.
The outlook for food price inflation is uncertain, but recent evidence suggests that it will
fall back considerably slower than expected in February. Contacts of the Bank’s Agents
suggest that food producers expect some production costs to moderate due largely to
declining energy prices, but the pass-through of producer costs to consumer prices may
take time. Food producers purchase inputs on fixed-term contracts which may take time to
reprice. There can also be lags between input costs and production output: for example,
fertilisers will typically be purchased in the autumn for the harvest the following year. This
could result in food inflation remaining higher for longer than suggested by developments
Chart 2.18: Producer price inflation is falling, but less so in the food sector
Annual inflation of select CPI and PPI components (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) The food CPI series is for food and non-alcoholic beverages. The overall output PPI series is the headline ONS
measure for manufacturing output producer prices. The food output PPI series is the producer price series for outputs of
food products. The PPI series have been mean and variance adjusted to match the corresponding CPI series between
2010 and 2023. In addition, to reflect lags between producer and consumer prices, the PPI series have been shifted to
maximise the correlation with CPI. The final data points are for March 2023.
Cost pressures are easing more slowly for food products than for other goods.
Page 57
Bank of England  


in input costs alone. There is also some evidence from the Bank’s Agents that profit
margins along the food supply chain have been squeezed, and so some businesses will
try to rebuild margins as their costs fall.
The current near-term projection for food inflation in the UK does not include any
reduction in the average level of food prices, only a slowing in the rate of inflation. Similar
to energy prices, where gas futures curves remain over double their typical pre-pandemic
level, the sustained higher price level represents a long-term cost for households and
businesses, and this is one driver of subdued economic activity over the forecast horizon.
For example, in 2020–21, spending on food and non-alcoholic beverages made up 14.4%
of total spending for the average household. Higher prices for food and energy particularly
hit families on lower incomes as these items tend to make up a larger share of their
overall consumption.
Taken together, a number of factors are expected to reduce CPI inflation. But these
factors may be less informative about inflationary pressures in the medium term. Section 3
discusses factors that are potentially more informative including labour market tightness,
wage growth and services price inflation.
Chart 2.19: Food price inflation rates are similar in the euro area and the UK,
suggesting common increases in production costs are a main cause
Annual food and non-alcoholic beverages price inflation (a)
Sources: ONS and Refinitiv Eikon from LSEG.
(a) Euro area data series is the HICP measure of food and non-alcoholic beverages. UK data series is the CPI measure
of food and non-alcoholic beverages. US data series is the PCE measure of food and non-alcoholic beverages
purchased for off premises consumption.
Page 58
Bank of England  


Box B: The cash-flow channel of monetary policy
CPI inflation has risen substantially since 2021 and the MPC has increased interest
rates in order to ensure inflation returns sustainably to the 2% target. Prior to this
month’s meeting, Bank Rate has been increased by 415 basis points since
December 2021, to 4.25%. The MPC is monitoring closely how tighter monetary
policy is affecting the economy. This occurs though a number of channels, including
via asset prices and the exchange rate (these channels are summarised in Mann
(2023)). The effects of monetary policy via these different channels will affect
households and firms in different ways depending on their characteristics, such as
how much debt and savings they have.
This box focuses on the cash-flow channel of monetary policy: how changes in
Bank Rate affect directly the amount of money that people have to spend on goods
and services. While this is just one of several ways in which changes in Bank Rate
affect the economy, it is a channel that is directly observable by households and
businesses. Overall, the MPC judges that this is operating broadly as expected
during the current tightening cycle, although the greater share of fixed-rate
mortgages means that it is likely to operate more slowly than in the past. Further
work on the monetary policy transmission mechanism is being conducted at the
Bank and will be published over the next year.
The cash-flow channel of monetary policy
The cash-flow channel operates via the interest rates that financial institutions
charge households and firms to borrow from them, and the interest rates they pay
on deposits. Higher interest rates on debt reduce disposable income, while higher
rates of interest being paid on deposits increase disposable income. However, since
borrowers’ spending is more sensitive to changes in income than that of savers, the
cash-flow channel tends to reduce spending across the economy as a whole when
interest rates rise.
Bank Rate is a key determinant of the interest rates faced by households
and firms, but other factors also matter.
Page 59
Bank of England  


As set out in Box C of the February 2022 Report, while changes in Bank Rate are
an important influence on many retail interest rates, they are also affected by other
factors. For example, banks’ funding costs increased following the failure of Silicon
Valley Bank, but have since retraced most of that increase (Section 2.1). A
sustained increase in bank funding costs because of such factors would probably
raise the interest rates banks charge, but that would not be because of a change in
monetary policy.
Page 60
Bank of England  


Table 1: The rise in Bank Rate has increased borrowing rates for households
and firms
Retail deposit and lending interest rates, corporate borrowing rates and reference rates
(a)
Level (per cent)
Change since November 2021 
(basis points)
Households (b)
 Mortgages
  Two-year fixed rate, 75% LTV
4.76
322
  Two-year fixed rate, 90% LTV
5.30
327
  Five-year fixed rate, 75% LTV
4.27
275
  Effective rate on total stock
2.73
71
 Consumer credit
  £10,000 unsecured loan
5.88
201
  Representative credit card
22.48
106
 Deposits
  Instant access savings
1.53
142
  Two-year fixed-rate bond
4.05
360
Private non-financial corporations (c)
  New lending
5.76
371
  Effective rate on total stock
5.79
309
Page 61
Bank of England  


Reference rates
Level (per cent)

Change since November 2021
(basis points)
Reference rates (d)
  Two-year OIS
4.25
335
  Five-year OIS
3.76
278
  Bank Rate
4.25
415
Bank Rate is the main ‘reference rate’ or ‘risk-free rate’ for some retail products, but
OIS rates are the key reference rate for others, and largely reflect expectations for
the path of Bank Rate. If Bank Rate changes, but expectations for Bank Rate in the
future change by less, then moves in Bank Rate and OIS rates – which are
summarised by the yield curve – will differ.
The matched-maturity reference rates used to price two and five-year mortgages
have risen by 335 and 280 basis points respectively since November 2021, with the
rates being quoted to borrowers for new mortgages increasing by similar amounts
(Table 1). Mortgage rates did increase by more than this after the period of volatility
in UK interest rate markets during late September and early October, but have since
fallen back (Chart A). Staff analysis using a methodology based on Alloza et al
(2020), which controls for other factors that may also affect mortgage rates such as
bank funding costs, financial market volatility and broader macroeconomic
developments, suggests that pass-through from these reference rates has been
broadly as expected.
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and Bank calculations.
(a) The Bank’s quoted and effective rates series are weighted averages of rates from a sample of banks and
building societies with products meeting the specific criteria, such as being widely accessible. Data are not
seasonally adjusted.
(b) Sterling-only monthly average quoted and effective rates. The latest data points are for March 2023.
(c) Sterling-only monthly average effective rates. The latest data points are for March 2023.
(d) Bank Rate is reported as end of month value and OIS rates are monthly averages. The latest data points are
for March 2023.
Staff analysis suggests that changes in risk-free rates have passed through
as expected into new mortgage and corporate borrowing rates…
Page 62
Bank of England  


Unsecured borrowing rates are less sensitive to Bank Rate, tending to be driven by
other factors such as the credit risk associated with the borrower. The quoted rates
on these products has risen by much less than Bank Rate since November 2021
(Table 1).
In contrast to households, most corporate bank lending is at variable interest rates
that tend to quickly reflect changes in Bank Rate and reference rates. The effective
rates of interest on outstanding PNFC debt and new lending have risen by around
310 and 370 basis points, respectively, since November 2021. This suggests that
the rise in reference rates has mostly been passed through since late 2021.
Around 60% of household deposits are held in interest-bearing instant access
accounts, which typically have a variable interest rate. The pass-through to these
accounts has been unusually weak over the tightening cycle, with the average
quoted interest rate rising by around 140 basis points so far (Table 1). One reason
for this is because the spreads between Bank Rate and savings rates were
unusually compressed during the long period when Bank Rate was close to zero
(see Box 2 in the February 2018 Report), so some widening of deposit spreads
was to be expected when Bank Rate began to rise again. The banking sector’s
ample supply of deposit funding, as indicated by its overall loan to deposit ratio
being well below 100%, may also have reduced the incentive to increase rates to
attract deposit funding.
Interest rates on higher-yielding savings accounts, such as fixed-rate bonds, have
risen broadly in line with changes in reference rates. For example, the interest rate
on a two-year fixed-rate bond has increased by around 360 basis points since late
2021. Probably reflecting these higher rates, there has been a shift in deposit
volumes from instant access accounts towards time deposits over the past six
months.
Although the rates being quoted on new mortgages have risen by around 300 basis
points, the effective rate on new lending has risen by less (orange line in Chart A).
The average effective rate on the existing stock of mortgages has only risen by 70
basis points (purple line in Chart A). That much smaller rise reflects the fact that
fixed-rate mortgages account for 85% of outstanding mortgages (Chart C), so many
borrowers have yet to pay higher rates.
…but pass-through into household instant-access deposit rates has been
muted
Many mortgagors have yet to experience higher rates…
Page 63
Bank of England  


Chart B shows an estimate of the size of these mortgage cash-flow effects on
consumption, based on the composition of the stock of mortgages in late 2021. It
suggests this channel has had only a small effect on spending so far, reducing
aggregate household consumption by around 0.3% in 2023 Q1. That largely reflects
lower spending by households with variable-rate mortgages.
This exercise combines data on mortgage rates with information about when fixed-
rate mortgages expire, to estimate how households’ monthly repayments will
change. To estimate the impact of that on consumption, the exercise relies on an
estimate of the marginal propensity to consume (mpc), which measures the change
in spending resulting from a change in disposable income. In this case, staff have
used an mpc of 0.4, which is in line with evidence in the NMG survey, in which
households are asked about their response to a hypothetical change in their
mortgage payment.
There are uncertainties around the scale of the cash-flow effect. On the one hand,
households on fixed-rate mortgages may have reduced spending in anticipation of
the change in their borrowing costs, and some studies suggest that households
increase their marginal propensities to consume as the size of the interest rate
Chart A: Rates on the stock of mortgages have risen by much less than
quoted rates on new mortgages
Quoted interest rates on new two-year 75% LTV mortgages, effective rate on new
lending and effective rate on existing stock of mortgages (a)
(a) The latest data points are March 2023. The Bank’s quoted and effective rates series are weighted averages
of rates from a sample of banks and building societies with products meeting the specific criteria, such as being
widely accessible. The data are sterling-only monthly averages and are not seasonally adjusted.
…so the direct cash-flow effects on consumption have been small to date…
Page 64
Bank of England  


increase gets larger (Fuster et al (2020)). These factors would imply a larger fall in
spending. On the other hand, the latest NMG survey suggests that the mpc at the
moment is not significantly different from that observed in years before the current
tightening cycle. The particular exercise in Chart B may overstate the cash-flow
effect if those on variable rates in late 2021 have since switched to fixed-rate
products as Bank Rate has risen. Loan-level data suggest that around one fifth of
mortgagors who were on a variable-rate mortgage when Bank Rate began to rise
have switched to a fixed-rate product.
The cash-flow effects from higher rates are expected to increase between 2023 Q2
and the end of the year as more households re-fix onto higher rates (Chart A).
Around 1.3 million households are expected to reach the end of their fixed-rate term
between 2023 Q2 and the end of 2023. For the average mortgagor within that
Chart B: The cash-flow effects of higher interest rates are expected to
increase
Changes in mortgage interest payments as a share of consumption (a)
Sources: Bank of England, FCA Product Sales Database, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Chart shows estimates of the impact of changes in mortgage rates on consumption, based on the maturity
profile of the stock of mortgages at the end of 2021. Up until 2023 Q1, it assumes fixed-rate mortgages were
remortgaged at the effective rate on new lending. Variable-rate mortgages are assumed to change in line with
changes in Bank Rate. Beyond that, it uses a projection for quoted rates on new secured lending for
households, taking into account the market-implied path for interest rates. Figures are shown relative to nominal
consumption in 2021, and assume that on average households reduce consumption by 40 pence for every £1
increase in their mortgage repayments.
…but these are expected to build in 2023.
Page 65
Bank of England  


group, monthly interest payments will increase by around £200 a month if their
mortgage rate rises by 300 basis points – the increase implied by quoted mortgage
rates.
The proportion of mortgagors who are on fixed-rate mortgages has risen from under
30% in the early 2000s to around 85% at present, as households have taken out
mortgages at lower rates in the years since the financial crisis. In addition, the
length of time people are deciding to fix their mortgages for has become longer. In
2018, the share of fixed-rate mortgages with an initial term of greater than two years
started to exceed that of products with a term of two years or less (Chart C). The
combination of these factors means that the cash-flow effect of monetary policy is
likely to be slower now compared to previous tightening cycles.
The greater share of fixed-rate mortgages means that the cash-flow channel
is likely to operate more slowly than in past tightening cycles.
Chart C: The share of fixed-rate mortgages has increased over time
Distribution of mortgages by type of product (a)
(a) Share of value of outstanding mortgage stock. Data from January 2016 are for individuals and individual
trusts only. Latest data points are March 2023.
Page 66
Bank of England  


Survey evidence on the impact of higher rates on households
and firms so far
In the latest NMG survey, households were asked how rising interest rates have
affected their finances over the past 12 months and how they expect them to be
affected in the coming year. For mortgagors, higher interest rates have weighed on
their finances, and a greater share expect negative effects in the year to come
(Chart D). This is broadly consistent with the cash-flow effects of higher rates
building as mortgagors move onto higher rates. In contrast, households who are net
savers have seen a positive impact on their household finances in the past year and
a similar share expect positive effects in the year ahead.
Despite these reported impacts on household finances via higher interest rates, the
latest survey also showed that households’ expectations for the general economic
situation and labour market prospects had improved since the second half of 2022.
The net balances for households’ income expectations and the likelihood of job
losses were the highest and lowest, respectively, recorded in the survey since 2015.
That said, the balance for households’ own financial situation, while improving in
recent surveys, remains negative and below 2019 levels.
Households expect the impact of higher interest rates to increase over the
coming year, and although there has been some improvement in
expectations for their own financial situation, these remain below 2019
levels.
Page 67
Bank of England  


Survey evidence from the DMP indicates that some firms are responding to higher
interest rates by cutting back on investment and reducing employment. Staff
estimates based on the survey responses imply that higher interest rates have
lowered investment by around 5% in 2022 Q4. Firms’ reported expectations of their
own investment suggest that this effect will increase going forward, with investment
expected to be 8% lower on average over the next year (Chart E). The impact on
employment is smaller, with a fall of 2% expected over the next year. These effects
were concentrated in roughly a third of the sample, and were also stronger for firms
that are more exposed to interest rates because they have existing debt (aqua bars
in Chart E). However, firms which do not have any debt also expect investment and
employment to be lower in the future (orange bars in Chart E). That is probably due
to the effects of higher interest rates on demand for their goods and services,
suggesting that this survey is picking up more than just the cash-flow channel of
monetary policy.
Chart D: Households expect interest rate effects to be greater in the coming
year
Reported impact of higher interest rates on household finances (a)
Sources: NMG Consulting and Bank calculations.
(a) These figures are based on responses to the following questions in the March 2023 NMG survey: ‘What
impact has this rise in interest rates had on your household finances in the last twelve months?’ and ‘What
impact do you expect the rise in interest rates to have on your household finances in the next twelve months?’.
Mortgagors are defined as households who have a mortgage and whose net savings are less than zero, while
savers are households with positive net savings.
The DMP suggests that higher interest rates have caused firms to cut back
on investment and employment.
Page 68
Bank of England  


Chart E: Firms expect to reduce investment and employment over the next
year as a result of higher interest rates
Expected impact of higher interest rates on firms’ investment and employment over the
next year (a)
Sources: DMP Survey and Bank calculations.
(a) Based on responses to the questions between November 2022 and January 2023: ‘Holding other factors
constant, how do you expect changes in interest rates to affect the number of employees that your business has
over the next year?’ and ‘Holding other factors constant, how do you expect changes in interest rates to affect
the capital expenditure of your business over the next year?’. Firms are split into those with or without debt
based on responses to the question: ‘Approximately how much interest-bearing borrowing does your business
have on its balance sheet, both now and at the end of 2021?’.
Page 69
Bank of England  


Box C: Agents’ update on business conditions
The key information from Agents’ contacts considered by the Monetary Policy
Committee at its May meeting is highlighted in this box, which summarises
intelligence gathered in the six weeks to late April.
Across the economy, private sector activity was broadly flat on a year earlier, but
that was stronger than contacts had generally expected, and so business
confidence had risen.
Consumer-price inflation remained very high, most notably for food and energy.
Contacts in the food sector expected inflation to decline in the second half of 2023,
but to remain elevated. There was growing confidence that other goods price
inflation would ease through the year, reflecting improved supply and lower
transport costs. But contacts only expected modest declines in service sector price
inflation, due largely to labour market conditions.
The UK labour market loosened and employment was expected to be broadly
stable over the coming year. Wage inflation remained elevated, averaging around
6%, but was expected to ease modestly through the year.
Retailers generally said that household spending had been more resilient than
expected. Sales in Q1 were up quite strongly on a year earlier. That largely
reflected higher prices, with the volume of sales broadly flat. Consumers continued
to change spending habits in response to higher prices, for example shopping in
lower-cost outlets or sacrificing quality to save money. Sales of furniture and
homeware had been weak, in part because spending had been so high on these
items during the pandemic.
Hospitality sector contacts also typically said that their revenues had been stronger
than expected, often higher than a year earlier. Again, that reflected significantly
higher prices charged, while volumes had been broadly flat. Demand for rented
accommodation was reported to be very strong. Demand for many other services
had been stable.
Some household-facing contacts had revised up their expectations for sales growth
through 2023, reflecting positive news on sales in Q1, and the decline in wholesale
energy prices which had improved the outlook for household finances.
Household consumption had been more resilient than expected.
Page 70
Bank of England  


In aggregate, business services revenue grew at roughly normal rates, but that was
driven by large price rises, and activity only rose modestly. Insurance, IT,
accountancy, consulting and private health sectors all reported continued robust
growth. There was further recovery in corporate events and advertising compared
to a year earlier. However, various transactional activities, for example in
commercial property and mergers and acquisitions, had been unusually weak in
late 2022 and to date in 2023, depressing demand for some professional services.
Manufacturing output stabilised in 2023 Q1 following a period of contraction. Export
orders picked up. But construction sector output was lower in Q1 than a year earlier,
reflecting weaker development activity in housing and commercial property. Across
both sectors, the availability of labour and materials had continued to improve.
Financial market conditions tightened in March in response to the failure of Silicon
Valley Bank, Signature Bank and Credit Suisse. By April, conditions started to
normalise. Credit supply to small and medium-sized firms in the UK did not appear
to have been affected by the bank failures overseas. However, credit conditions
remained tighter than normal, reflecting higher interest rates and the weaker
economy which implied higher credit risk. The availability of more speculative
finance – such as venture capital and syndicated leverage loans – was particularly
poor.
On balance investment intentions for 2023 increased modestly, but relative to low
investment levels in 2022. That reflected the desire to improve energy and labour
efficiency in the face of higher costs, and also modestly higher growth expectations.
In 2023 Q1 and into April, confidence in the housing market appeared to have
picked up a little, relative to the weak position in the previous quarter. Viewings
started to pick up and more properties were put up for sale. Contacts expected
house prices to stabilise after some months of modest declines. Transaction levels
were expected to be lower than in 2022, but roughly normal. That was stronger than
expected at the start of the year. Demand in the rental market continued to be very
strong, which was driving sharp rises in rents, up around 10% on a year earlier.
Business services continued to grow modestly, manufacturing output
stabilised, but construction output continued to fall.
The impact of recent bank failures on UK credit conditions had started to
recede, and investment intentions remained modestly positive.
Confidence in the residential housing market had recovered a little, but it
remained depressed in the commercial property market.
Page 71
Bank of England  


The number of commercial property transactions was depressed in 2022 Q4 and
2023 Q1, as investors held back from purchases in response to higher finance
costs and uncertainty about valuations. The market continued to adjust to post-
pandemic changes in lifestyle and working practices.
On average, contacts intended to hold headcount stable over the coming year.
Higher labour costs and a weak growth outlook were reasons to shed labour, but
contacts preferred to hang on to their staff given past recruitment difficulties. In
some cases they were reducing hours if demand was weak.
The labour market remained tight. But many contacts said that recruitment
difficulties had eased in recent months and were starting to approach pre-pandemic
conditions. Employees were moving jobs less frequently and contacts were seeing
more applications for job vacancies, as some of their competitors had started to
shed staff. But in professional service sectors, for example accountancy and some
IT areas, contacts still reported severe skill shortages.
Pay settlements in recent months were stable, averaging 6%. Pay awards tended to
be higher for the lower paid, given the rise in the National Living Wage. Fewer
contacts planned to make one-off payments to staff to help with the cost of living.
Contacts expected the decline in headline inflation and the looser labour market to
begin to reduce pay awards modestly in the second half of the year.
Costs had fallen for some raw materials, transport and wholesale energy, alongside
further improvement in supply chains. Not all businesses would benefit immediately,
as many had contracts that fix prices for a certain period, particularly for energy.
The improving cost outlook meant many manufacturers expected their price inflation
to decline. There was less sign of respite for business services inflation, which
remained elevated in the light of high pay growth.
Retail price inflation for food had risen more than contacts expected, to almost 20%,
reflecting high input, labour and energy costs, poor harvests for some crops, and
lower domestic production over the winter. Contacts revised up their view of the
year ahead, but still expected the rate of inflation to fall back, though it would take
Employment was likely to be broadly stable over the coming year, and
recruitment difficulties had eased apart from in some professional services.
Pay settlements remained elevated.
Input cost inflation had eased, which was expected to lead to lower
consumer price inflation later in the year, particularly for goods.
Page 72
Bank of England  


some time for easing cost pressures to work fully through the supply chain. Many
thought that food price inflation would remain elevated, even by the end of the year,
in part due to some rebuild in profit margins which had been squeezed along the
supply chain.
Retail contacts were more confident of a significant easing in inflation by the end of
the year for durable goods, and clothing and footwear, in the light of easing
material, energy and transport costs. Where discretionary demand had weakened,
there might be more discounting than last year. New car prices had continued to
rise, but the inflation rate might ease as supply conditions improved.
Consumer services price inflation was expected to abate more gradually. Contacts
reported sharply rising labour costs, as well as higher cost for energy and materials.
Many were aiming to pass on as much of those into higher prices as they could, but
in sectors such as hospitality that would depend on the resilience of demand.
Page 73
Bank of England  


3: In focus – The outlook for inflation
A series of significant shocks has kept CPI inflation well above the 2% target for
around two years, with the direct impact of those shocks particularly apparent in
higher energy and food prices. But these shocks have also added to UK domestic
inflationary pressures. This partly reflects the indirect effects of higher input costs on
the broader CPI basket, but also second-round effects on inflation in wages and
domestic prices. While inflation is expected to fall in the coming months due to base
effects and lower energy prices, a key uncertainty is whether the unwinding of
second-round effects takes longer than it did for them to emerge (Section 3.1). In
their assessment of the inflation outlook, the MPC is monitoring closely indicators of
persistent inflationary pressures, including labour market tightness, wage growth
and services price inflation (Section 3.2). Overall, the MPC expects CPI inflation to
fall back to around the 2% target by the end of next year. That is around three
quarters later than in the February Report, predominantly reflecting higher expected
food price inflation. The risks around that modal projection remain skewed
significantly to the upside, primarily reflecting the possibility of more persistence in
domestic wage and price setting (Section 3.3).
3.1: Why has inflation been above target?
CPI inflation has been consistently above the 2% target since July 2021 and averaged
10.2% in 2023 Q1 (Chart 3.1). This is the result of a series of significant shocks hitting the
economy, all of which have operated in the same direction. For example, global supply
bottlenecks associated with the aftermath of the pandemic led to increases in tradable
goods prices (Box B of the February 2022 Report). This was followed by Russia’s
invasion of Ukraine which greatly exacerbated the increase in wholesale gas prices, as
well as the prices of many agricultural commodities. Although wholesale gas futures
prices have fallen materially recently (Chart 2.2), they remain higher than their pre-
pandemic average. In addition, the initial shock is still affecting firms. Some contacts of the
Bank’s Agents report that they are on fixed energy contracts from last year, which will not
renew until later this year, and are thus still subject to elevated energy costs. Food prices
A series of significant shocks has pushed CPI inflation well above the 2% target,
with the current impact of these shocks apparent in energy and food prices…
Page 74
Bank of England  


have continued to rise sharply, reaching 19.1% in March, in part driven by higher energy
prices but also adverse weather conditions (Section 2.4). Around half of the current
strength in inflation is accounted for by energy and food prices (Chart 2.17).
Core CPI inflation, which excludes food and energy prices, has also risen and remains
elevated, averaging 6.1% in 2023 Q1 (Chart 3.1). Much of that increase in core inflation
has been accounted for by components of CPI that have exhibited more persistent
inflationary dynamics in the past, such that a shock to the inflation rate in one period is
estimated to take longer to dissipate (Chart 3.2). Restaurants, for example, are one of the
most persistent components of core CPI inflation and are therefore shown in the fifth
quintile of Chart 3.2. This item accounts for around 0.9 percentage points of the rise in
core inflation relative to its pre-pandemic average.
Chart 3.1: Headline and core CPI inflation have risen rapidly and remain elevated
Headline and core annual CPI inflation (a)
(a) The latest data points are for March 2023. Core CPI is CPI excluding energy, food, beverages and tobacco.
...but core inflation is also elevated, particularly among the items that have had
the most persistent inflationary dynamics in the past.
Page 75
Bank of England  


Large energy price moves are likely to affect all sectors to some extent, as energy is a key
input to production across the economy (Box B of the November 2022 Report). For
example, restaurants use gas to heat ovens. While energy and other imports make up
less than one quarter of the value of the CPI basket, this share increases when their use
at each stage of the supply chain is considered (Dhingra (2023)). Analysis by Bank staff
suggests that there have been broad-based comovements in prices across a range of
items (see How broad-based is the increase in UK inflation?). Prices moving jointly in
this way across different sectors suggests that changes in some prices in the CPI basket
may be having indirect effects on others.
Chart 3.2: Components that have exhibited persistent inflationary dynamics in the
past have driven the increase in core CPI inflation
Contribution to change in core CPI inflation (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Contribution to the change in core CPI inflation between the average over 2012–19 and the three months to March
2023 of each component of core CPI inflation. Persistence quintile refers to the estimated strength of the autoregressive
properties of the quarterly inflation rate of the 85 components within core CPI, with the first quintile covering items whose
inflation rates are least statistically related to the prices in previous periods, and the fifth quintile showing those items
that are most statistically related.
The strength in core inflation will partly reflect the indirect effects of higher energy
prices…
Page 76
Bank of England  


It is also possible that economic behaviour has changed in a way that makes the
response of headline inflation to these large external shocks last longer. That behaviour
may be influenced by the state of the domestic economy, such as the tightness of the
labour market and the degree of corporate pricing power. In a tight labour market, firms
are more likely to agree to higher pay settlements for their employees. So when those
employees observe higher prices for the goods and services they buy, as well as a fall in
their real incomes, they may feel that attempts to offset these losses through higher
nominal pay are more likely to be successful (Bruno and Sachs (1985) and Layard et al
(2005)). And if companies sense that their customers will bear higher prices, they may be
more willing to pass higher labour and other input costs on to them.
The magnitude of the increases in energy and other input costs may also have affected
how firms set prices. For example, firms may previously have been content to absorb
high-frequency changes in costs and adopted a ‘time-dependent’ approach to pricing
behaviour, rolling all increases in costs into a single annual increase in prices for example.
When those high-frequency changes in costs become too large, however, companies may
feel they need to respond more directly and adopt a ‘state-dependent’ approach. Around
60% of firms in the DMP Survey reported that in the current high-inflation environment
they change prices in response to events or thresholds, rather than at fixed time intervals
(Chart 3.3). Under this approach, pass-through of shocks to prices tends to be faster and
increase with the size of the shock. This may help to explain why inflation has risen so
rapidly. However, it may also lead to faster declines in inflation once cost pressures abate.
Analysis of the DMP data also suggests that firms’ expectations for their own prices have
become more responsive to CPI outturns. In 2022–23, a 1 percentage point increase in
CPI inflation was associated with almost a 1 percentage point increase in firms’ expected
own price growth, a relationship that was not apparent in previous years. The idea that
firms’ attentiveness to economic news can vary over time is incorporated in some
economic models (eg Reis (2006)).
…but it will also reflect second-round effects as the series of external shocks
interacts with the state of the domestic economy…
…as well as a change in the way firms have responded to these shocks.
Page 77
Bank of England  


The decline in wholesale gas prices, alongside the impact of base effects, is expected to
lead to a sharp fall in CPI inflation in the coming months (Section 2.4). This should in time
reduce the corresponding pressure on domestic inflation. A key uncertainty is whether the
unwinding of second-round effects takes longer than it did for them to emerge. On the one
hand, if wage and price-setting behaviour is very responsive to headline inflation,
domestic wage and price growth may fall as base effects and energy prices drive CPI
inflation materially lower in the coming months. On the other hand, if this behaviour is
influenced by the prolonged period of above-target inflation, there might be a slower
adjustment. In other words, as the initial shocks recede, the response of inflation could be
asymmetric.
That is why the MPC is monitoring closely indicators of inflation persistence in the
domestic economy, including the tightness of the labour market and the behaviour of
wage growth and services price inflation. The latest developments in these indicators are
assessed in the next section.
Chart 3.3: Around 60% of firms in the DMP Survey reported changing their prices in
response to events such as changes in costs or demand
Share of respondents to the DMP Survey (a)
Sources: DMP Survey and Bank calculations.
(a) Responses to the question: ‘Which of the following best describes how your business usually sets prices? Mostly
change prices in response to specific events (eg changes in costs or demand); or Mostly change prices at fixed intervals
(eg once a year or once a quarter, etc)’. The share of respondents show an average over the February to April 2023
Surveys.
As the shocks pushing up on inflation recede, a key uncertainty is whether the
response of domestic wages and prices will be symmetric.
Page 78
Bank of England  


3.2: How have some of the indicators of inflation persistence been
evolving?
Labour market tightness
At 3.8% in the three months to February, the unemployment rate remains close to its
historical low, and slightly below the MPC’s assessment of the medium-term equilibrium
rate of unemployment.
Other indicators of labour market tightness suggest that the labour market has started to
loosen. While the ratio of vacancies to unemployment remains elevated – and indeed has
suggested a tighter labour market than the unemployment rate alone – it has fallen from
its peak in 2022 (left panel of Chart 3.4). Similarly, job-to-job flows – which also tend to be
high when the labour market is tight – have declined in the most recent data (right panel of
Chart 3.4). In addition, contacts of the Bank’s Agents report that recruitment difficulties
have eased (Box C), and in the latest KPMG/REC UK Report on Jobs, staff availability
increased.
Although there are some signs that the labour market is loosening, it is expected to be
tighter than had been projected in February in the near term. The unemployment rate is
expected to be around ¼ of a percentage point lower in Q2 than in the February Report,
and annual employment growth is projected to be over 1 percentage point stronger
(Section 2.3).
There are indications that the labour market has started to loosen but it is
expected to remain tighter than projected in the February Report in the near term.
Page 79
Bank of England  


Wage growth
Annual growth in whole-economy average weekly earnings remained flat at 5.9% in the
three months to February. Annual private sector regular pay growth – which excludes
bonuses – eased a little to 6.9% (Chart 3.5). On a three-month on three-month annualised
basis, private sector regular pay growth has fallen significantly, from a peak of 9.0% in
July to 5.6% in February. These outturns are close to the projection in the February
Report.
More timely indicators of pay growth, such as the HMRC payroll data, have softened since
the February Report and point to further easing in ONS pay growth. The KPMG/REC
permanent staff salaries index tends to lead the ONS measure of private sector pay
growth, because it tracks new hires whose pay offers change before existing employees.
That indicator has fallen markedly since last summer (Chart 3.5) and suggests that pay
growth could weaken further later this year, although it has flattened in recent months.
Chart 3.4: The labour market remains tight, but there are signs that it is loosening a
little
Ratio of the number of vacancies to the number of people unemployed and job-to-job flows (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Vacancies to unemployment ratio data are monthly and the latest data point is for the three months to February
2023. Job-to-job flows (of those aged 16–69 years) measure the number of people who reported being employed in
consecutive quarters of the Labour Force Survey, but who in the latter quarter reported being with their current employer
for less than three months. These data are quarterly and the latest data point is for 2022 Q4.
Nominal pay growth has fallen back slightly, to a rate close to the projection in the
February Report…
…and is expected to decline further in the near term…
Page 80
Bank of England  


Models estimated by Bank staff suggest that households’ short-term inflation expectations,
which tend to move closely with actual inflation (Rowe (2016)), have been an important
driver of the pickup in wage growth (Chart 3.6). These are, in turn, expected to be the key
driver of the projected easing in wage growth, as headline inflation falls reflecting lower
energy prices, base effects and easing cost pressures (Section 2.4). Respondents to the
Agents’ pay survey in February reported that inflation was the top factor driving pay
settlements this year (Box C of the February 2023 Report), so as headline inflation
declines, the pressure on pay growth should also reduce.
Chart 3.5: Pay growth has eased since the February Report, and some indicators
point to a further decline this year
Indicators of annual pay growth (a)
Sources: HMRC, KPMG/REC UK Report on Jobs, ONS, S&P Global and Bank calculations.
(a) Private sector regular pay growth is Bank staff’s estimate of underlying pay growth between January 2020 and
November 2022 and ONS private sector regular pay growth otherwise. KPMG/REC shows permanent staff salaries. Pay
as You Earn (PAYE) Real Time Information (RTI) shows median of pay growth. The KPMG/REC index is mean-variance
adjusted to ONS private sector regular pay growth over March 2001–19. Latest data points are March 2023 for PAYE
RTI and the KPMG/REC index, and the three months to February 2023 for private sector regular pay.
…possibly driven by short-term inflation expectations, which move closely with
inflation.
Page 81
Bank of England  


Short-term measures of household inflation expectations, such as the one year ahead
measure in the YouGov/Citigroup survey, have already fallen, although they remain above
historical averages (Chart 3.7). The medium-term measure in the same survey has also
declined a little. At this horizon, fewer respondents expect inflation to be in the highest
tails of the distribution. The share of respondents expecting inflation to rise by 6% or more
fell from over 30% in August 2022 to 22% in April 2023, but remained higher than the
average over 2019.
Chart 3.6: Staff analysis suggests that the expected fall in inflation will drive down
nominal pay growth this year
Contributions to annual private sector regular pay growth (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Wage equation is based on Yellen (2017). Private sector regular pay growth is Bank staff’s estimate of underlying
pay growth between January 2020 and November 2022 and ONS private sector regular pay growth otherwise. Short-
term inflation expectations are based on the Barclays Basix Index and the YouGov/Citigroup one year ahead measure of
household inflation expectations. Since 2022 Q3, the YouGov/Citigroup survey has been based on updated response
buckets. Slack is based on the MPC’s estimate of the unemployment gap. Productivity growth is based on long-run
market sector productivity growth per head. The unexplained component is the residual. Data are to 2022 Q4 and
projections are shown for 2023 Q1 to 2023 Q4.
Page 82
Bank of England  


Services inflation and firms’ pricing decisions
Services CPI inflation has been rising over the past two years. It was 6.4% in 2023 Q1,
close to a 30-year high. It is expected to remain elevated in the near term, similar to the
February Report (Chart 3.8).
Chart 3.7: Household inflation expectations have fallen back, but remain above pre-
pandemic averages
Household inflation expectations (a)
Sources: Citigroup, YouGov and Bank calculations.
(a) Data are not seasonally adjusted. ‘Short term’ refers to expectations in the next 12 months and ‘medium term’ refers
to expectations five to ten years ahead. The latest data points are for April 2023. Since August 2022, the
YouGov/Citigroup survey has been based on updated response buckets. 
Services inflation remains elevated, as expected in the February Report.
Page 83
Bank of England  


To help inform the outlook, Bank staff have estimated various models to assess the drivers
of services prices. As noted in the February Report, linear regression models suggested
that rising pay growth has been a significant contributor to the pickup in services inflation,
consistent with the steer from business surveys such as the DMP Survey and the S&P
Global/CIPS UK services input price PMI. But other costs, proxied by producer prices,
also appeared to have made an important contribution.
This conclusion is supported by new work by Bank staff that uses a much larger range of
variables to help explain services inflation, and allows for non-linear relationships between
them. For example, the contribution from pay growth, inflation expectations or labour
market tightness to services inflation can change over time or interact with each other
differently during certain periods, for example when inflation is high.
Chart 3.9 shows a decomposition of services inflation as predicted by such a model,
which tracks the trend in actual services inflation reasonably well. It suggests that the
largest contribution to the recent rise in services inflation has come from spillovers from
Chart 3.8: Services CPI inflation remains elevated, in line with the February
projection
Services inflation (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) The latest data point is March 2023 and the projection is shown to September 2023.
Staff analysis suggests that the rise in services prices reflects both wage growth
and the indirect effects of higher energy and other input costs...
Page 84
Bank of England  


input costs (gold bars in Chart 3.9). But it also suggests that pay growth and past services
inflation has played an important role (purple bars in Chart 3.9).
Firms in the DMP Survey reporting state-dependent pricing – where they respond to
changes in demand or costs – are more likely to have passed through the cost shocks.
Consistent with that, they report a larger past increase in their prices, and expect their
own price inflation to fall markedly over the next year (orange line and diamond in Chart
Chart 3.9: Both higher input costs and pay growth appear to be playing a role in
the rise in services inflation
Contributions to model-implied services inflation relative to 1997–2019 mean (a)
Sources: OECD, ONS, World Bank and Bank calculations.
(a) Outputs are from a machine-learning model based on a version of the model proposed by Goulet Coulombe (2022).
Model outputs show one quarter ahead out-of-sample forecasts. Quarterly growth rates are annualised and quarterly
fluctuations are smoothed. Bars show contributions to the model-implied services inflation forecast (white line) relative to
the mean of 3.3% between 1997 and 2019 (dashed line). Domestic input costs include past domestic goods inflation,
food inflation, energy inflation and input prices. Pay growth and services prices include ONS private sector regular pay
growth, past services inflation, selected services inflation subcomponents and output prices. Inflation expectations bars
include household and financial market-based measures of short and long-term inflation expectations. Other bars
include the impact of the model-implied output gap estimate and international prices, which includes global commodity
and export prices.
…and the extent to which firms have already passed through these costs will
influence the pace at which inflation declines.
Page 85
Bank of England  


3.10). In contrast, firms which change their prices at fixed intervals report a smaller
increase in prices, and expect price growth to fall back only modestly (aqua line and
diamond in Chart 3.10). Contacts of the Bank’s Agents report that many firms are still in
the process of passing through higher costs.
How firms respond to falls in input costs will also matter. Some contacts of the Bank’s
Agents, whose input costs had fallen, reported that they were not being automatically
passed through to consumer prices in an attempt to rebuild margins.
Chart 3.10: Firms that have reported a larger rise in their prices also expect price
growth to fall back by more over the next year
Firms’ own realised and expected price inflation in the DMP Survey by pricing strategy (a)
Sources: DMP Survey and Bank calculations.
(a) Three-month moving averages. Realised price growth (lines) are responses to the question: ‘Looking back, from 12
months ago to now, what was the approximate % change in the average price you charge, considering all products and
services?’. The latest data are from the April 2023 Survey. Expected price growth (diamonds) are responses to the
question: ‘Looking ahead, from now to 12 months from now, what approximate % change in your average price would
you expect in each of the following scenarios: lowest, low, middle, high and highest?’, and respondents are asked to
assign a probability to each scenario which is used to create a weighted average expectation of price growth. These
diamonds show the average response from the February to April 2023 Surveys. Figures in parentheses show the
average share of respondents in the February to April 2023 Surveys.
Page 86
Bank of England  


3.3: The MPC’s forecast for inflation
In the MPC’s latest modal projection, CPI inflation is expected to decline somewhat less
rapidly than in the February Report, and returns to the 2% target around three quarters
later. This predominantly reflects higher expected food price inflation (Section 1).
There remain considerable uncertainties around the pace at which CPI inflation will return
sustainably to the 2% target. The Committee has considered a range of analysis by Bank
staff concerning the persistence of inflation in wages and domestic prices, some of which
is set out in this chapter. The MPC continues to judge that the risks around the modal
projection for CPI inflation are skewed significantly to the upside. This primarily reflects
the possibility of more persistence in domestic wage and price setting. In particular,
second-round effects may be asymmetric. As global prices cease to rise, and in some
cases reverse, this should in time reduce the corresponding pressure on domestic
inflation. But, to the extent that employees and firms are still seeking to recoup lost
incomes, this unwinding of second-round effects may take longer than it did for them to
emerge.
Page 87
Bank of England  


Annex: Other forecasters’ expectations
This annex reports the results of the Bank’s most recent survey of external forecasters.
Responses were submitted in the two weeks to 25 April. Expectations throughout the
forecast period are summarised in Chart A. These are compared to the MPC’s modal
projections, which are conditioned on a range of assumptions (Section 1.1) that may differ
from those made by external forecasters.
On average, respondents expected GDP to rise by 0.7% in the four quarters to 2024 Q2
(left panel, Chart A). Responses ranged from -0.2% to 1.9%. Four-quarter GDP growth
was then expected to rise, on average, to 1.6% in 2025 Q2 and 1.8% in 2026 Q2. The
latter forecasts are higher than the MPC’s modal projections of 0.7% in 2025 Q2 and 1.1%
in 2026 Q2.
External forecasters expected an unemployment rate of 4.4% in 2024 Q2, higher than the
MPC’s projection (middle panel, Chart A). The average external forecast remains at 4.4%
in 2025 Q2 and falls a little to 4.2% in 2026 Q2. By comparison, in the MPC’s projection,
the unemployment rate rises to 4.3% in 2025 Q2 and further to 4.5% in 2026 Q2.
CPI inflation was expected to fall, on average, to 2.3% in 2024 Q2, a faster decline than in
the MPC’s projection (right panel, Chart A). The average forecasts for 2025 Q2 and
2026 Q2 were broadly in line with the 2% target at 2.1% and 1.9% respectively, both
above the MPC’s projection.
Page 88
Bank of England  


Chart A: At the three-year horizon, external forecasters expected four-quarter
GDP growth to be 1.8%, the unemployment rate to be 4.2%, and CPI inflation to be
1.9%
Projections for GDP, the unemployment rate and CPI inflation (a)
(a) On 12 May, the axis labels for unemployment were corrected.
Page 89
Bank of England  


Glossary and other information
CPI – consumer prices index.
CPI inflation – inflation measured by the consumer prices index.
DMP – Decision Maker Panel.
ERI – exchange rate index.
GDP – gross domestic product.
HICP – harmonised index of consumer prices.
LFS – Labour Force Survey.
OIS – overnight index swap.
PCE – personal consumption expenditure.
PMI – purchasing managers’ index.
Glossary of selected data and instruments
CCS – Credit Conditions Survey.
CIPS – Chartered Institute of Purchasing and Supply.
ECB – European Central Bank.
EPG – Energy Price Guarantee.
FOMC – Federal Open Market Committee.
FPC – Financial Policy Committee.
GfK – Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung, Great Britain Ltd.
HMRC – His Majesty’s Revenue and Customs.
IMF – International Monetary Fund.
Abbreviations
Page 90
Bank of England  


LTV – loan to value.
mpc – marginal propensity to consume.
MPC – Monetary Policy Committee.
MTIC – missing trader intra-community.
OBR – Office for Budget Responsibility.
OECD – Organisation for Economic Co-operation and Development.
Ofgem – Office of Gas and Electricity Markets.
ONS – Office for National Statistics.
PAYE – Pay As You Earn.
PNFCs – private non-financial corporations.
PPP – purchasing power parity.
REC – Recruitment and Employment Confederation.
RTI – Real Time Information.
S&P – Standard & Poor’s.
SME – small and medium-sized enterprise.
SVB – Silicon Valley Bank.
WEO – IMF World Economic Outlook.
Except where otherwise stated, the source of the data used in charts and tables is the
Bank of England or the Office for National Statistics (ONS) and all data, apart from
financial markets data and results from the Decision Maker Panel (DMP) Survey, are
seasonally adjusted.
n.a. = not available.
Because of rounding, the sum of the separate items may sometimes differ from the total
shown.
Symbols and conventions
Page 91
Bank of England  


On the horizontal axes of graphs, larger ticks denote the first observation within the
relevant period, eg data for the first quarter of the year.
Page 92
Bank of England
