BANK: BOE
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: Monetary Policy Report - August 2025
DATE: 01/06/2025
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/monetary-policy-report/2025/august/monetary-policy-report-august-2025.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Bank of England
Monetary Policy Report
Monetary Policy Committee 
August 2025
Bank of England  


Monetary policy at the Bank of England 
The objectives of monetary policy 
The Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) sets monetary policy to keep inflation low and 
stable, which supports growth and jobs. Subject to maintaining price stability, the MPC is also 
required to support the Government’s economic policy. 
The Government has set the MPC a target for the 12-month increase in the Consumer Prices 
Index of 2%. 
The 2% inflation target is symmetric and applies at all times. 
The MPC’s remit recognises, however, that the actual inflation rate will depart from its target 
as a result of shocks and disturbances, and that attempts to keep inflation at target in these 
circumstances may cause undesirable volatility in output. In exceptional circumstances, the 
appropriate horizon for returning inflation to target can vary. The MPC will communicate how 
and when it intends to return inflation to the target. 
The instruments of monetary policy 
The MPC currently uses two main monetary policy tools. First, we set the interest rate that 
banks and building societies earn on deposits, or ‘reserves’, placed with the Bank of England 
– this is Bank Rate. Second, we can buy government and corporate bonds, financed by the
issuance of central bank reserves – this is asset purchases or quantitative easing. 
The Monetary Policy Report 
The MPC is committed to clear, transparent communication. The Monetary Policy Report 
(MPR) is a key part of that. It allows the MPC to share its thinking and explain the reasons for 
its decisions. 
The Report is produced quarterly by Bank staff under the guidance of the members of the 
MPC.  
This Report has been prepared and published by the Bank of England in accordance with 
section 18 of the Bank of England Act 1998. 
Bank of England  
Page 1


The Monetary Policy Committee 
• Andrew Bailey, Chair
• Sarah Breeden
• Swati Dhingra
• Megan Greene
• Clare Lombardelli
• Catherine L Mann
• Huw Pill
• Dave Ramsden
• Alan Taylor
PowerPoint™ versions of the Monetary Policy Report charts and Excel spreadsheets of the 
data underlying most of them are available at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetary-
policy-report/2025/august-2025. 
© Bank of England 2025 
ISSN 2633-7819 
Bank of England  
Page 2


 Contents 
Monetary Policy Summary 
4 
1: The economic outlook 
6 
  1.1: The conditioning assumptions underlying the MPC’s baseline projections 
8 
  1.2: Key judgements and risks 
10 
Box A: Assessing the restrictiveness of the monetary policy stance 
24 
Box B: Reviewing the process of quantitative tightening 
35 
Box C: Monetary policy since the May 2025 Report 
43 
2: Current economic conditions 
44 
  2.1: Global economy and financial markets 
46 
  2.2: Domestic credit conditions 
52 
  2.3: Domestic activity 
55 
  2.4: The labour market and supply 
60 
  2.5: Wages and inflation 
67 
Box D: Global uncertainties and their implications for the UK economy 
79 
Box E: The outlook for food price inflation 
89 
Box F: Agents’ update on business conditions 
96 
Annex: Other forecasters’ expectations 
102 
Glossary and other information 
104 
 
 
Bank of England  
Page 3


Monetary Policy Summary
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) sets monetary policy to meet the 2% inflation target,
and in a way that helps to sustain growth and employment. The MPC adopts a medium-term
and forward-looking approach to determine the monetary stance required to achieve the
inflation target sustainably.
At its meeting ending on 6 August 2025, the MPC voted by a majority of 5–4 to reduce Bank
Rate by 0.25 percentage points, to 4%, rather than maintaining it at 4.25%.
There has been substantial disinflation over the past two and a half years, following previous
external shocks, supported by the restrictive stance of monetary policy. That progress has
allowed for reductions in Bank Rate over the past year. The Committee remains focused on
squeezing out any existing or emerging persistent inflationary pressures, to return inflation
sustainably to its 2% target in the medium term.
The path of disinflation in underlying domestic price and wage pressures has generally
continued, albeit to different degrees. Twelve-month CPI inflation increased to 3.5% in 2025
Q2, owing to developments in energy, food and administered prices. Pay growth remains
elevated, but has declined further recently, and is still expected to slow significantly over the
rest of the year. Services consumer price inflation has been broadly flat over recent months.
The Committee continues to be vigilant about the extent to which easing pay pressures will
feed through to consumer price inflation.
CPI inflation is forecast to increase slightly further to peak at 4.0% in September. Inflation is
expected to fall back thereafter towards the 2% target, although the Committee remains alert
to the risk that this temporary increase in inflation could put additional upward pressure on the
wage and price-setting process. Overall, the MPC judges that the upside risks around
medium-term inflationary pressures have moved slightly higher since May.
Underlying UK GDP growth has remained subdued, consistent with a continued, gradual
loosening in the labour market. A margin of slack is judged to have emerged in the economy.
Downside domestic and geopolitical risks around economic activity remain, although trade
policy uncertainty has diminished somewhat.
At this meeting, the Committee voted to reduce Bank Rate to 4%. A gradual and careful
approach to the further withdrawal of monetary policy restraint remains appropriate. The
restrictiveness of monetary policy has fallen as Bank Rate has been reduced. The timing and
Bank of England  
Page 4


pace of future reductions in the restrictiveness of policy will depend on the extent to which
underlying disinflationary pressures continue to ease. Monetary policy is not on a pre-set
path, and the Committee will remain responsive to the accumulation of evidence.
Bank of England  
Page 5


1: The economic outlook
The path of disinflation in underlying domestic price and wage pressures has generally
continued, albeit to different degrees (Key judgement 1). Wage growth has declined
further recently, to around 5% in May, although services consumer price inflation has
remained at 4.7% in recent months. Twelve-month CPI inflation averaged 3.5% in
2025 Q2, 0.1 percentage points higher than expected in the May Report and an
increase from 2.8% in Q1. Around half of this rise was accounted for by an expected
reduction in the extent to which energy prices have been dragging on headline
inflation. The contribution of administered prices to inflation has increased, while food
price inflation has also picked up by more than anticipated. While headline inflation is
projected to rise slightly further in the near term, to around 3¾% over the second half
of this year, the baseline projection assumes that this will not lead to additional
second-round effects on domestic inflationary pressures.
Four-quarter GDP growth is projected to remain close to its recent average level, of
around 1¼%, before picking up in the second half of the forecast period. This remains
dependent on a sustained fall in the household saving ratio. A margin of spare capacity
is estimated to have opened up in the UK economy and the labour market is
continuing to loosen gradually. This margin of excess supply is expected to build a little
further, before narrowing from the end of next year onwards (Key judgement 2). A
range of factors are expected to reduce spare capacity further out, including the impact
on demand of the gradual loosening in the stance of monetary policy embodied in the
market path of interest rates. Monetary policy still weighs on the level of demand
across the forecast period, however, such that it continues to contribute to the
disinflationary process.
The margin of spare capacity in the economy is expected to act against some
continuing persistence in domestic prices and wages in order for CPI inflation to fall
back to around the 2% target in the medium term (Key judgement 3). The August CPI
projection is somewhat higher than the profile in May during the first and second years
of the forecast period, and broadly similar in the medium term. There remains
considerable uncertainty around the calibration of the Committee’s judgement on the
path of second-round effects in domestic prices and wages. Overall, the MPC judges
that the upside risks around medium-term inflationary pressures have moved slightly
Bank of England  
Page 6


higher since May. This is in part due to the risk of inflation expectations impacting
price-setting as illustrated in the inflation persistence scenario set out in the May
Report.
Table 1.A: Baseline forecast summary (a) (b)
2025 Q3
2026 Q3
2027 Q3
2028 Q3
GDP (c)
1.2 (1.1)
1.3 (1.3)
1.5 (1.6)
1.7
CPI inflation (d)
3.8 (3.5)
2.7 (2.4)
2 (1.9)
2
Unemployment rate (e)
4.8 (4.6)
4.9 (4.9)
4.8 (5)
4.8
Excess supply/Excess demand (f)
-½ (-½)
-¾ (-¾)
-¼ (-¾)
0
Bank Rate (g)
4.1 (4)
3.5 (3.5)
3.6 (3.6)
3.7
(a) Figures in parentheses show the corresponding projections in the May 2025 Monetary Policy Report.
(b) The numbers shown in this table are conditioned on the assumptions described in Section 1.1.
(c) Four-quarter growth in real GDP.
(d) Four-quarter inflation rate.
(e) International Labour Organization (ILO) definition of unemployment. Although LFS unemployment data have been
reinstated by the ONS, they are badged as official statistics in development and the LFS continues to suffer from very low
response rates, which can introduce volatility and potentially non-response bias (Box D of the May 2024 Monetary Policy
Report).
(f) Per cent of potential GDP. A negative figure implies output is below potential and a positive that it is above.
(g) Per cent. The path for Bank Rate implied by forward market interest rates. The curves are based on overnight index swap
rates.
Bank of England  
Page 7


1.1: The conditioning assumptions underlying the MPC’s baseline
projections
As set out in Table 1.B, the MPC’s August baseline projections are conditioned on:
Chart 1.1: CPI inflation and CPI inflation excluding energy (a)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Energy prices include fuels and lubricants, electricity, gas and other fuels.
The paths for policy rates in advanced economies implied by financial markets, as
captured in the 15 working day averages of forward interest rates to 29 July (Chart 2.3).
The market-implied path for Bank Rate underpinning the August projections declines to
3½% by 2026 Q2, similar to the profile at the time of the May Report.
A path for the sterling effective exchange rate index that is around ¾% higher compared
with the May Report. The exchange rate depreciates slightly over the forecast period,
reflecting the role of expected interest rate differentials in the Committee’s conditioning
assumption.
Wholesale energy prices that follow their respective futures curves over the forecast
period. Oil and gas prices have ended the period since May slightly higher than their levels
at the time of the previous Report (Section 2.1). Significant uncertainty remains around the
outlook for wholesale energy prices (Box D).
UK household energy prices that move in line with Bank staff estimates of the Ofgem price
cap implied by the paths of wholesale gas and electricity prices (Section 2.5).
Bank of England  
Page 8


UK fiscal policy that evolves in line with government policies to date, as announced in
Spring Statement 2025.
Global and UK trade policies in place as of 29 July, which are consistent with a somewhat
lower US effective tariff rate than at the time of the May Report (Section 2.1). These
policies are assumed to continue throughout the forecast period. There has been a range
of announced policy changes that are yet to be implemented and so have not been
included in the baseline projections. These include the agreement between the US and EU
announced on 27 July. And, on 1 August, the US announced increases in tariffs on a
number of countries, excluding the UK, due to take effect on 8 August.
The growth in the size and composition of the 16+ population implied by the ONS’s 2022-
based migration category variant national population projections, which is weaker than the
previous assumption incorporated in the May Report that was based on the principal
version of those projections. These population projections do not include the England and
Wales mid-year population estimates published on 30 July.
Bank of England  
Page 9


Table 1.B: Conditioning assumptions (a) (b)
Average
1998–2007
Average
2010–19
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
Bank Rate (c)
5.0
0.5
5.3
(5.3)
4.9
(4.9)
3.8
(3.7)
3.5
(3.6)
3.6
(3.6)
Sterling effective
exchange rate (d)
100
82
81 (81)
85 (85)
85 (84)
84 (84)
84 (83)
Oil prices (e)
39
77
84 (84)
75 (75)
68 (64)
67 (64)
67 (65)
Gas prices (f)
29
52
101
(101)
107
(107)
91 (94)
89 (86)
80 (78)
Nominal government
expenditure (g)
7¼
2¼
7¾
(7¾)
6½
(6½)
6½
(8¼)
3 (3)
3¼
(3¼)
1.2: Key judgements and risks
1.2: Key judgement 1
The path of disinflation in underlying domestic price and wage pressures has generally
continued, albeit to different degrees. While headline inflation is projected to rise
slightly further in the near term, to around 3¾% over the second half of this year, the
baseline projection assumes that this will not lead to additional second-round effects
on domestic inflationary pressures.
There has been substantial disinflation over the past two and a half years, following previous
external shocks, supported by the restrictive stance of monetary policy. That progress has
allowed for reductions in Bank Rate over the past year. The Committee remains focused on
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg Finance L.P., LSEG Workspace, Office for Budget Responsibility (OBR), ONS and
Bank calculations.
(a) The table shows the projections for financial market prices, wholesale energy prices and government spending
projections that are used as conditioning assumptions for the MPC’s projections for CPI inflation, GDP growth and the
unemployment rate. Figures in parentheses show the corresponding projections in the May 2025 Monetary Policy Report.
(b) Financial market data are based on averages in the 15 working days to 29 July 2025. Figures show the average level in
Q4 of each year, unless otherwise stated.
(c) Per cent. The path for Bank Rate implied by forward market interest rates. The curves are based on overnight index swap
rates.
(d) Index: January 2005 = 100. The convention is that the sterling exchange rate follows a path that is halfway between the
starting level of the sterling ERI and a path implied by interest rate differentials.
(e) Dollars per barrel. Projection based on monthly Brent futures prices.
(f) Pence per therm. Projection based on monthly natural gas futures prices.
(g) Annual average growth rate. Nominal general government consumption and investment. Projections are based on the
OBR’s March 2025 Economic and Fiscal Outlook. Historical data based on NMRP+D7QK.
Bank of England  
Page 10


squeezing out any existing or emerging persistent inflationary pressures.
Twelve-month CPI inflation averaged 3.5% in 2025 Q2. This was 0.1 percentage points above
expectations at the time of the May Report and an increase from 2.8% in Q1 (Section 2.5).
Around half of this rise in the second quarter was accounted for by an expected reduction in
the extent to which energy prices have been dragging on headline inflation. The contribution
of administered prices to inflation has increased, while food price inflation has also picked up
by more than anticipated (Box E).
The latest accumulation of evidence suggests disinflation in underlying domestic price and
wage pressures has generally continued, although with greater signs of progress in declining
pay growth than in developments in services price inflation. CPI inflation excluding energy
picked up slightly to around 3¾% in Q2 (Chart 1.1).
Services consumer price inflation has remained at around 4.7% over recent months, slightly
higher than expected at the time of the May Report. The still-elevated rate of services inflation
reflects past strength in wage growth as well as temporary upward pressure from one-off
increases in administered prices and the increase in employer NICs. Underlying services
price inflation has continued to moderate across a range of measures, although progress in
recent months has been slower than last year according to a measure excluding indexed and
volatile components, rents and foreign holidays (Chart 2.20). Even after accounting for
respective administered price changes recently, UK services inflation has remained
significantly higher than services inflation in the euro area (Section 2.5), suggesting that price-
setting in the UK has not yet fully normalised to a target-consistent path.
Wage growth has declined further recently, to around 5%. Annual private sector regular
average weekly earnings growth fell to 4.9% in the three months to May, weaker than
expected in the May Report. This is now broadly in line with Bank staff’s estimate of the
underlying rate of pay growth. Nevertheless, pay growth has remained higher than can be
explained by its usual economic determinants.
Private sector regular pay growth is expected to slow further by the end of 2025, to 3¾%. In
contrast, annual services inflation is projected to rise slightly over the remainder of the year, in
part reflecting continued upward pressure from non-wage labour costs, before falling back in
2026.
There is uncertainty around the path of services inflation over coming quarters, including the
extent to which weaker pay growth will over time feed through to lower services inflation, and
the extent to which services inflation may continue to be boosted by other factors such as
administered prices. There is little evidence so far that the empirical relationship between
services inflation and wages has broken down, or that aggregate measures of profit margins
are increasing. However, consumer-facing services businesses responding to the Decision
Bank of England  
Page 11


Maker Panel (DMP) Survey continue to expect some increase in price inflation over the year
ahead. And DMP firms’ own-price expectations have remained more sensitive to changes in
aggregate CPI inflation than prior to 2022. The near-term rise in headline inflation could
therefore affect price-setting behaviour, even while a weaker labour market means wage-
setting is unaffected.
In the August Report baseline projection, CPI inflation is projected to rise slightly further, to
around 3¾% over the second half of this year, with a peak of 4.0% in September, which is a
slightly higher profile than in the May Report. This pickup reflects some near-term upward
pressure on inflation from energy, food and services prices, offset by a slight decline in
projected core goods inflation.
The near-term strength in CPI inflation is still expected to be temporary. This in part reflects
the Committee’s continuing judgement in the baseline forecast that recent developments are
assumed not to lead to additional second-round effects on underlying domestic inflationary
pressures, beyond those that would typically be expected to occur and in contrast to the more
persistent dynamics in the inflation generating process that occurred following the very large
shocks in 2021–22. In this forecast, the Committee has also maintained its judgement on the
speed with which overall excess domestic inflationary pressures are expected to dissipate in
the medium term (Key judgement 3). There remains significant uncertainty around these
judgements, however, and the MPC judges that the upside risks around medium-term
inflationary pressures have moved slightly higher since May.
1.2: Key judgement 2
A margin of spare capacity is estimated to have opened up in the UK economy and the
labour market is continuing to loosen gradually. This margin of excess supply is
expected to build a little further, before narrowing from the end of next year onwards.
UK quarterly GDP growth is estimated to have been 0.1% in 2025 Q2, on both a headline and
underlying basis (Section 2.3). Growth is expected to pick up a little in the near term,
reflecting a modest improvement in survey indicators of output.
Underlying employment growth has been around zero over recent quarters, somewhat
weaker than implied by past developments in underlying GDP growth (Chart 2.11). This is in
part likely to have reflected recent increases in firms’ total labour costs, which may have
affected employment to a slightly greater degree than previously anticipated. Survey
indicators of employment intentions have remained weak.
Consistent with the weakness of employment growth, the labour market has continued to
loosen gradually (Section 2.4). The LFS unemployment rate rose to 4.7% in the three months
to May. The ratio of vacancies to unemployment has fallen further and is judged to be
Bank of England  
Page 12


somewhat below its equilibrium level. In addition, surveys of capacity utilisation suggest
growing spare capacity within firms.
Bank staff have reassessed the extent to which weakness in productivity growth in 2023 and
2024 has been matched by lower potential productivity growth. As outlined in Box E of the
February Report, potential productivity had appeared to be notably weaker last year than
could be explained by factors such as the impacts of past events, notably Brexit and the
pandemic. Based on new analysis that adjusts measured productivity growth for erratic and
volatile components of GDP, measurement error in hours worked and variations in capacity
utilisation, potential productivity growth is now judged to have been somewhat less weak over
recent years, and potential labour supply growth somewhat lower. Taken together, this pushes
up on past supply growth and is consistent with a margin of spare capacity having opened up
slightly earlier than in the May projection.
Overall, a small margin of spare capacity is now estimated to have opened up in the economy
from the start of 2024, reaching around ½% of potential GDP by the middle of 2025. The MPC
continues to recognise the significant uncertainty around estimates of the current degree of
slack in the economy. For example, developments in the labour market and in capacity
utilisation would suggest a wider margin of excess supply, whereas models of the output gap
based on nominal dynamics could suggest that the economy has a margin of excess demand
currently. This highlights a tension between the possibility of greater spare capacity and the
persistently high rate of domestic inflation.
As set out in Box C of the May Report, recent global trade policy developments are likely to
reduce UK GDP growth relative to the trade policies in place prior to this year. However, the
trade policies in place on 29 July, which are assumed in the August Report projections to
continue over the forecast period, are consistent with a somewhat lower US effective tariff
rate than at the time of the May Report. Global trade policy uncertainty has also fallen back
over recent months, though at a similar pace to the assumption underpinning the May Report
projections prior to the most recent trade policy developments. Since May, volatility in financial
markets has declined and global equity prices have risen.
Reflecting these developments, UK-weighted world GDP growth is expected to weaken by
slightly less in the near term in the August baseline forecast than in the May forecast. Four-
quarter world growth falls back to around 1¾% this year and next, before rising to 2¼% in
2027. Conditioned on trade policies as of 29 July, near-term growth is projected to be stronger
in the United States and China than in the May Report. The outlook for euro-area GDP growth
is broadly unchanged from May.
The medium-term outlook for UK activity will be determined by both global and
domestic factors.
Bank of England  
Page 13


Box A sets out the Committee’s latest assessment of the restrictiveness of the UK monetary
policy stance. Reflecting the usual lags of policy, past restrictiveness is estimated to be
weighing on the current level of demand, which will contribute to the disinflationary process. A
range of more forward-looking estimates, based on real interest rate gaps, suggest that the
degree of restrictiveness has fallen to some extent over the past 18 months. Based on the
market curve conditioning assumption, restrictiveness is judged likely to wane to some extent
over the forecast period.
The August baseline forecast includes a small near-term boost to activity from recent changes
in mortgage market regulation, including changes to the implementation of the FPC’s loan
to income (LTI) flow limit to allow individual lenders to increase their share of lending at high
LTIs while aiming to ensure the aggregate flow remained consistent with the limit of 15%.
Based on the Government’s plans set out in Spring Statement 2025, the overall stance of
fiscal policy is tightening materially over the MPC’s forecast period. All else equal, this pulls
down on the baseline GDP growth and output gap projections, particularly over the next year.
Four-quarter potential supply growth is projected to weaken slightly in the middle of the
forecast period, before recovering to around 1½% in the medium term. This is slightly weaker
beyond the near term than in the May Report, reflecting the lower assumed path of population
growth (Section 1.1).
In the August baseline projection, four-quarter GDP growth is projected to remain close to its
recent average level, of around 1¼%, before picking up in the second half of the forecast
period (Chart 1.2). This forecast remains dependent on a sustained fall in the household
saving ratio to under 8% in the medium term from over 10% currently. As a result, beyond the
near term, consumption growth is projected to pick up to a greater degree than GDP growth,
to around 2¼% on an annual basis by the end of the forecast period. There remains
considerable uncertainty over this projection, as discussed below, and previous projections of
material declines in the saving ratio have so far largely failed to materialise.
Reflecting the paths of GDP and potential supply, the margin of spare capacity in the baseline
forecast is expected to widen slightly further over the next year, to just under ¾% of potential
GDP in the middle of 2026, before narrowing to close to zero by the end of the forecast
period. The impact on demand of the tightening in the stance of fiscal policy, based on the
plans set out in the Spring Statement, is the main factor increasing excess supply in the near
term. A range of factors is expected to reduce excess supply further out, including the impact
on demand of the gradual loosening in the stance of monetary policy embodied in the market
path of interest rates. Monetary policy still weighs on the level of demand across the forecast
period, however, such that it continues to contribute to the disinflationary process.
Bank of England  
Page 14


Relative to the May baseline projection, there is expected to be a slightly smaller margin of
spare capacity throughout most of the forecast period, in part reflecting the Committee’s
judgement that the lower assumed path of population growth will put slightly more downward
pressure on supply than on demand over coming years.
The unemployment rate is projected to rise gradually to just under 5% by the middle of 2026
(Chart 1.3), above its assumed medium-term equilibrium rate of just over 4½%.
Unemployment is slightly lower than in the May Report in the medium term, consistent with
the narrower margin of excess supply in the baseline projection.
There are risks around the future path of activity, spare capacity and hence inflationary
pressures in the medium term (Key judgement 3), reflecting both global and domestic factors.
Box D discusses global uncertainties and their implications for the UK economy, including the
risks from potential, but impossible to anticipate, future increases in energy prices, and
around global trade policies. There also remain uncertainties around the paths of fiscal policy
in Germany, the United States and elsewhere. Overall, there are judged to be downside risks
to global activity, which would pass through to UK growth and inflation were they to occur. The
scale of the immediate downside risks has diminished since May, however, reflecting the most
recent developments in trade policy.
Box A of the May Report set out an alternative scenario in which UK demand is substantially
weaker than in the baseline projection. This was based on an additional UK-specific increase
in uncertainty, which drags on consumption and investment to a greater extent than the
indirect impact on UK growth of elevated global trade policy uncertainty that has already been
included in the baseline projection. Although both global and domestic uncertainty appears to
have fallen back somewhat since May, there remains a risk that UK domestic demand could
be weaker, and the margin of spare capacity wider, than in the baseline projection.
In particular, the MPC continues to see downside risks around consumption growth and
upside risks around the path of the saving ratio over the forecast period. These could relate to
the continuation of past structural factors, such as the desire for households to build up their
savings following the pandemic, that have already pushed up saving by more than expected.
Or it could reflect greater precautionary saving behaviour by households than has so far
appeared to be occurring. The latter could be triggered by broader downside risks to activity
and particularly the risk of more sudden adverse developments in the labour market. This
includes the possibility that the impact of the higher labour costs facing companies has a
greater impact on their employment decisions. That said, analysis of previous cycles suggests
The Committee judges that the risks around the UK GDP growth projection are
somewhat to the downside.
Bank of England  
Page 15


that rapid shake-outs in the labour market have tended to be associated with larger shocks to
the economy than have occurred recently, and with a greater pickup in redundancies than has
so far appeared to be in train.
Overall, the Committee judges that the risks around the UK GDP growth projection,
particularly from domestic factors, are somewhat to the downside. This is also judged to lead
to a risk of a greater margin of spare capacity over the forecast period than in the baseline.
Chart 1.2: GDP growth projection based on market interest rate expectations, other
policy measures as announced
The fan chart depicts the probability of various outcomes for GDP growth. It has been conditioned on Bank Rate following a
path implied by market yields, but allows the Committee’s judgement on the risks around the other conditioning assumptions
set out in Section 1.1, including wholesale energy prices, to affect the calibration of the fan chart skew. To the left of the
shaded area, the distribution reflects uncertainty around revisions to the data over the past. To the right of the shaded area,
the distribution reflects uncertainty over the evolution of GDP growth in the future. If economic circumstances identical to
today’s were to prevail on 100 occasions, the MPC’s judgement is that the mature estimate of GDP growth would lie within
the darkest central band on only 30 of those occasions. The fan chart is constructed so that outturns are also expected to lie
within each pair of the lighter aqua areas on 30 occasions. In any particular quarter of the forecast period, GDP growth is
therefore expected to lie somewhere within the fan on 90 out of 100 occasions. And on the remaining 10 out of 100 occasions
GDP growth can fall anywhere outside the aqua area of the fan chart. Over the forecast period, this has been depicted by the
grey background. The Box on page 39 of the November 2007 Inflation Report provides a fuller description of the fan chart
and what it represents. The y-axis of the chart has been truncated to illustrate more clearly the current uncertainty around the
path of GDP growth, as otherwise this would be obscured by the volatility of GDP growth during the pandemic.
Bank of England  
Page 16


1.2: Key judgement 3
Conditioned on the market path of interest rates, the margin of spare capacity in the
economy is expected to act against some continuing persistence in domestic prices
and wages in order for CPI inflation to fall back to around the 2% target in the medium
term.
Domestically, the August forecast for CPI inflation continues to incorporate the effects of a
period of economic slack (Key judgement 2), which is required in order for price-setting
dynamics to normalise fully. The Committee has not changed its judgement on the speed with
which excess domestic inflationary pressures are expected to dissipate in the baseline
projection. The continuing second-round effects in the baseline relate in large part to the
unwind of the succession of very large external cost shocks in 2021–22, rather than additional
second-round effects from the near-term pickup in headline inflation (Key judgement 1).
Chart 1.3: Unemployment rate projection based on market interest rate expectations,
other policy measures as announced
The fan chart depicts the probability of various future outcomes for the ILO definition of unemployment and begins in 2025
Q2. Although LFS unemployment data have recently been reinstated by the ONS, they are badged as official statistics in
development and the LFS continues to suffer from very low response rates, which can introduce volatility and potentially non-
response bias (Box D of the May 2024 Monetary Policy Report). The fan chart has been conditioned on Bank Rate
following a path implied by market yields, but allows the Committee’s judgement on the risks around the other conditioning
assumptions set out in Section 1.1, including wholesale energy prices, to affect the calibration of the fan chart skew. The
coloured bands have the same interpretation as in Chart 1.2 and portray 90% of the probability distribution. A significant
proportion of this distribution lies below Bank staff’s current estimate of the long-term equilibrium unemployment rate. There
is therefore uncertainty about the precise calibration of this fan chart.
Bank of England  
Page 17


In terms of global factors affecting the UK, the Committee continues to judge that the overall
impact of recent trade policy developments is, on balance, more likely to be disinflationary
than inflationary, although the effects incorporated into the August baseline forecast are not
large. UK-weighted world export price inflation, excluding the direct effect of oil prices, is
expected to turn negative in the near term before recovering into slightly positive territory in
the middle of the forecast period. This profile is broadly similar to the path of world prices in
the May forecast, though slightly higher reflecting the constellation of trade policies as of 29
July. For that reason and reflecting recent data outturns, UK non-energy import price inflation
is projected to be higher in the near term, compared with May. The direct contribution of
energy prices to CPI inflation is around zero throughout the forecast period.
In the baseline projection conditioned on the market-implied path of interest rates in the 15
working days to 29 July, CPI inflation falls back gradually to 2.7% in 2026 Q3, and to around
the 2% target by 2027 Q2, remaining there in the medium term (Chart 1.4 and Table 1.C). The
August CPI projection is somewhat higher than the profile in May during the second year of
the forecast period and broadly similar in the medium term. Private sector regular AWE
growth is expected to fall to around 3% in the medium term.
There remains considerable uncertainty around the calibration of the Committee’s judgement
on the path of second-round effects in domestic prices and wages.
Box A of the May Report set out a scenario in which inflation persistence is greater than
assumed in the baseline, in part as the current strength in headline inflation could result in
additional second-round effects in domestic wage and price-setting. The scenario also set out
how domestic inflationary pressures could be greater if potential productivity growth was
materially weaker than in the baseline, and that weakness was not reflected in lower wages.
Both of these mechanisms remain relevant for the Committee’s views on the risks to medium-
term inflation.
As part of this continuing assessment of these risks, the MPC is monitoring a range of
indicators to judge whether inflation expectations remain consistent with meeting the 2%
inflation target sustainably in the medium term. Households’ near-term inflation expectations
have fallen back slightly recently, although medium-term household measures have continued
to increase and are now materially above their historical averages. Businesses’ medium-term
CPI inflation expectations have increased slightly since the start of the year, while market-
based inflation compensation measures are broadly unchanged.
The Committee is placing particular weight on the extent to which higher CPI inflation,
including developments in salient items such as food prices, could affect inflation expectations
and add to the persistence of inflationary pressures (Box E). Bank staff analysis based on a
The MPC judges that the upside risks around medium-term inflationary pressures
have moved slightly higher since May.
Bank of England  
Page 18


machine learning approach suggests that, after falling towards historical averages earlier this
year, a measure of the inertial component of inflation reflecting more backward-looking
expectations has begun to rise again. Staff analysis also suggests that second-round effects
in domestic price and wage-setting, owing to the response of inflation expectations to realised
inflation, have historically become stronger when inflation has exceeded a threshold of 3½ to
4%, which is relevant given the near-term path of headline inflation (Key judgement 1).
Conversely, it is possible that the role of household inflation expectations in the wage-setting
process could become weaker as the labour market loosens further.
There may still be downside risks to the path of potential productivity over the forecast period,
and hence upside risks to wage growth and inflation. But, this risk may have diminished since
May, as Bank staff’s assessment of recent potential productivity growth has been revised up,
which means that potential productivity is now more explicable by the shocks that have
previously affected the economy (Key judgement 2) and there is slightly less of a step change
up in expected productivity growth over the forecast period.
In addition, there remains a risk that the economy has been subject to lasting changes in
wage and price-setting behaviour following the major supply shocks experienced over
previous years, as set out in Box A in the November 2024 Report. The recent and future path
for the medium-term equilibrium rate of unemployment could be higher than assumed in the
baseline forecast in this case, or because of recent increases in the wedge between wages
and total labour costs. These risks would be consistent with greater persistence in inflation.
Box D discusses global uncertainties and their implications for the UK economy, including the
risks to UK inflation from potential, but impossible to anticipate, future increases in energy
prices, and around global trade policies. There are two-sided risks around the impact of global
prices on UK inflation. These relate both to the possibility of new shocks and uncertainties
around the impact of existing shocks, such as the extent of the shift in global trade patterns
already under way and how this may come to affect external pressures on UK inflation.
Overall, the MPC judges that the upside risks around medium-term inflationary pressures
have moved slightly higher since May. This is in part due to the risk of inflation expectations
impacting price-setting as illustrated in the inflation persistence scenario set out in the May
Report.
Bank of England  
Page 19


Table 1.C: The quarterly baseline projection for CPI inflation based on market rate
expectations (a)
2025 Q3
2025 Q4
2026 Q1
2026 Q2
CPI inflation
3.8
3.6
3.1
3.0
2026 Q3
2026 Q4
2027 Q1
2027 Q2
CPI inflation
2.7
2.5
2.3
2.0
2027 Q3
2027 Q4
2028 Q1
2028 Q2
2028 Q3
CPI inflation
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
Chart 1.4: CPI inflation projection based on market interest rate expectations, other
policy measures as announced
The fan chart depicts the probability of various future outcomes for CPI inflation and begins in 2025 Q3. It has been
conditioned on Bank Rate following a path implied by market yields, but allows the Committee’s judgement on the risks
around the other conditioning assumptions set out in Section 1.1, including wholesale energy prices, to affect the calibration
of the fan chart skew. If economic circumstances identical to today’s were to prevail on 100 occasions, the MPC’s judgement
is that inflation in any particular quarter would lie within the darkest central band on only 30 of those occasions. The fan chart
is constructed so that outturns of inflation are also expected to lie within each pair of the lighter orange areas on 30
occasions. In any particular quarter of the forecast period, inflation is therefore expected to lie somewhere within the fans on
90 out of 100 occasions. And on the remaining 10 out of 100 occasions inflation can fall anywhere outside the orange area of
the fan chart. Over the forecast period, this has been depicted by the grey background. The Box on pages 48–49 of the May
2002 Inflation Report provides a fuller description of the fan chart and what it represents.
(a) Four-quarter inflation rate.
Bank of England  
Page 20


Table 1.D: Indicative projections consistent with the MPC's baseline forecast (a) (b)
World GDP (UK-weighted)
(c)
3
2½
2 (2)
2 (2)
1¾
(1½)
1¾
(1½)
2¼
(2¼)
World GDP (PPP-weighted)
(d)
4
3¾
3½
(3¼)
3¼
(3¼)
3 (2½)
2¾
(2¾)
3¼
(3¼)
Euro-area GDP (e)
2½
1½
¾ (½)
1 (¾)
1 (¾)
1 (1)
1¾
(1¾)
US GDP (f)
3
2½
3 (3)
2¾
(2¾)
1¾
(1¼)
1¾
(1¼)
2 (1¾)
Emerging market GDP
(PPP-weighted) (g)
5½
5
4½
(4½)
4¼
(4¼)
4 (3½)
3¾
(3¾)
4¼
(4¼)
  of which, China GDP (h)
10
7¾
5½
(5½)
5 (5)
4¾ (4)
4 (4¼)
4½
(4¼)
UK GDP (i)
2¾
2
½ (½)
1 (1)
1¼ (1)
1¼
(1¼)
1½
(1½)
Household consumption (j)
3¼
2
½ (½)
¾ (¾)
1 (1¼)
1½
(1¾)
2 (1¾)
Business investment (k)
3
4¼
4½
(4½)
2 (2)
3¼
(1½)
1¼ (1)
1½
(1¼)
Housing investment (l)
3¼
4
-7 (-7)
¾ (¾)
¼ (0)
4½ (5)
6 (6)
Exports (m)
4½
3½
-½ (-½)
-1¼
(-1¼)
2¼ (½)
2¼ (0)
1¾ (2)
Imports (n)
6
4
-1¼
(-1¼)
2¾
(2¾)
5 (1½)
1¼ (2)
2¾
(2¾)
Contribution of net trade to
GDP (o)
-¼
-¼
¼ (¼)
-1¼
(-1¼)
-1 (-½)
¼ (-¾)
-½ (-
½)
Real post-tax labour income
(p)
3¼
1½
1 (1)
4¼
(4¼)
1½
(1½)
0 (½)
½ (½)
Household saving ratio (q)
7¼
7¾
7¼
(7¼)
10 (10)
10¼
(10½)
9¼
(9¾)
8¼ (9)
Average
1998–2007
Average
2010–19
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
Bank of England  
Page 21


Credit spreads (r)
¾
2½
1 (1)
1 (1)
1¼
(1½)
1½
(1½)
1½
(1½)
Excess supply/Excess
demand (s)
0
-1¾
¾ (¾)
-¼ (0)
-½ (-½)
-½ (-
¾)
-½ (-
¾)
Labour productivity (output
per worker) (t)
1¾
¾
-¾ (-¾)
¼ (¼)
0 (-¼)
1¼ (¾) 1 (¾)
Employment (u)
1
1¼
¾ (¾)
1½
(1½)
¾ (¾)
¼ (½)
¾ (¾)
Working-age (16+)
population (v)
¾
¾
1¼
(1¼)
1¼
(1¼)
1 (1)
¾ (1)
¾ (1)
Unemployment rate (w)
5¼
6
3¾
(3¾)
4½
(4½)
4¾
(4¾)
5 (5)
4¾ (5)
Participation rate (x)
63
63½
62¾
(62¾)
63¼
(63¼)
63½
(63¼)
63¼
(63)
63
(63)
CPI inflation (y)
1½
2¼
4¼
(4¼)
2½
(2½)
3¾
(3¼)
2½ (2)
2 (1¾)
UK import prices (z)
-¼
1¼
1 (1)
-1¼
(-1¼)
1¼ (-¼) 0 (¼)
½ (½)
Energy prices – direct
contribution to CPI inflation
(aa)
¼
¼
-1¼
(-1¼)
-½ (-½)
0 (-¼)
0 (0)
0 (0)
Private sector regular
average weekly earnings
(ab)
4
2¼
6¼
(6¼)
6¼
(6¼)
3¾
(3¾)
3¼
(2¾)
3 (2¾)
Private sector regular pay-
based unit wage costs (ac)
2
1¾
7¼
(7¼)
6½
(6½)
2½
(2¾)
2 (1¾)
2 (1¾)
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg Finance L.P., Department for Energy Security and Net Zero, Eurostat, IMF World
Economic Outlook, National Bureau of Statistics of China, ONS, US Bureau of Economic Analysis and Bank calculations.
(a) The profiles in this table should be viewed as broadly consistent with the MPC’s baseline projections for GDP growth, CPI
inflation and unemployment (as presented in the fan charts).
(b) Figures show annual average growth rates unless otherwise stated. Figures in parentheses show the corresponding
projections in the May 2025 Monetary Policy Report. Calculations for back data based on ONS data are shown using ONS
series identifiers.
(c) Chained-volume measure. Constructed using real GDP growth rates of 188 countries weighted according to their shares
in UK exports.
(d) Chained-volume measure. Constructed using real GDP growth rates of 189 countries weighted according to their shares
in world GDP using the IMF’s purchasing power parity (PPP) weights.
Bank of England  
Page 22


(e) Chained-volume measure. The forecast was finalised before the release of the preliminary flash estimate of euro-area
GDP for Q2, so that has not been incorporated.
(f) Chained-volume measure. The forecast was finalised before the release of the advance estimate of US GDP for Q2, so
that has not been incorporated.
(g) Chained-volume measure. Constructed using real GDP growth rates of 154 emerging market economies, weighted
according to their relative shares in world GDP using the IMF’s PPP weights.
(h) Chained-volume measure.
(i) Chained-volume measure.
(j) Chained-volume measure. Includes non-profit institutions serving households. Based on ABJR+HAYO.
(k) Chained-volume measure. Based on GAN8.
(l) Chained-volume measure. Whole-economy measure. Includes new dwellings, improvements and spending on services
associated with the sale and purchase of property. Based on DFEG+L635+L637.
(m) Chained-volume measure. The historical data exclude the impact of missing trader intra‑community (MTIC) fraud. Since
1998 based on IKBK-OFNN/(BOKH/BQKO). Prior to 1998 based on IKBK.
(n) Chained-volume measure. The historical data exclude the impact of MTIC fraud. Since 1998 based on IKBL-
OFNN/(BOKH/BQKO). Prior to 1998 based on IKBL.
(o) Chained-volume measure. Exports less imports.
(p) Wages and salaries plus mixed income and general government benefits less income taxes and employees’ National
Insurance contributions, deflated by the consumer expenditure deflator. Based on [ROYJ+ROYH-(RPHS+AIIV-
CUCT)+GZVX]/[(ABJQ+HAYE)/(ABJR+HAYO)]. The backdata for this series are available at Monetary Policy Report –
Download chart slides and data – August 2025.
(q) Annual average. Percentage of total available household resources. Based on NRJS.
(r) Level in Q4. Percentage point spread over reference rates. Based on a weighted average of household and corporate loan
and deposit spreads over appropriate risk-free rates. Indexed to equal zero in 2007 Q3.
(s) Annual average. Per cent of potential GDP. A negative figure implies output is below potential and a positive figure that it
is above.
(t) Real GDP (ABMI) divided by total 16+ employment (MGRZ). Although LFS employment data have been reinstated by the
ONS, they are badged as official statistics in development and the LFS continues to suffer from very low response rates,
which can introduce volatility and potentially non-response bias (Box D of the May 2024 Monetary Policy Report).
(u) Four-quarter growth in the ILO definition of employment in Q4 (MGRZ). Although LFS employment data have been
reinstated by the ONS, they are badged as official statistics in development and the LFS continues to suffer from very low
response rates, which can introduce volatility and potentially non-response bias (Box D of the May 2024 Monetary Policy
Report).
(v) Four-quarter growth in Q4. LFS household population, all aged 16 and over (MGSL). Growth rates are interpolated
between the LFS and ONS National population projections: 2022-based interim within the forecast period.
(w) ILO definition of unemployment rate in Q4 (MGSX). Although LFS unemployment data have been reinstated by the ONS,
they are badged as official statistics in development and the LFS continues to suffer from very low response rates, which can
introduce volatility and potentially non-response bias (Box D of the May 2024 Monetary Policy Report).
(x) ILO definition of labour force participation in Q4 as a percentage of the 16+ population (MGWG). Although LFS
participation data have been reinstated by the ONS, they are badged as official statistics in development and the LFS
continues to suffer from very low response rates, which can introduce volatility and potentially non-response bias (Box D of
the May 2024 Monetary Policy Report).
(y) Four-quarter inflation rate in Q4.
(z) Four-quarter inflation rate in Q4 excluding fuel and the impact of MTIC fraud.
(aa) Contribution of fuels and lubricants and gas and electricity prices to four-quarter CPI inflation in Q4.
(ab) Four-quarter growth in Q4. Private sector AWE excluding bonuses and arrears of pay (KAJ2).
(ac) Four-quarter growth in private sector regular pay-based unit wage costs in Q4. Private sector wage costs divided by
private sector output at constant prices. Private sector wage costs are AWE (excluding bonuses) multiplied by private sector
employment.
Bank of England  
Page 23


Box A: Assessing the restrictiveness of the monetary policy
stance
The MPC increased Bank Rate significantly between December 2021 and August
2023, from 0.1% to 5.25%, before starting to reduce Bank Rate in August 2024. This
box sets out a range of measures that the MPC has used to assess the restrictiveness
of monetary policy. The first part of the box presents evidence on the degree to which
past increases in Bank Rate continue to weigh on the level of demand. The second
explores the extent to which the current monetary policy stance, taken as a whole,
remains restrictive and will hence weigh on demand in the future.
Both real and nominal interest rates play an important role in influencing demand and
inflation (Burr and Willems (2024)). But real interest rates, defined as nominal interest
rates adjusted for expected inflation, are usually judged to be more important when
assessing the stance of monetary policy. That is because, when making spending and
saving decisions, firms and households tend to factor in their expectations about future
inflation (Box C of the February 2024 Monetary Policy Report).
Yields on UK government bonds are significantly higher than in late 2021 (Chart A).
Nominal gilt yields rose notably over 2022–23, consistent with increases in Bank Rate
over this period. Real yields, obtained from inflation-linked UK government bonds, also
rose significantly. Both real and nominal government bond yields are lower than their
peaks in 2023 but have been relatively stable over recent quarters. That partly reflects
the impact of international developments, which can have a large influence on UK
government bond yields (Cesa-Bianchi et al (2021) and Mann (2022)).
Real and nominal interest rates are elevated relative to end-2021.
Bank of England  
Page 24


The MPC raised Bank Rate between late 2021 and mid-2023 to curb the sharp rise in
inflation over that period (Chart A). As described in Box C of the August 2024
Monetary Policy Report, those increases in Bank Rate have weighed on demand and
contributed towards the sharp rise in the household saving ratio over recent years
(Section 2.3), as well as the more recent loosening in the labour market (Section 2.4).
The impact of interest rates on demand, estimated using models that feed into the
MPC’s baseline projections, is shown by the aqua bars in Chart B. Higher interest
rates are estimated to have been weighing on the level of demand since late 2022.
Before that, a period of lower interest rates, which had been required to stimulate the
economy, had been boosting demand.
Because monetary policy affects demand and inflation with a lag (Burr and Willems
(2024)), Bank staff estimate that past increases in Bank Rate and the market-implied
path for future interest rates continue to weigh on the level of demand. The impact of
past increases in interest rates on demand is now estimated to be around its peak,
however.
Once that peak has passed, monetary policy will start to contribute positively to GDP
growth, as its effect on demand starts to fade. Nevertheless, past increases in Bank
Rate will still weigh on the level of demand, such that they will continue to support the
disinflationary process over the coming years.
Chart A: Real and nominal yields remain elevated relative to end-2021
Bank Rate and select real and nominal government bond yields (a)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., Tradeweb FTSE Gilt Closing Data and Bank calculations.
(a) Real yields are inflation-linked UK government bond yields. The final data points shown are for 29 July 2025.
Past increases in Bank Rate are estimated to be weighing on the current level
of demand, although this impact is around its peak.
Bank of England  
Page 25


There are large uncertainties around the size and timing of the estimates in Chart B.
The relationship between Bank Rate and the real economy can vary over time (Box C
of the August 2024 Monetary Policy Report). In addition, these estimates capture
the effects on demand of changes in Bank Rate and the market-implied path for future
interest rates. This may not reflect a change in restrictiveness, which is also dependent
on movements in the equilibrium interest rate, the level of interest rates that neither
stimulates nor depresses the level of GDP (further details below).
One of the clearest indications that higher interest rates have weighed on demand has
been the rise in the household saving ratio (Chart 2.10), which stood at 10.6% in 2025
Q1, up from 4.6% in 2022 Q2. Higher interest rates have incentivised additional
Chart B: Past increases in interest rates are estimated still to be weighing on
demand
Estimated contribution of the overnight indexed swap (OIS) curve to the level of GDP (a)
Sources: Bank of England, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) The estimates for the contribution of the OIS curve to the level of UK GDP are the sum of the impacts on
consumption, business investment, housing investment and the net imports offset in the MPC’s baseline
projections. The net imports offset component reflects that part of the reduction in consumption from higher interest
rates will arise from lower spending on imported goods, which mechanically pushes up GDP. These estimates are
based on the standard treatment of the impact of changes in Bank Rate and the OIS curve in the Bank’s forecasting
models. Bank staff estimate the impact of changes in the OIS curve between each Monetary Policy Report on the
level of GDP, and these are then summed to obtain estimates of the total contributions. The estimates incorporate
an impact from changes in the OIS curve on the level of GDP that persists over several years. The level of the aqua
bars in the first data point in 2021 Q3 therefore reflects the estimated impact on demand of changes in the OIS
curve from several years prior to that date. The effects of the estimated impact of changes in the OIS curve on
sterling exchange rates have been excluded. The final data are for 2025 Q2.
Evidence from several channels of monetary policy transmission is consistent
with the impact of past increases in Bank Rate on the level of GDP being
around its peak.
Bank of England  
Page 26


household saving and lower borrowing over recent years. However, there are some
tentative signs that the impact of higher interest rates on household saving may have
peaked. Evidence from the March 2025 Bank of England/NMG survey suggests that
fewer households across most income quintiles are increasing saving due to higher
interest rates, relative to the peaks observed over 2023–24 (Chart C, left panel). And
the saving ratio fell in 2025 Q1, although this largely reflected a reduction in real
household incomes (Section 2.3).
Net secured lending to households has picked up in recent quarters, notwithstanding
some recent volatility associated with changes in Stamp Duty Land Tax (SDLT). That is
consistent with a rise in demand for borrowing due to the reduction in household
interest rates since mid-2024 (Section 2.2), and has been associated with a pick-up in
aggregate broad money growth (Box D of the May 2025 Monetary Policy Report).
Lenders responding to the Credit Conditions Survey have noted an increase in
demand for house purchases over the past few quarters, although that may have also
reflected increased activity ahead of the changes to SDLT.
Evidence is also consistent with the impact of higher interest rates on house price
inflation having peaked. House prices have fallen relative to household income over
recent years, consistent with a drag from restrictive monetary policy (Box C of the
August 2024 Monetary Policy Report). But house price inflation picked up in 2024,
and estimates by Bank staff suggest that the drag on house price inflation from higher
interest rates has fallen back a little over recent quarters.
Higher interest rates have also weighed on some components of housing investment,
but there have been signs of recovery over recent quarters. Investment in new
dwellings was weak over 2022–23, consistent with lower house prices having reduced
the real returns on building new homes. And a lower volume of housing transactions
has weighed on the transfer costs component of housing investment, which includes
costs related to moving home, such as legal fees. But the recovery in house price
inflation over recent quarters, and growing demand for house purchases, suggests that
the monetary policy impact on the level of housing investment may be around its peak.
Consistent with that, annual growth in private new housing construction output turned
positive in late 2024, having been negative since early 2023. Despite this recent pick-
up, intelligence from the Bank’s Agents suggests that growth in housing investment is
likely to remain subdued, relative to historical norms, over the coming year.
Business investment is particularly sensitive to changes in interest rates, making this
channel an important aspect of monetary policy transmission (Shah et al (2024)).
Responses to the DMP Survey indicate that higher interest rates have suppressed
firms’ capital expenditure growth since Bank Rate started to rise in late 2021. But this
Bank of England  
Page 27


effect now appears to have peaked, with the proportion of firms stating that the cost of
finance would constrain their capital expenditure over the next year falling from 46% to
38% between January 2024 and January 2025. There has been a gradual pick-up in
net lending to corporates over recent quarters (Section 2.2 and Box D of the May 2025
Monetary Policy Report).
Analysis of growth in businesses’ gross value added (GVA), the total output of goods
and services less the value of inputs used in production, also suggests that the impact
of higher interest rates may have peaked. Bank staff analysis based on responses to
the DMP Survey suggests that, between end-2022 and mid-2024, growth in GVA for
the most interest rate-sensitive industries, including the utilities and construction
sectors, was notably weaker than for other industries. But since mid-2024, GVA growth
has converged across sectors with different estimated interest rate sensitivities,
suggesting that the impact of higher interest rates may have peaked (Chart C, right
panel). That said, past increases in Bank Rate continue to depress the level of demand
for goods and services in the most interest rate-sensitive sectors. The most and least
interest rate-sensitive sectors are difficult to identify accurately, and so this analysis
should be treated with caution.
Bank of England  
Page 28


While the effects of many channels of monetary policy transmission appear to be
around their peaks, the household cash-flow channel continues to build. This channel
captures the effects on consumption of increases in interest rates paid by existing
borrowers and those received by savers. All else equal, increases in effective
mortgage rates, relative to rates paid on household deposits, tends to weigh on
household consumption.
Chart C: Indicators of demand suggest that the impact of tighter monetary
policy may be around its peak
Percentage of NMG survey respondents saving more than usual due to higher interest
rates; annual GVA growth for industries that are most and least sensitive to higher rates (a)
(b)
Sources: Bank of England/NMG survey, DMP Survey, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) The data are from NMG surveys between March 2023 and March 2025. The data show the percentage of
households in the NMG survey that reported that they had saved more than usual over the last 12 months and that
higher interest rates on savings had been one of the main reasons for this increase. Households that responded
‘prefer not to state’ have been excluded from the calculation.
(b) The latest data are for April 2025. The most and least interest rate-sensitive industries were identified from
responses to the DMP Survey, using firms’ estimates of how much higher interest rates had reduced their sales.
The most and least rate-sensitive industries are those in the upper and lower quartiles respectively of estimated
interest rate sensitivity.
But the impact of higher interest rates on demand via the cost of existing
borrowing continues to build.
Bank of England  
Page 29


The effective interest rate on the stock of UK mortgages is expected to rise a little
further over the next year. Most borrowers hold their mortgage on a fixed-rate basis
over a period of between two and five years. So, while the effective rate on the stock of
UK mortgages has risen from around 2% to 4% since early 2022, the long lags in
mortgage refinancing mean that the effective mortgage rate is expected to continue to
rise (Chart D). Meanwhile, effective deposit rates have been falling since mid-2024, as
reductions in Bank Rate have passed through to household saving rates. Overall, past
rises in interest rates are expected to weigh further on consumption via the cash-flow
channel over coming quarters.
While indicators of economic activity can be used to assess the extent to which past
rises in Bank Rate continue to weigh on demand, they are less informative as to
whether the current stance of monetary policy remains restrictive. Forward-looking
estimates of the real-rate gap measure the difference between the current and future
Chart D: The effective interest rate on the stock of mortgages is expected to
rise further over coming quarters
Effective interest rates on the stock of UK mortgages (a)
Sources: Bank of England, Financial Conduct Authority Product Sales Data (PSD) and Bank calculations.
(a) The data from March 2025 to June 2026 are quarterly projections consistent with the MPC’s August 2025
baseline forecast. The latest historical data are from the December 2024 PSD. The projections are informed by the
Bank’s quoted mortgage rate data and assume that fixed-rate mortgagors re-fix at a new rate, the average of
projected two and five-year fixed mortgage rates, once their incentive period ends. Variable-rate mortgagors are
assumed to remain on variable-rate contracts.
Measures of the current monetary policy stance suggest that the degree of
restrictiveness has fallen to some extent over the past 18 months.
Bank of England  
Page 30


expected real policy rate, r, and the equilibrium real interest rate, r*. The latter is the
time-varying real interest rate that, if the economy started from a position of no output
gap and inflation at target, would sustain output at potential and inflation at target (Box
C of the February 2024 Monetary Policy Report). A positive real-rate gap indicates
that the current monetary policy stance will weigh on demand, once lags in the
transmission process are accounted for, and is hence restrictive.
Bank staff monitor a range of indicators of the real-rate gap (Chart E). The degree of
policy restrictiveness implied by each of these measures is highly dependent on the
level of r* embodied within them. The equilibrium real interest rate cannot be observed
directly, and its definition varies between the approaches used. Estimates
encompassing a higher r* will, all else equal, signal a lower degree of restrictiveness.
Real-rate gap indicators are also sensitive to the measure of inflation expectations
used in their estimation. Nominal measures of the interest-rate gap, which do not
account for inflation expectations, can therefore provide a useful cross-check on the
degree of restrictiveness.
Bank of England  
Page 31


Chart E: Forward-looking measures of the real-rate gap suggest that the
degree of restrictiveness has fallen
Average real-rate gaps in February 2024 and August 2025 (a)
Sources: Bank of England, Bank of England/Ipsos Inflation Attitudes Survey, Bank of England Market Participants
Survey (MaPS), Bloomberg Finance L.P., Consensus Economics, Davis et al (2024), ONS, TradeWeb FTSE Gilt
Closing Data and Bank calculations.
(a) The February 2024 estimates for the macroeconomic models are for 2023 Q4. Corresponding estimates for the
macrofinancial model are for 2024 Q1, and the estimates for financial markets and the MaPS are for February 2024.
The August 2025 estimates for the macroeconomic models are for 2025 Q2. Corresponding estimates for the
macrofinancial model are for 2025 Q3, and the estimates for financial markets and the MaPS are for August 2025.
The macroeconomic models ranges are produced using estimates from two models. The first is a dynamic semi-
structural IS curve model that relates the current output gap to past and expected future output gaps and the real-
rate gap. It is estimated with data from 1988 Q3 to 2025 Q2. Average real-rate gaps over a three-year horizon are
attained from a model using the Kalman filter, with associated ranges inferred from a dynamic factor model. The
second set of macroeconomic model estimates are generated from one of the main models underlying the baseline
projections in this Report (Albuquerque et al (2025)). Estimates from this model are also average implied real-rate
gaps over a three-year horizon. The real policy rates used in both macroeconomic models are produced using the
same model that underlies most of the baseline projections in this Report. The macrofinancial model ranges are
estimated using the state-space model from Davis et al (2024), with a 95% confidence interval applied around the
central estimates of r*. The real policy rates used in the macrofinancial model ranges are ex-post real rates, as
described in Taylor (2025). The financial market ranges use estimates of the nominal neutral rate derived from
three term premia models: the benchmark models in Malik and Meldrum (2016), Vlieghe (2016) and Meldrum
and Roberts-Sklar (2015). These estimates are adjusted by average six-year to ten-year inflation expectations
from half-year Consensus surveys to obtain real neutral rate estimates. The real policy rates in the financial markets
ranges are calculated as the average instantaneous forward OIS curves over three-year horizons, deflated by
annual Consensus survey inflation expectations over this period. These inflation expectations are linearly
interpolated over the three-year horizon. The instantaneous forward OIS curves are estimated using the average
paths for interest rates in the 15 UK working days to 23 January 2024 and 29 July 2025, on which the baseline
projections for the February 2024 and August 2025 Monetary Policy Reports are conditioned, respectively. The
ranges for the MaPS show the 10th–90th percentile of perceptions of the average implied real-rate gaps over a
three-year horizon. The implied real-rate gaps are calculated as the difference between each MaPS respondent’s
weighted mean nominal Bank Rate expectation, adjusted by their expectations for CPI inflation over the same
period, relative to their perception of r*. The r* component is calculated from nominal equilibrium rate perceptions
Bank of England  
Page 32


Bank staff use macroeconomic models to estimate the degree of monetary policy
restrictiveness. These estimates are based on dynamic structural and semi-structural
models, which are underpinned by an inverse relationship between the output gap and
the real-rate gap described by the investment-saving (IS) curve (Box C of the
February 2024 Monetary Policy Report). These models estimate the current degree
of monetary policy restrictiveness based on the average real-rate gap over the next
three years. There is uncertainty around the results from these models, given that the
estimation of the output gap itself is uncertain.
Estimates from these macroeconomic models suggest that monetary policy remains
moderately restrictive (Chart E, aqua bar in right panel), but the degree of
restrictiveness has fallen relative to its peak in early 2024. Reductions in Bank Rate
have contributed towards a narrower real-rate gap, and hence lower restrictiveness,
over that period. Meanwhile, the estimated level of spare capacity over the forecast
period is currently smaller than was projected at the time of the February 2024
Monetary Policy Report, which has pushed up the implied level of r*. The rise in
inflation expectations over recent quarters (Section 2.5) has also contributed to the fall
in the estimated real-rate gap.
Bank staff also use data from financial markets and the MaPS to monitor investors’
perceptions of monetary policy restrictiveness (Box C of the February 2024 Monetary
Policy Report). In line with the result from macroeconomic models, MaPS-implied
estimates of the real-rate gap suggest that the restrictiveness of monetary policy has
fallen since February 2024 (Chart E, gold bars). The market-implied range of the real-
rate gap has widened over the same period (Chart E, purple bars). While both market
and MaPS-implied estimates of the nominal interest-rate gap remain positive,
estimates of the real-rate gap are now closer to zero or negative in some cases,
suggesting that market participants judge that the monetary policy stance may no
longer be restrictive.
There are caveats to these measures, however. Similar to other indicators, financial
market and MaPS-implied measures of the real-rate gap are highly dependent on the
measure of inflation expectations used. Moreover, financial market measures may
provide more of a signal about deviations of the real policy rate from the long-run real
equilibrium interest rate, R*, rather than the shorter-run concept of r* (Box C of the
February 2024 Monetary Policy Report). That is because they incorporate
from the MaPS, applying two alternative assumptions around the deflator: the 2% inflation target or three-year CPI
expectations from the MaPS. All measures of the real-rate gap presented in this chart show the implied degree of
monetary policy restrictiveness over a three-year horizon. But to the extent that monetary policy can impact
expectations of interest rates over longer horizons, changes to the monetary policy stance beyond the three-year
point are not captured within the estimates on this chart.
Bank of England  
Page 33


expectations about future rates over long horizons. Estimates of R* derived from
financial markets have risen by more than corresponding estimates from
macroeconomic models over recent years (Box A of the February 2025 Monetary
Policy Report).
The real-rate gap can also be estimated using macrofinancial models, which combine
higher-frequency information from asset prices with lower-frequency trends in growth
and inflation to derive estimates of r*. The real-rate gap is then calculated as the real
policy rate less this estimate of r*. Estimates of the real-rate gap obtained using the
macrofinancial model described in Davis et al (2024) suggest that the degree of
monetary policy restrictiveness has fallen slightly relative to early 2024 (Chart E,
orange bars). But monetary policy is estimated to remain restrictive based on this
measure. And macrofinancial estimates of the nominal interest-rate gap, which do not
adjust for inflation expectations, remain clearly positive.
Past rises in Bank Rate have contributed towards the disinflationary process by
weighing materially on demand. Given lags in transmission, those past rises in Bank
Rate are estimated still to be weighing on demand and will continue to do so over the
forecast period, such that they contribute towards the ongoing disinflationary process.
As the disinflationary process has continued and Bank Rate has been reduced,
forward-looking measures of restrictiveness based on the real-rate gap indicate that
the degree of restrictiveness has fallen.
Overall, while monetary policy continues to weigh on demand because of lags
in transmission, the degree of policy restrictiveness has fallen.
Bank of England  
Page 34


Box B: Reviewing the process of quantitative tightening
Since February 2022, the MPC has been reducing the stock of assets held in the Bank
of England’s Asset Purchase Facility (APF) for monetary policy purposes, a process
known as quantitative tightening (QT). In line with the commitment made by the MPC
in the minutes of its August 2022 meeting, this box sets out the MPC’s annual
assessment of QT over the past year.
Following the 2008 global financial crisis, Bank Rate was reduced to close to zero to
support economic activity and inflation. To further stimulate the economy when interest
rates were at this level, the MPC began a programme of asset purchases known as
QE (Chart A). QE works largely by reducing longer-term interest rates in the economy,
ultimately boosting demand (Busetto et al (2022)).
Further QE programmes were conducted after the EU referendum and during the
Covid pandemic. The size of the stock of assets held in the APF for monetary policy
purposes peaked at £895 billion at the turn of 2022.
The Bank’s balance sheet grew after the financial crisis and the pandemic, as
the MPC used quantitative easing (QE) to meet its 2% inflation target and to
support the economy.
Bank of England  
Page 35


In December 2021, the MPC started to increase Bank Rate in order to return CPI
inflation sustainably to the 2% target. In 2022, once Bank Rate had been raised to a
level that provided scope to reduce it as may be required, the Bank started to unwind
its holdings of assets previously purchased as part of QE, a process known as QT.
From February 2022, the Bank stopped reinvesting maturing assets in the APF. Sales
of gilts commenced in November 2022.
Reducing the size of the APF has the benefit of reducing the risk of a ratchet upwards
in the size of the Bank’s balance sheet as a consequence of repeated asset purchases
over time, were the economy to return to needing support if Bank Rate were to be at
the effective lower bound. QT therefore increases the headroom and flexibility
available to the Bank to use its balance sheet in the future if needed.
QT has comprised a mix of sales of gilts, maturing gilts and sales of corporate bonds.
The size of each of these has varied from year to year (Chart B). Between October
2022 and September 2023, £20 billion of corporate bonds were sold. Gilt maturities
have varied between £35 billion and £87 billion per year, reflecting the maturity profile
Chart A: The Bank’s APF holdings grew markedly through QE but have shrunk
since 2022
Stock of gilts held for monetary policy purposes in the APF (a)
(a) Gilt value is measured as the ‘initial purchase proceeds’ value.
Since 2022, the stock of purchased assets has been reduced and will reach
£558 billion by September 2025.
Bank of England  
Page 36


of assets held by the APF. The balance of QT in 2024–25 was particularly skewed to
maturities rather than sales, and the quantity of maturities will fall back in coming
years. The size of the APF will fall to £558 billion by September 2025.
The MPC has previously set out key principles under which QT should be conducted.
First, the MPC has used Bank Rate as its active policy tool when adjusting the stance
of monetary policy.
Second, sales have been conducted so as not to disrupt the functioning of financial
markets, and only in appropriate market conditions.
Third, to help achieve that, sales have been conducted in a relatively gradual and
predictable manner over a period of time.
Chart B: The QT process has reflected a mix of sales and maturing assets
Initial purchase proceeds value of APF maturities and sales and maturities in future gilt
stock reduction periods (a)
(a) Each year shows maturities in the period between October and September of the following year (ie a yearly QT
review cycle). For October 2022–September 2023 to October 2024–September 2025 these bars show the target gilt
stock reduction voted for by the MPC, including both maturities and active sales, as well as sales of assets
purchased under the Corporate Bond Purchase Scheme. In periods from October 2025–September 2026 onwards
only the path of expected maturities is shown, as the Committee is yet to vote on the target gilt stock reduction for
these periods.
The MPC’s QT process has been guided by three key principles…
…which have helped to reduce the impact of QT on financial conditions.
Bank of England  
Page 37


The main way through which QT affects financial conditions is through the so-called
portfolio rebalancing channel. This is because market demand for assets is not
perfectly elastic, so the price of gilts, and other similar maturity assets, falls as the
available supply increases. QT increases the supply of gilts to the market relative to a
counterfactual where these gilts remain in the APF, although QT represents a relatively
low share of the overall gilt market. Lower longer-duration asset prices mean long-term
rates are higher than they would otherwise be. Long-term rates are affected by a wide
range of factors, of which QT is only one, and movements in these rates have tended
to be dominated by global factors over the past year.
The principles under which QT has been conducted help to limit financial market
impacts outside this direct channel. Conceptually, QT could also affect gilt rates by
changing market expectations for the future path of Bank Rate. This would be the case
if market participants believed news about QT contained information about the future
stance of monetary policy. As the MPC has been using Bank Rate as the active tool of
monetary policy, this should not be the case. And market intelligence suggests that
market participants’ Bank Rate expectations have not been affected by QT
announcements. QT could, in principle, also have effects on gilt market liquidity and
thus affect liquidity risk premia. However, as sales have been gradual, predictable and
only conducted in appropriate market conditions, there has been no marked effect on
market liquidity.
Bank staff have updated their analysis of the effects of QT on gilt yields and the wider
macroeconomy. While difficult to measure precisely, Bank staff continue to judge that
the impact of QT on gilt yields has been modest.
Longer-term gilt rates are the sum of short-term rate expectations and a term premium,
the additional interest return that investors require to hold long-term assets compared
with purchasing equivalent short-term assets in sequence over the life of the long-term
bond. Given that QT has been conducted in a way that does not communicate any
changes to future Bank Rate, any impact of QT on gilt rates should come through
higher term premia.
Between QT commencing in February 2022 and the end of June 2025, 10-year gilt
rates rose by 325 basis points. Term structure model estimates indicate that around
150 basis points of this increase was driven by term premia, with the remaining rise
accounted for by higher expected rates. Higher term premia have been driven by a
Estimates of the impact of QT on term premia suggest a modest increase in
long-term interest rates of between 15–25 basis points since QT started.
Bank of England  
Page 38


wide range of factors including a structural reduction in future domestic demand for
long-term government debt, for example due to a decline in demand from defined
benefit pension schemes.
Since the 2024 QT review, government bond yields have risen across countries,
particularly long-term rates. Over the past year, 10-year gilt yields have risen by
around 55 basis points and 30-year gilt yields have risen by around 95 basis points in
the UK. Similar, albeit somewhat smaller, moves have been seen across countries. For
example, in the US 10-year yields rose a little over 20 basis points and 30-year yields
rose 60 basis points. In Japan, 10-year and 30-year yields rose by around 50 basis
points and 100 basis points respectively. And in the euro area, 10-year and 30-year
yields have risen by around 25 basis points and 60 basis points respectively.
Market intelligence and term structure models point to higher term premia having more
than accounted for higher yields in the UK and internationally, with models estimating
that the total term premium for 10-year gilts over the last year has increased by around
70 basis points in the UK. Isolating the specific effect of QT is not simple because term
premia are influenced by a wide range of domestic and international factors, and these
factors change over time. One way to estimate the specific effect is to look at
movements in term premia in short periods directly around announcements of QT
policies, such as when the amount of QT planned for the forthcoming year is
announced, or around the time of QT auctions, where bonds are sold to the market.
This helps to identify the impact of QT because gilt market pricing tends to adjust
quickly in response to market news, and the short window helps to limit the influence
of other factors on the estimates.
It is challenging to identify the causal impact of QT policy announcements because
there have been relatively few of them and so the sample size is limited. And, as QT is
being operated in a predictable manner, QT announcements and auctions should
contain little news for the market.
Notwithstanding the challenges in estimating these impacts, new analysis by Bank
staff points to an estimated total increase in 10-year gilt rates from cumulative QT to
date of 15–25 basis points. This estimate is based on modelling the change in the 10-
year gilt rate term premium on the day of QT policy announcements, combined with
the effects on the day of QT auctions. Given the overall increase in term premium for
10-year gilt yields, this suggests QT has driven between a tenth and a fifth of that total.
Bank staff’s most recent estimate of the impact of QT on term premia is slightly higher
than in the 2024 QT review (Box A of the August 2024 Report), when the estimated
range was 10–20 basis points. This is likely to reflect a small impact on term premia
Bank of England  
Page 39


from the additional QT since September 2024. The estimated rise in term premia due
to this additional QT is much smaller than the overall rise in term premia over this
period.
There is uncertainty over these estimates of the impact of QT. One drawback of event
study estimates is that they cannot identify effects of QT that fall outside of the short
window used for the estimation. For example, Bank staff analysis of past auction sales
suggests that rate impacts have tended to be short lived and reverse over subsequent
days and so the component of the estimates that reflects impacts on auction days
could be overstated. In contrast, were the impact of QT to only build up slowly over
time, or only operate with a lag after policy announcements or auctions, the total
impact of QT on gilt rates could be underestimated.
Long-term gilt yields, such as those for 30-year gilts, have risen by more than 10-year
gilt yields. Bank staff analysis suggests that the larger increase in longer-term rates
has been driven primarily by global factors, rather than being attributable to QT.
Furthermore, analysis of changes in term premia for 30-year gilts, based on the same
model used for the estimated range above, suggests that QT impacts have been
similar to those for 10-year gilts. Lower market liquidity for these assets means that the
model-based estimates are more uncertain for this maturity.
Besides its impact on long-term interest rates through the portfolio rebalancing
channel, staff analysis and external research suggests that QT could affect bank
lending, especially as central bank reserves become less abundant in the system
(Altavilla et al (2024)). The process of QT reduces reserves in the banking system
which, among other purposes, are used by banks to insure against liquidity risk. As
reserves are risk-free and the most liquid form of asset, fewer available reserves could
weigh on bank lending growth. The Bank is currently transitioning to a repo-led
demand-driven framework for supplying reserves, which will ensure that banks can
meet their demand for reserves through use of the Bank's repo facilities (Bank of
England (2024)). This framework should mitigate risks to bank lending from QT
through this channel.
There is little evidence of a material impact of QT auctions on broader market
conditions. For example, the average range over which gilt rates vary on days with QT
auctions is less than one basis point higher than the average range observed on days
without QT auctions. Were auctions to affect market liquidity negatively, we would
expect to see larger variation in rates at those times. The small impact on market
liquidity will partly reflect the fact that market participants are able to adjust for the
effects of QT auctions in advance, since they are announced well ahead of time. In line
QT auctions have had little impact on market functioning.
Bank of England  
Page 40


with the principle that QT should be conducted in appropriate market conditions, in
April 2025 the Bank amended the schedule of gilt sales by delaying sales of long
maturity bonds following a period of international market volatility.
External research on the impact of QT programmes is broadly consistent with Bank
staff’s analysis. For example, Du et al (2024) find that QT programmes in various
countries have had limited impact on government bond yields, market functioning and
liquidity. External estimates of the impact of QT rely heavily on event study estimates.
That means they have similar limitations to the Bank staff analysis outlined above. This
is particularly important for the UK given the gradual and predictable approach taken
for QT (Lu and Valcarcel (2024), D’Amico and Seida (2024)).
More generally, differences in the implementation of QT between the UK and other
jurisdictions make it difficult to compare estimates of the impact of QT internationally.
For instance, the Federal Reserve has indicated that shrinking its balance sheet
through QT is an active monetary policy tool (December 2021 FOMC minutes), in
contrast to the MPC’s principles outlined above.
The small rise in market interest rates driven by QT will have a slight contractionary
effect on GDP and will slightly reduce inflation. There are large uncertainties around
these estimates, but Bank staff analysis based on the UK's experience of QE suggests
that the impact of a 10 basis point increase in yields would be associated with a
negative impact on GDP and inflation of less than 0.2% and 0.1 percentage points
respectively. To the extent that asset prices at the time of the Committee's policy
assessments incorporate the impacts of announced and expected APF reductions, the
MPC takes account of these impacts when taking its decisions on Bank Rate. The
MPC will adjust Bank Rate such that overall financial conditions are appropriate to
bring inflation back to the 2% target. It retains the ability to set the monetary stance to
meet the 2% inflation target at all times.
Global economic policy uncertainty, high issuance of government bonds across
countries and structural changes within the domestic bond market which have reduced
demand for long-term government debt, have all pushed up on bond term premia.
External estimates of the impact of QT on rates are broadly consistent with
Bank staff’s analysis, but comparing with estimates for other countries is
difficult due to differences in the implementation of QT programmes.
When the MPC sets Bank Rate, it takes account of financial market conditions
that reflect the effects of announced and expected APF reductions.
The effect of QT may vary over time and estimates of its impact are uncertain.
Bank of England  
Page 41


These same shifts in the gilt market could pose a risk that QT has a greater impact on
market functioning than previously. In an environment with lower demand for long-term
assets, for example, QT could have a larger impact on market liquidity.
Measures of gilt market functioning suggest that the market has generally continued to
function in an orderly manner. However, reflecting changes in the profile of underlying
demand for gilts and long-term cost and risk factors, the Debt Management Office
(DMO) amended its 2025–26 financing remit by reducing sales of long-term bonds and
increasing short-term financing. The DMO also increased the proportion of issuance
for which an issuance method has yet to be decided, in order to provide additional
flexibility to respond to evolving demand and market conditions during the financial
year.
The MPC will continue to monitor the impact of QT. The analysis summarised in this
box will support the MPC’s decision over the appropriate pace of gilt stock reduction
over the year ahead.
At its September meeting the MPC will vote on the target for the reduction in the stock
of UK government bonds held for monetary policy purposes over the 12-month period
from October 2025 to September 2026. Bank Rate remains the MPC’s active tool of
monetary policy and will be set to meet the 2% inflation target sustainably in the
medium term.
Bank of England  
Page 42


Box C: Monetary policy since the May 2025 Report
At its meeting ending on 18 June 2025, the MPC voted by a majority of 6–3 to maintain
Bank Rate at 4.25%. Three members preferred to reduce Bank Rate by 0.25
percentage points, to 4%.
There had been substantial disinflation over the past two years, as previous external
shocks had receded, and as the restrictive stance of monetary policy had curbed
second-round effects and stabilised longer-term inflation expectations. This had
allowed the MPC to withdraw gradually some degree of policy restraint, while
maintaining Bank Rate in restrictive territory so as to continue to squeeze out existing
or emerging persistent inflationary pressures.
Underlying UK GDP growth appeared to have remained weak and the labour market
had continued to loosen, leading to clearer signs that a margin of slack had opened up
over time. Measures of pay growth had continued to moderate and, as in May, the
Committee expected a significant slowing over the rest of the year. The Committee
remained vigilant about the extent to which easing pay pressures would feed through
to consumer price inflation.
Twelve-month CPI inflation had increased to 3.4% in May from 2.6% in March, in line
with expectations in the May Monetary Policy Report. The rise had been largely due to
a range of regulated prices and previous increases in energy prices. Consumer price
inflation was expected to remain broadly at current rates throughout the remainder of
the year before falling back towards target next year.
Furthermore, global uncertainty remained elevated. Energy prices had risen owing to
an escalation of the conflict in the Middle East. The Committee would remain sensitive
to heightened unpredictability in the economic and geopolitical environment, and would
continue to update its assessment of risks to the economy.
Bank of England  
Page 43


2: Current economic conditions
CPI inflation was 3.6% in June, 0.2 percentage points higher than expected in the May
Report. Mainly reflecting unexpected strength in food prices, CPI inflation is now
projected to peak at 4.0% in September before falling back to 3.6% by the end of the
year.
Services consumer price inflation remains elevated. While underlying disinflation in
services prices seems on balance to be continuing, any progress is being masked
temporarily by upward pressure from administered prices and the impact on some
prices of the increase in employer NICs. Indicators of households’ inflation
expectations remain elevated, while inflation expectations of firms have been more
stable.
Pay growth continues to ease from elevated rates and is projected to slow to around
3¾% by the end of this year from around 5% currently.
Developments in the labour market are consistent with a continued gradual loosening.
Underlying employment growth has been around zero in recent months and the
degree of slack in the labour market appears to have widened. Spare capacity within
firms has also increased.
Underlying momentum in UK GDP has been subdued but is expected to pick up a little
in the near term. The household saving ratio remains elevated relative to its pre-Covid
pandemic average.
Developments in trade policy in the US and elsewhere continue to be a key influence
on global GDP growth. The future constellation of policies remains difficult to predict,
but US tariffs are currently expected to be lower on average than was assumed at the
time of the May Report.
Sterling had appreciated slightly in the period leading up the August Report, compared
with three months earlier. Over the same period, risky asset prices had risen and the
market-implied paths for policy rates in the UK, US and euro area had been little
changed.
Bank of England  
Page 44


Chart 2.1: In the MPC’s latest projections, underlying GDP growth picks up slightly,
the unemployment rate edges higher and CPI inflation rises a little further in 2025 Q3
Near-term projections (a)
Sources: BCC, CBI, Lloyds Business Barometer, ONS, S&P Global and Bank calculations.
Bank of England  
Page 45


2.1: Global economy and financial markets
Since March, the US Government has announced a series of tariff policy changes for various
countries and products.
The baseline projections in this Report are conditioned on the tariff rates implemented as of
29 July, which for the US means an estimated effective tariff rate of around 14%. This is down
from the 23% estimate based on trade policies that had been implemented at the time of the
May Report, but up from the 2% estimate prior to the policy changes. Tariff rates fell after the
May Report as there was a de-escalation of tensions between some countries, particularly the
US and China, and trade agreements between others, initially the US and the UK. After that
agreement, the estimated effective US tariff rate on the UK fell from 11% estimated at the time
of the May Report to 8%–9% now.
There has been a range of announced policy changes that had not been implemented as of
29 July and so were not included in the baseline projections. These include the agreement
between the US and EU announced on 27 July. And on 1 August, the US administration
announced increases in tariffs on a number of countries, excluding the UK, due to take effect
on 7 August. Based on these recent policy announcements, the expected future US effective
tariff rate is likely to rise from the level implied by tariffs implemented as of 29 July to around
17%, though remain below the rate at the time of the May Report. Although measures of trade
policy uncertainty have fallen back, there remains uncertainty over future trade policies across
countries. Box D discusses the sensitivity of the economic outlook to a higher level of global
tariffs and to different assumptions around the impact of higher tariffs.
Changes in global trade policy have driven most of the dynamics in global GDP so far this
year. Four-quarter UK-weighted global GDP growth fell from 2.2% in 2024 Q4 to 2.1% in 2025
Q1 (Chart 2.2), owing primarily to a 0.1% contraction in US GDP in Q1. Higher frequency
trade data suggest that there was greater than anticipated front-loading of imports ahead of
US tariff announcements in April (Box C of the May 2025 Monetary Policy Report).
(a) The lighter diamonds show Bank staff’s projections at the time of the May Report. The darker diamonds show Bank staff’s
current projections. The azure diamonds in the top panel are Bank staff’s estimates of underlying quarterly GDP growth.
Underlying GDP data from 2023 Q3 to 2025 Q1 show in-sample fitted values of a business survey indicator model estimated
by Bank staff, and data for 2025 Q2 and 2025 Q3 show out-of-sample projections. The projections for headline GDP growth
and the unemployment rate are quarterly and show 2025 Q2 and 2025 Q3 (May projections show 2025 Q1 to 2025 Q3). The
projections for CPI inflation are monthly and show July to December 2025 (May projections show April to September 2025).
The GDP growth and unemployment rate projections for 2025 Q2 are based on official data to May 2025, while the CPI
inflation figures over the same quarter are outturns. Although LFS unemployment data have been reinstated by the ONS,
they are badged as official statistics in development and the LFS continues to suffer from low response rates, which can
introduce volatility and potentially non-response bias (Box D of the May 2024 Monetary Policy Report).
Trade policy announcements in the US and elsewhere are affecting global GDP
growth.
Bank of England  
Page 46


The advance estimate of quarterly growth in US GDP picked up to 0.7% in 2025 Q2, as net
trade partially recovered from this front-loading effect, with monthly US goods imports falling
back by almost $70 billion in April. Growth in final private domestic demand, which abstracts
from some of the volatility from trade policy, slowed in Q2, growing by 0.3%, down from 0.5%
in Q1.
Euro-area GDP grew by 0.1% in 2025 Q2, lower than the projection in the May Report. This
was driven by an unwinding of a greater-than-expected front-loading of exports in 2025 Q1.
Four-quarter UK-weighted global GDP growth is projected to be 1.6% in 2025 Q3 and 1.4% in
2025 Q4. While this represents a slowing in growth, the projection for 2025 Q3 and Q4 is 0.3
and 0.4 percentage points respectively above the projection at the time of the May Report.
A range of factors, including US trade and fiscal policy and financial conditions in the euro
area, account for the upward revision to the near-term global GDP projection. Trade barriers
are lower than assumed in the May Report projections. And a recent US bill has introduced a
range of tax cuts, which are only partially offset by spending cuts and smaller tax increases.
More accommodative financial conditions in the euro area are also expected to raise global
growth in the near term. Continued strength in Chinese exports and strong activity in China,
supported by domestic policies such as the consumer trade-in programme, are expected to
increase global growth in the near term.
Lower trade barriers than at the time of the May Report, US fiscal stimulus and more
accommodative financial conditions in some countries are expected to boost UK-
weighted global GDP growth in 2025 H2 compared with the baseline projection in the
May Report.
Bank of England  
Page 47


Military action between Iran and Israel (later joined by the US) in June, led to a rise in spot oil
prices, peaking at a little under $80 a barrel, up from a little over $60 at the time of the May
Report. Since then, tensions have eased, and spot oil prices have fallen back and averaged a
little under $70 a barrel over the 15 working days to 29 July. Oil prices are currently below
levels seen at the start of the year reflecting a combination of increased supply from OPEC
countries and the expectation of weaker global demand. Liquified natural gas prices similarly
increased in June but subsequently fell back. Oil and gas prices have ended the period since
May slightly higher than their levels at the time of the previous Report.
Chart 2.2: Global GDP growth is projected to remain below historical norms
Four-quarter UK-weighted global GDP growth with contributions by region (a)
Sources: LSEG Workspace and Bank calculations.
(a) Refer to footnote (c) of Table 1.D for definition. The figures for 2025 Q2 to 2025 Q4 are Bank staff projections. These
projections do not include the advance estimate of US GDP in 2025 Q2 or the preliminary flash estimate of euro-area GDP
for the same quarter, as the data were published after the cut-off for incorporation into the forecast. The pink diamonds are
the corresponding projections from the May Report.
Despite rises in oil and gas prices following further conflict in the Middle East,
current energy prices are now closer to their levels ahead of the May Report.
The easing in trade restrictions has fed through to stronger global commodity prices
and broader financial market conditions.
Bank of England  
Page 48


Reflecting the partial easing in global trade tensions, particularly between the US and China,
global non-oil export prices are now expected to be around 1% higher over the forecast period
(Section 1). That is primarily because lower tariff rates are expected to raise demand for
global exports, particularly as lower tariffs encourage more exports from China to the US,
pushing up their prices. Higher global prices are expected to pass through to somewhat
higher UK import prices and eventually to consumer goods prices.
Measures of market volatility, including the VIX and MOVE, rose ahead of the May Report,
driven by global trade policy announcements in April. But they have since fallen back to their
average levels since 2002 (Chart 1.1 of the July 2025 Financial Stability Report). Specific
measures of trade policy uncertainty remain elevated but have fallen back markedly from their
peaks.
Equity markets have strengthened. The US S&P 500 index has risen by just under 20% since
the period leading up to the May Report and the UK FTSE 100 index has also risen over this
period, by around 10%. European equities prices have also risen. These rises more than
reverse the large falls seen in March and April following the changes in US economic policy.
Both the US and UK indices are close to all-time highs.
Corporate bond spreads have tightened in the UK and other countries and are now tighter
than their average between 1998 and 2025 across asset classes, reflecting resilient corporate
balance sheets (July 2025 Financial Stability Report).
Following the May Report, 10-year gilt yields in the UK are little changed, up by 5 basis points
in the 15 working day average to 29 July compared with the 15 working day average to 29
April. There has been a more persistent change in very long-term yields over this period. The
spread between 30-year and 10-year government bond yields has risen across countries
since January, by around 35 basis points in the UK, 40 basis points in the US and over 50
basis points in Japan. Market intelligence suggests that the key drivers of these moves have
been concerns over the long-term sustainability of fiscal policy across advanced economies
and declining structural demand for long maturity bonds. Between the 29 July and 5 August,
government bond yields fell back a little, driven partly by market reaction to weak US labour
market data.
The European Central Bank (ECB) Governing Council maintained its deposit facility rate at
2% at its July meeting. Meanwhile, the Federal Reserve’s Federal Open Market Committee
maintained the target range for the federal funds rate at 4.25%–4.5% at its July meeting.
The market-implied paths for future policy rates have changed relatively little since
the May Report although they have varied more in the near-term for the US.
Bank of England  
Page 49


After the US announcement of higher tariffs in April, the market-implied paths for future policy
rates in advanced economies fell, offsetting some of the expected drag to UK growth and
inflation from the greater restrictions on trade. Despite the delay or reduction in US tariff rates
after that, and the recovery in risky asset prices, the market-implied paths for future policy
rates have changed little since then.
The market-implied path for the UK policy rate is, on average, little changed since the period
leading up to the May Report over the next three years. Based on the 15 working day average
to 29 July 2025, the market-implied path for Bank Rate fell to around 3.5% by 2026 Q2,
before subsequently rising slightly to 3.7% by 2028 Q2 (Chart 2.3). The market-implied path
of future ECB policy rates over the same period had risen by a little under 10 basis points on
average over the next three years.
The market-implied path for US policy rates, based on the 15 working day average to 29 July,
was around 45 basis points higher over the remainder of 2025 than the 15 working day
average to 29 April. This, in part, reflected market expectations that the Federal Reserve
would keep the federal funds rate higher in the near term to counteract the expected increase
in inflationary pressures from fiscal stimulus, trade restrictions and a deprecation in the dollar.
However, as of 5 August, the market-implied path for US policy rates had fallen materially
from the 15 working day average to 29 July, in part driven by reaction to weak US labour
market data.
Bank of England  
Page 50


Sterling had appreciated slightly since the period leading up to the May Report, with the
average sterling exchange rate index over the 15 working days to 29 July being 0.3% higher
than the 15 working days up to 29 April (Chart 2.4). The pound weakened by 1% over this
period against the euro, but strengthened by around 2% against the dollar. As of 5 August,
sterling had depreciated slightly compared to the 15 working day average to 29 July, to a little
below the levels leading up to the May Report.
Chart 2.3: The market-implied paths for policy rates have changed relatively little
since the May Report, although near-term US rate expectations have risen somewhat
Policy rates and instantaneous forward curves for the UK, US and euro area (a)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and Bank calculations.
(a) All data are as of 29 July 2025. The May 2025 curves are estimated based on the 15 UK working days to 29 April 2025.
The August 2025 curves are estimated using the 15 UK working days to 29 July 2025. The federal funds rate is the upper
bound of the announced target range. The market-implied path for US policy rates is the expected effective federal funds
rate. The ECB deposit rate is based on the date from which changes in policy rates are effective. The final data points are
forward rates for September 2028.
Sterling had appreciated very slightly in the run-up to the August Report, compared
with three months earlier.
Bank of England  
Page 51


2.2: Domestic credit conditions
UK banks’ wholesale funding costs have fallen back since the May Report, having risen in
April in response to growing concerns around the impact of higher tariffs on global economic
activity (Section 2.2 of the May 2025 Monetary Policy Report).
The primary driver of changes in household and corporate interest rates over recent months
has continued to be movements in their relevant reference rates. The average effective
interest rate on new corporate lending, for which Bank Rate is the main reference rate, has
continued to evolve broadly in line with the experience from previous Bank Rate cycles, and is
now 125 basis points lower than in May 2024 (Chart 2.5, right panel).
The pass-through of reductions in Bank Rate to instant-access household deposit rates has
continued to be low over recent months. The average quoted instant-access deposit rate is
currently around 45 basis points lower than in July 2024, much less than the reduction in
Bank Rate over this period. That low degree of pass-through is partly a consequence of low
pass-through during the most recent Bank Rate tightening cycle, along with increasingly
strong competition for deposits between banks. Meanwhile, quoted interest rates on
Chart 2.4: The appreciation in sterling since early 2025 has been driven in part by
weakness in the US dollar
Sterling exchange rates (a)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., LSEG Workspace and Bank calculations.
(a) Data are indexed to the average level in January 2025 for each series. Final data are to 29 July.
Spreads on wholesale bank debt have fallen back from their levels in April.
Many quoted household interest rates have fallen over recent months, along with
effective rates on new corporate lending.
Bank of England  
Page 52


representative credit card lending to households tend to respond to changes in Bank Rate
very slowly and have remained around the same level since the start of the current cutting
cycle.
Medium-term overnight indexed swap (OIS) rates are the key reference rates for interest rates
on fixed-rate mortgages, fixed-rate savings bonds, and personal loans. Two and five-year spot
OIS rates are little changed overall since the May Report. But despite some volatility, interest
rates have generally fallen across relevant household products over this period, reflecting the
lagged pass-through of previous falls in OIS rates (Chart 2.5, left panel). The average quoted
rates on two-year fixed-rate mortgages with loan to value (LTV) ratios of 75% and 90% have
fallen by around 15 basis points and 35 basis points, respectively, since April 2025. Quoted
rates on fixed-rate savings bonds and personal loans have also fallen broadly as expected.
Chart 2.5: Pass-through of changes in reference rates has continued to operate
broadly as expected over recent months
Household and corporate interest rates and their corresponding reference rates (a)
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg Finance L.P. and Bank calculations.
(a) Household loan and deposit rates are based on average quoted rates and business loan rates are based on average
effective rates on new lending. The Bank’s quoted rates series are weighted monthly average rates advertised by all UK
banks and building societies with products meeting the specific criteria. Introduction of new Quoted Rates data provides
more information. The 75% and 90% LTV mortgage rates are for two-year fixed-rate products. The reference rate for these,
and for personal loans and fixed-rate savings bonds, is the two-year OIS rate. The two-year OIS rate shows monthly
averages, while Bank Rate shows month-end numbers. The provisional July 2025 data are shown in diamonds. For quoted
rate series and the two-year OIS rate, these are based on average values to 29 July 2025. The provisional data point for
Bank Rate is based on the rate as of 29 July 2025. The final business loan rate data are for June 2025.
Bank of England  
Page 53


Household net secured lending growth was weak over 2023, largely reflecting the impact of
restrictive monetary policy on demand for borrowing. But there has been a gradual pick-up
since 2024 as monetary policy has become less restrictive (Box A and Chart 2.6, left panel).
More recently, net secured lending flows have been volatile, largely due to changes in Stamp
Duty Land Tax (SDLT). Net secured lending to households recovered in May and June,
following the weakest monthly flow since January 2024 in April. That recent volatility is
consistent with households having brought forward house purchases ahead of the rise in
SDLT in April.
Recent developments in mortgage regulation are judged to be supporting mortgage
approvals, which should feed through to higher lending volumes over the coming months.
Lenders have already started to use lower stress test rates in borrower affordability tests
following the March statement from the Financial Conduct Authority (FCA) on its mortgage
rules (July 2025 Financial Stability Report). This is expected to lead to a larger share of
lending at a loan to income (LTI) ratio of greater than or equal to 4.5 over coming quarters.
Meanwhile, the FPC recommended the Prudential Regulation Authority and the FCA amend
implementation of its LTI flow limit to allow individual lenders to increase their share of lending
at high LTIs, while aiming to ensure the aggregate flow remained consistent with the 15% limit
(July 2025 Financial Policy Committee Record). This is also likely to increase the
availability of credit for some households over coming quarters.
Real unsecured credit volumes have been relatively stable since the Covid pandemic, with the
flows in June in line with their average level over the previous six months (Chart 2.6, right
panel).
Net lending to non-financial private corporations has risen over recent months. That follows
weakness between 2023 and mid-2024, driven by the effects of higher interest rates on the
demand for credit and businesses repaying pandemic-era loans (Box D of the May 2025
Monetary Policy Report). Intelligence from the Bank’s Agents suggests that credit demand
from corporates remains weak in an absolute sense, but rising enquiries suggest some
recovery over 2025 H2 (Box F). That is consistent with responses to the 2025 Q2 Credit
Conditions Survey, which suggest that businesses’ demand for credit is expected to pick up
slightly for both small and large businesses over 2025 Q3.
The annual growth rate in aggregate broad money picked up a little to 4.1% in June, while the
ratio of aggregate broad money to nominal GDP remains below its pre-pandemic trend (Box D
of the May 2025 Monetary Policy Report).
Bank lending to households and corporates has generally picked up over recent
quarters but there has been some volatility in recent data. Aggregate broad money
growth has been relatively stable.
Bank of England  
Page 54


2.3: Domestic activity
Having flatlined in 2024 H2, GDP growth picked up sharply at the start of the year, to 0.7% in
2025 Q1, 0.1 percentage points stronger than expected in the May Report. But Bank staff
judge that this recent strength largely reflects temporary factors that provide little signal for
underlying momentum in GDP. Some of the strength in headline GDP was driven by growth in
net trade, largely reflecting higher goods exports to the US as firms sought to front-load
exports ahead of higher expected tariffs in 2025 Q2. Consistent with this, there was strength
in the activity of tariff-sensitive industries, such as manufacturing and wholesale services.
There was also evidence of front-loading in activity ahead of higher domestic taxation. Motor
trades output rose notably ahead of higher vehicle excise duty in April and there was strength
in housing sensitive sectors ahead of the April rise in Stamp Duty Land Tax (Section 2.2).
The collective steer from business surveys suggests that underlying momentum in GDP
picked up from 0% in 2025 Q1 to 0.1% in 2025 Q2 (Chart 2.7). The most recent monthly
output data have been weak, falling by 0.3% in April and 0.1% in May, unwinding some of the
Chart 2.6: Flows of net secured lending to households have been volatile over recent
months, while net consumer credit volumes have been more stable
Real flows of net secured and net unsecured lending to households (a)
Sources: Bank of England, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) All flows are deflated with the CPI index and are shown in June 2025 prices. The latest data are to June 2025.
Temporary factors pushed up headline GDP growth at the turn of the year.
Underlying GDP growth is expected to pick up a little in the near term.
Bank of England  
Page 55


strength in Q1 and leaving the level of GDP unchanged since February. Based on the
available monthly GDP data and survey indicators, headline GDP is expected to have grown
by 0.1% in Q2.
Underlying GDP growth is expected to pick up a little further to 0.2% in 2025 Q3. As of July,
the final S&P Global composite UK PMI future output index had risen by over one standard
deviation from its April trough, while the output index had also risen but by less. Both indices
remain a little below their pre-pandemic averages. Headline GDP is expected to grow by
0.3%, a little stronger than growth in underlying GDP. That in part reflects a modest expected
recovery in export volumes as part of the recently announced UK-US Economic Prosperity
Deal, resulting in reduced automotive and aerospace tariffs for the UK.
Chart 2.7: Underlying GDP growth is expected to pick up slightly
Three-month on three-month growth in GDP and quarterly GDP growth implied by business
surveys (a)
Sources: Bank of England Agents, BCC, CBI, Lloyds Business Barometer, ONS, S&P Global and Bank calculations.
(a) The final data point for three-month on three-month GDP growth is for the three months to May 2025. The aqua diamonds
show Bank staff projections for headline GDP. The survey indicator model is based on a Staggered Combination MIDAS
approach (Moreira (2025)). The orange diamonds to 2025 Q1 show in-sample fitted values of the survey indicator model and
diamonds for 2025 Q2 and Q3 show out of sample projections.
Firms have reported that a mixture of global and domestic factors has weighed on
output.
Bank of England  
Page 56


Indicators of output and export orders have been below their historical averages recently
(Chart 2.8), owing to a mixture of global and domestic factors. On the domestic side, firms
have pointed to higher employer NICs, and uncertainty about its impact, as having weighed
on growth. In the 2025 Q2 BCC Quarterly Economic Survey, 56% of firms reported that taxes
were a greater concern than three months ago. On the global side, some firms reported that
tariff announcements and the associated weakness in global demand were contributing to
weakness in output growth. In the June S&P Global UK Manufacturing PMI survey,
manufacturers reported that tariff uncertainty had resulted in lower export orders amid reports
of weak global demand. And according to intelligence from the Bank’s Agents, uncertainty
about the global and domestic outlook remains elevated, although global uncertainty has
slightly declined since the May Report. Elevated uncertainty is contributing to low business
confidence and subdued investment intentions.
The impact of these global and domestic factors appears to have waned somewhat in recent
months, however. Consistent with that, the Composite S&P Global UK output and new export
indices have risen from their April troughs (Chart 2.8).
Chart 2.8: Survey measures of output and export growth have picked up somewhat
from recent lows
Survey indicators of UK output and export growth (a)
Sources: S&P Global and Bank calculations.
(a) A reading of above 50 in the S&P Global PMI index indicates an increase on the previous month while a reading below 50
indicates a fall. The dashed lines represent the series averages, calculated from January 1998 to December 2019 for the
composite output series and September 2014 to December 2019 for the new export orders series. The latest data are flash
estimates for July 2025.
Bank of England  
Page 57


UK goods exports have fallen sharply in recent months. While these data can be volatile and
prone to large revisions, Bank staff judge that the falls largely reflect an unwind of previous
front-loading ahead of rises in global tariffs. Since March, the value of goods exports to non-
EU countries has fallen by nearly 12%, which mostly reflects a 28% fall in exports to the US.
These declines were predominantly driven by goods that were likely to be affected by
particularly high tariffs, namely cars and non-ferrous metals, though exports of other goods
were also affected (Chart 2.9). Bank staff judge that there is some additional weakness in UK
export growth beyond the effects of front-loading, however. That is particularly the case for car
exports, the value of which to the US had fallen by around 24% on an annual basis in May.
The Society of Motor Manufacturers and Traders reported that UK vehicle production had
fallen for five consecutive months in May, in part due to the impact of US tariffs, though it had
picked up a touch in June.
Higher global tariffs weighed on UK export growth in Q2, largely due to the unwind of
front-loading.
Chart 2.9: UK goods exports to the US have fallen sharply since March
Contributions to percentage change in nominal UK goods exports to the US since January 2024 (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) The data are current price measures, are non-seasonally adjusted and include trade in unspecified goods. Data are
shown to May 2025.
The household saving ratio remains elevated.
Bank of England  
Page 58


Household consumption grew by 0.3% in 2025 Q1, 0.1 percentage points lower than
expected in the May Report. Consumption growth has been weaker than growth in real
household incomes, such that the household saving ratio had risen to 11.6% by the end of
last year. Much of that recent rise in the saving ratio reflects the restrictive stance of monetary
policy (Box A). The saving ratio fell by 1 percentage point in 2025 Q1 (Chart 2.10), reflecting a
decline in real household income of 0.8% as the rate of inflation outpaced the increase in
nominal incomes. Despite this fall, the saving ratio remains notably above its pre-pandemic
level, although these data can be heavily revised. Results from the spring Bank of
England/NMG survey suggested that one of the key drivers of elevated saving, besides higher
interest rates, was saving for emergencies, potentially reflecting precautionary behaviour. And
in the July GfK Consumer Confidence Barometer, the savings index, which tracks people’s
desire to save, rose to its highest level since November 2007. But few respondents to the
NMG survey said that concerns about job loss were inducing them to save more.
Indicators of household spending suggest that consumption will grow by 0.2% over Q2 and
Q3. Retail sales volumes rose by 0.2% over 2025 Q2, in part reflecting weakness in food
sales. And the GfK consumer confidence index remains below its historical average, largely
driven by weakness in the general economic situation sub-indices. Further out, consumption
growth is expected to pick up somewhat, supported by a reduced drag from past rises in
interest rates. This is consistent with a gradual decline in the saving ratio (Section 1).
Chart 2.10: The household saving ratio fell for the first time in two years in 2025 Q1,
but remains elevated
Household saving ratio (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) The ratio is calculated as saving as a percentage of total available household resources. The ONS series is NRJS. The
final data point shown is for 2025 Q1.
Bank of England  
Page 59


2.4: The labour market and supply
Bank staff judge that underlying employment growth, based on the signal from a range of
measures, has been around zero since the end of last year (Chart 2.11, aqua line). Part of the
weakness in employment reflects the weak underlying momentum in GDP. The orange line in
Chart 2.11, which plots the estimated path of employment growth consistent with growth in
underlying GDP, has fallen in recent quarters. And firms reported that subdued demand
conditions were a constraint on staff recruitment in the June S&P Global Flash PMI survey.
Weakness in GDP cannot fully explain the current weakness in underlying employment
growth, however. Bank staff judge that some of that additional weakness reflects increases in
employment costs. Contacts of the Bank’s Agents have pointed to the rise in employer NICs
and, to a lesser extent, increases in the NLW, as contributors to the weakness in employment
growth. Alongside employment, firms are expected to continue to use several margins of
adjustment in response to higher employer NICs (Section 2.5).
While indicators, on balance, suggest that underlying employment growth has been around
zero, there is a high degree of dispersion among various measures. HMRC payroll data have
been particularly weak, falling by 0.3% in the three months to June. Around half of this fall
represents fewer jobs in the retail and hospitality sectors, both of which are quite labour
intensive and are therefore exposed to the recent rise in labour costs. But early estimates of
these data are prone to large revisions, so some of this weakness could be revised away. In
addition, these data only cover employees, and it could be the case that some of the
weakness reflects workers switching to self-employment.
Bank staff project employment growth to remain weak in the near term. Timely indicators of
employment growth, such as the REC permanent staff placements index, are below historical
averages and broadly consistent with employment growth of around zero. And employment
intentions remain subdued, according to Agency intelligence. Contacts of the Bank’s Agents
suggest that considerable adjustment to NICs through employment has already taken place,
however.
Underlying employment growth has continued to stagnate.
Bank of England  
Page 60


The ONS LFS estimate of employment has been significantly stronger than Bank staff’s
underlying measure, increasing by 0.4% in the three months to May. Achieved sample sizes in
the LFS have improved recently, from 50% below 2019 levels in 2023, to around 17% below
those levels in the latest data. But sample sizes remain low overall and therefore sampling
variability is elevated. As such, the MPC continues to place less weight on the LFS relative to
alternative measures of employment growth.
The latest LFS data suggest that the unemployment rate rose to 4.7% in the three months to
May, up from 4.4% at the end of 2024 and 0.2 percentage points higher than expected in the
May Report. Relative to employment, there are fewer indicators beyond the LFS when
gauging developments in unemployment (Broadbent (2023)). But the combined signal from
Chart 2.11: Part of the recent weakening in underlying employment growth reflects
weak underlying momentum in GDP
Measures of employment growth and employment growth implied by GDP growth (a)
Sources: Bank of England Agents, DMP Survey, HMRC, KPMG/REC UK Report on Jobs, Lloyds Business Barometer, ONS,
S&P Global and Bank calculations.
(a) Bank staff’s indicator-based measure of underlying employment growth is constructed using a dynamic factor model
following the approach of Doz et al (2011). The model extracts a common component from monthly survey indicators,
capturing comovements across series. The common component is scaled to align with LFS employment growth between
2000–19. The shaded areas represent 95% confidence intervals. The employment growth estimate implied by underlying
GDP is based on a simple regression of underlying employment on six lags of underlying momentum in GDP based on Chart
2.7. The latest data are for 2025 Q2 for the GDP implied estimate of employment and July 2025 for the estimate of underlying
employment based on survey data.
The unemployment rate has edged up recently.
Bank of England  
Page 61


the available indicators, such as the REC and Agents’ scores for recruitment difficulties,
suggest a similar increase. The rise in the unemployment rate from its recent trough in 2022
Q3 has occurred alongside a rise in labour force participation.
The recently reinstated LFS flows data are consistent with a gradual loosening in the labour
market. Job-to-job flows, which track the proportion of people moving between jobs, have
fallen below their historical average in recent quarters (Chart 2.12, left panel) and are
consistent with the recent rise in the unemployment rate (Gomes (2012)). And while a
broader labour market downturn would, based on past historical relationships, be
accompanied by a sharp rise in the job separation rate, the current data have been broadly
stable (Chart 2.12, right panel). These data should be interpreted with a degree of caution,
however, given low sample sizes.
Looking ahead, Bank staff project the unemployment rate to rise slightly further, to around
4.8% by 2025 Q3. This is broadly consistent with softening employment intentions and
relatively stable redundancy rates. LFS redundancies remain low, while advanced
notifications of potential redundancies among larger firms, known as HR1s, are also subdued.
Meanwhile, company insolvencies remain below their long-term average levels (July 2025
Financial Stability Report). Taken together, these data are broadly consistent with the
expected continued gradual loosening in the labour market. Set against that, Google
searches for redundancies, which track official redundancies fairly well, have edged up
recently. And redundancies were cited as a driver of higher overall staff availability in the
KPMG/REC survey. These data could point to an upside risk to the near-term projection for
unemployment.
Bank of England  
Page 62


Labour demand appears to have fallen further in recent months. ONS job vacancies, a
measure of labour demand, have fallen by around 10% since the start of the year and Bank
staff project job vacancies to fall a little further in the near term. Some firms responding to the
ONS Vacancy Survey reported that they are not recruiting new workers or replacing workers
who have left. Agency intelligence shows a similar picture, with many contacts reporting
recruitment freezes and more intense scrutiny of hiring decisions, reflecting a mixture of
higher labour costs and demand uncertainty.
Alongside higher unemployment, the fall in job vacancies has led to a further fall in the ratio of
vacancies to unemployment, known as the V/U ratio (Chart 2.13). This ratio is judged to be
somewhat below its equilibrium level (Stelmach et al (2025)) and is projected to fall a little
further in the near term. Other indicators are also consistent with a growing margin of labour
market slack. The net additional hours desired by workers, as a percentage of average hours
worked, has continued to rise, and contacts of the Bank’s Agents report that recruitment
difficulties are normalising from previously elevated levels.
Chart 2.12: Job-to-job flows have recently fallen below past averages, while job
separation rates have been broadly stable
Flows as a percentage of people in employment (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) These data are two-quarter flows, based on total employment of people aged 16–69 for job-to-job flows and 16–64 for the
separation rate. Job-to-job flows refer to those who were employed in both quarters, but who in the latter quarter reported
being with their current employer for less than three months, indicating a change of job between the quarters. The separation
rate captures those who were unemployed in the latter quarter, having been classified as employed or economically inactive
in the previous quarter. Refer to ONS (2010) for more details. The dashed lines are averages from 2002–19.
Labour market slack is continuing to build as expected and survey indicators point to
a further gradual loosening in the near term.
Bank of England  
Page 63


In addition to evidence of a growing margin of labour market slack, surveys of capacity
utilisation suggest a growing degree of spare capacity within firms (Chart 2.14, left panel).
Consistent with this, contacts of the Bank’s Agents report that spare capacity is opening up
across sectors, particularly in production industries, reflecting subdued demand. Top-down
estimates of the output gap based on statistical techniques imply a modest widening recently,
although there are large uncertainties around the precise level of the output gap. While
capacity utilisation and labour market data suggest a growing margin of slack, the signal from
nominal indicators remains consistent with a margin of excess demand (Chart 2.14, right
panel).
Taken together, the MPC judges that the economy is operating with a degree of spare
capacity. The margin of spare capacity is projected to widen a little further over the next few
quarters (Section 1).
Chart 2.13: The V/U ratio has fallen further below its equilibrium level
Vacancies to unemployment ratio and its estimated equilibrium value (a)
Sources: Advertising association/World Advertising Research Centre Expenditure Report, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) The final data point shown for the V/U ratio data is for the three months to May 2025. The equilibrium V/U ratio is
estimated using an error-correction model over the period 1982–2024. The real cost of vacancy posting and hourly labour
productivity are included as long-run determinants for the level of vacancies. The model also includes controls for short-term
movements in these variables (Stelmach et al (2025)). The final data point for the equilibrium V/U ratio is 2025 Q1. The
diamonds represent Bank staff projections for the V/U ratio and equilibrium V/U ratio for 2025 Q2 to 2025 Q4.
A margin of spare capacity has opened up in the economy.
Bank of England  
Page 64


Net migration fell to 431,000 in the year ending December 2024, down from 860,000 in the
previous year (Chart 2.15, aqua line). That largely reflects fewer visas issued over the last
year, as well as an increased number of students returning abroad. The fall in migration has
been far greater than expected based on the ONS principal projection (Chart 2.15, orange
line), which itself is based on 2022 population data. Based on the new migration data, the
ONS has recommended using a lower path for future net migration, known as the migration
Chart 2.14: Capacity utilisation and labour market data are consistent with growing
slack
Survey indicators of capacity utilisation (a) and model-based estimates of the output gap (b)
Sources: Bank of England Agents, BCC, CBI, KPMG/REC UK Report on Jobs, ONS, S&P Global and Bank calculations.
(a) Standard deviations from averages between 2000–19. The measures included in the swathe are from the Bank’s Agents,
the BCC (non-services and services), the CBI (manufacturing (capacity); and financial services,
business/consumer/professional services and distributive trade (business relative to normal)) and S&P Global (manufacturing
(backlogs) and services (outstanding business)). Sectors are weighted using their shares in gross value added. The BCC
data are not seasonally adjusted. The data are shown to 2025 Q2.
(b) The model is estimated over 2000–2025 Q2 using the two-step estimator from Doz et al (2011), obtained from running
the data through a Kalman filter and smoother once. The first factor of the dynamic factor model is interpreted as a measure
of slack. The factor is then mean-variance adjusted to the MPC’s baseline output gap estimate over 2000–2025 Q2. The
labour market block is estimated using survey indicators of slack and the vacancy gap estimate from Chart 2.13. The
capacity utilisation block includes a range of surveys of capacity utilisation also used in the left panel of this chart. The
nominal block contains measures of pay and underlying inflation, such as those in Charts 2.17 and 2.20. The data are shown
to 2025 Q2.
Potential supply growth over the forecast period is expected to be weaker than
projected in the May Report, reflecting lower net migration.
Bank of England  
Page 65


category variant projection (Chart 2.15, purple line). Based on that lower projected path for
net migration, Bank staff have revised down their estimate for annual potential supply growth
by an average of 0.2 percentage points per year over the forecast period (Section 1).
Measures of labour productivity growth continue to be weak relative to past averages. In the
four quarters to 2025 Q1, output per hour based on headline data fell by 0.2%, while output
per worker fell by 0.6% on the same basis (solid lines in Chart 2.16). That compares with
average four-quarter growth of around 0.6% in these measures in the five years ahead of the
Covid pandemic. But Bank staff judge that erratic factors have meant that some of the
weakness in the headline data has been overstated. Underlying output per worker, based on
the measures of underlying momentum in GDP and employment shown in Charts 2.7 and
2.11, grew by 0.4% in the four quarters to 2025 Q1 (Chart 2.16, dashed aqua line).
Chart 2.15: Net migration has fallen more quickly than expected
Estimates of net migration and ONS projections (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) The official ONS net migration data are estimated using administrative data, supported by surveys and statistical
modelling. The Provisional long-term international migration estimates: technical user guide provides further details.
These data refer to 12-month reference periods. For example, year-end December 2023 covers international migration to and
from the UK from 1 January 2023 to 31 December 2023. The final official ONS net migration data are for year-end December
2024. The ONS principal and migrant category population projections are from the 2022-based national population
projections. The latest data points are for year-end September 2028.
Labour productivity growth remains weak, although the headline data may overstate
some of the most recent weakness.
Bank of England  
Page 66


2.5: Wages and inflation
Wage growth has continued to slow, to around 5%. Annual private sector regular AWE growth
was 4.9% in the three months to May, compared with 5.9% in the three months to February
and below the May Report projection of 5.4%. Part of the recent drop in AWE growth reflects
a reversal of compositional effects and the fading of base effects that had pushed up pay
growth at the start of the year, as anticipated in the May Report. But there has also been
some additional downside news in private sector regular AWE growth.
The recent falls have brought AWE growth back in line with the signal of a gradual slowing in
pay growth from a range of other indicators (Chart 2.17). The DMP Survey, the Indeed Wage
Tracker and a proxy based on HMRC RTI data all suggest that annual pay growth has fallen
modestly since the beginning of the year, albeit to a still elevated level.
Chart 2.16: Labour productivity growth remains subdued
Measures of annual labour productivity growth (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Four-quarter growth in output per worker and output per hour. Underlying output per worker is constructed using
underlying momentum of GDP and employment, based on the indicator-based models from Charts 2.7 and 2.11 for GDP and
employment respectively. The final data points are for 2025 Q1.
Pay growth across a range of measures continues to fall back but remains elevated.
Bank of England  
Page 67


Private sector regular pay growth is expected to ease further over the second half of the year.
That is partly due to an expected drag from base effects because of unusually strong wage
growth at the end of 2024. Statistical analysis by Bank staff suggests that, even absent any
further slowing in the trend of monthly pay growth rates, AWE growth should drop to around
4.5% by the end of the year. A range of indicators suggests that AWE growth will be lower
than this by the end of 2025, however. Intelligence from the Bank’s Agents points to average
pay rises for 2025 of between 3.5% and 4%, and respondents to the DMP Survey expected
pay growth to be just under 4% by the end of the year (Chart 2.17).
Meanwhile, recent pay settlements data from Brightmine, CIPD and the Bank’s own
settlements database continue to suggest that pay awards have been around 3%–4% since
the end of last year. Within the Bank’s settlements database, a normalisation in the
Chart 2.17: Wage growth has declined across various measures and is expected to
fall to around 3¾% by the end of the year
Measures of private sector wage growth (a)
Sources: Bank of England Agents, DMP Survey, HMRC, Indeed, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Private sector regular pay growth shows the ONS measure of private sector regular average weekly earnings growth
(three-month average on same three-month average a year ago). DMP shows three-month average realised pay growth from
the DMP Survey (three-month average on same three-month average a year ago). HMRC Real-Time Information (RTI)
shows median of private sector employee pay growth. Indeed Wage Tracker shows annual average job title matched pay
growth for UK job vacancies. Latest data points are for the three months to May 2025 for private sector regular pay, June
2025 for Indeed and HMRC RTI, and July 2025 for the DMP Survey. The Agents’ pay survey circle shows respondents’
expected average pay settlements in 2025, weighted by employment and sector. The DMP diamond shows average
expected pay growth one year ahead from the December 2024 DMP Survey. Private sector regular pay growth projections
are for 2025 Q3 and 2025 Q4.
Wage growth is expected to moderate significantly further in the second half of 2025.
Bank of England  
Page 68


distribution of pay awards is evident. In particular, the share of awards above 5¼% has fallen
from over 50% to below 20% over the past year, while the share of awards in the 2½% to
3¾% range has increased from around 6% to 36%.
Pay settlements in the 3%–4% range are broadly consistent with headline pay growth towards
the top of this range by the end of the year. That is partly because pay settlements typically
cover the period 12 months from when they are made, and hence provide a leading signal of
pay growth, whereas AWE growth refers to the previous 12 months. It is also because pay
settlements only capture increases in basic pay. Measures of aggregate pay growth will often
depart from this due to people moving jobs to get a higher salary, in-role promotions, or
discretionary pay increases outside the usual settlement period. These effects are also known
as pay drift. Historically, pay drift has tended to be higher in periods of labour market
tightness. As the labour market is now loosening (Section 2.4), Bank staff expect aggregate
pay drift to fall back from its level of around 1 percentage point in 2024.
Overall, annual private sector regular AWE growth is projected to slow to 3.7% by the end of
2025, as the easing in the labour market and past falls in inflation expectations feed through
to lower wage growth. Wage growth is expected to moderate further to a little below 3½% by
2026 Q2, broadly consistent with expected pay growth in the latest DMP Survey and early
intelligence from the Bank’s Agents.
The 6.7% rise in the National Living Wage (NLW) in April was expected to push up annual pay
growth by around 0.2 percentage points from 2025 Q2 in the May Report. In line with that, pay
growth in the retail and hospitality sectors, which have a large share of employees at or close
to the NLW, was elevated at 7.1% in the latest data. Contacts of the Bank’s Agents continue
to cite the NLW as the largest factor exerting upward pressure on pay in 2025.
Partly offsetting the impact of a higher NLW, the increase in the rate of employer NICs is likely
to weigh on wage growth as firms try to contain the rise in overall employment costs (Box D of
the February 2025 Monetary Policy Report). In line with this, intelligence from the Bank’s
Agents suggests that firms are using a range of measures to mitigate the impact of higher
NICs on total labour costs, including reducing pay awards for staff paid above the NLW, as
well as raising prices.
Twelve-month CPI inflation was 3.6% in June, up from 2.6% in March and slightly above the
expectation at the time of the May Report. Since its recent trough in September 2024,
headline inflation has picked up. This reflects a smaller drag from energy prices (Chart 1.1), a
larger contribution from core goods, and, more recently, stronger-than-expected food price
The rise in the National Living Wage is putting modest upward pressure on pay, partly
offset by a drag from higher employer NICs.
Headline CPI inflation was 3.6% in June, above the MPC’s 2% target.
Bank of England  
Page 69


inflation. Meanwhile, core inflation has remained elevated, mainly because services inflation
continues to be high at 4.7%. This reflects past strength in wage growth as well as temporary
upward pressures from one-off increases in administered prices and the increase in employer
NICs.
The largest driver of the rise in headline inflation over the past year has been the waning drag
from household energy bills. The contribution of household energy bills to headline inflation
has been positive since April of this year, following 18 months in which household energy bills
reduced headline inflation (Chart 2.18). The Ofgem energy price cap for the typical household
is £1,720 for July until September 2025, almost 10% higher than for the same period last year,
and is expected to remain at around that level for October to December 2025. Household
energy bills are expected to boost inflation slightly over the next few months, partly offset by a
small drag from fuels and lubricants.
Energy prices drove much of the rise in CPI inflation over the past year but are
expected to have little impact on inflation going forward.
Chart 2.18: CPI inflation rose to 3.6% in June
Contributions to CPI inflation (a)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., Department for Energy Security and Net Zero, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Figures in parentheses are CPI basket weights in 2025, which do not sum to 100% due to rounding. Data are shown to
June 2025. Component-level Bank staff projections are shown from July to December 2025. The food component is defined
as food and non-alcoholic beverages. Fuels and lubricants estimates use Department for Energy Security and Net Zero
petrol price data for July 2025 and are then projected based on the sterling oil futures curve.
Core goods price inflation is projected to moderate, while food price inflation is
expected to rise further.
Bank of England  
Page 70


Core goods and food price inflation fell materially over 2023 and early 2024, following
declines in the prices of key inputs such as energy and other raw materials, but both have
increased in recent months (Chart 2.19). Annual core goods and food price inflation were
1.8% and 4.5% in June respectively, above pre-Covid average rates.
Intelligence from the Bank’s Agents suggests that the increase in core goods price inflation in
recent months has mainly reflected higher labour costs. Indicators of non-labour cost
pressures had increased at the beginning of the year but have fallen back somewhat since
April. Annual core goods price inflation is expected to moderate in coming months, driven
mainly by base effects due to strong increases in core goods prices in the second half of last
year. Monthly annualised core goods price inflation rates are projected to remain slightly
above their pre-Covid average in the second half of the year.
There are uncertainties around the outlook for core goods price inflation due to data quality
issues. In March, the ONS paused the publication of its producer price inflation data following
the identification of a problem in its production (ONS (2025)). The ONS is expected to resume
full publication of these data in October. However, indicative producer prices published in
Chart 2.19: Core goods price inflation is expected to moderate in coming months,
while services and food price inflation are projected to remain elevated
Annual inflation rates for components of CPI (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) The core goods component is defined as goods excluding food and non-alcoholic beverages (FNAB), alcohol, tobacco
and energy. Data are to June 2025. Bank staff projections from July to December 2025. Dashed lines represent the 2010–19
averages, which are 3.0%, 1.6% and 0.8% for services, FNAB and core goods respectively.
Bank of England  
Page 71


July suggest that input price pressures had remained muted as of April. That is broadly in line
with the PMI manufacturing input price balance, which has picked up since late 2023 but has
fallen again in recent months and remains around its long-run average.
Meanwhile, food price inflation is projected to be around 5% in 2025 Q3, 1½ percentage
points higher than expected in the May Report, before rising further to 5½% by the end of this
year. This accounts for most of the upward revision to the projected path for CPI inflation over
the next few months. High expected food price inflation is driven partly by higher global
commodity prices, but also by labour costs and the Extended Producer Responsibility
regulations that come into effect from October of this year (Box E).
Services inflation remained at 4.7% in June, unchanged from March and slightly above the
expectation in the May Report. Underlying services price inflation has continued to moderate
somewhat across a broad range of measures, including those based on exclusionary,
trimming or reweighting approaches (Chart 2.20). However, all of these measures suggest
that underlying services inflation remains elevated, and disinflationary progress in recent
months has been slower than last year according to some measures.
Underlying services inflation has continued to moderate, but at a slower pace than
last year based on some measures.
Bank of England  
Page 72


Unusually large increases in several administered prices such as vehicle excise duty have
contributed to high services inflation since April. Bank staff estimate that these are currently
adding around 0.6 percentage points to UK services inflation (Chart 2.21), masking some of
the disinflationary progress in the first half of this year.
Chart 2.20: Underlying services inflation remains elevated
Measures of three-month average monthly annualised services price inflation (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Measures shown are three-month averages of seasonally adjusted monthly annualised inflation. The low variance
measure is calculated by weighting each component of services inflation by the inverse variance of the change in 12-month
inflation of that component from 12 months previously. The maximum adjusted weight is capped at twice its original value.
Details on the components which have been included/excluded from the Services excluding indexed and volatile
components, rents and foreign holidays measure are included in the accompanying spreadsheet published online. The
trimmed mean measure excludes the 10% largest and 10% smallest price changes. The latest data points shown refer to
June 2025.
Elevated services inflation reflects unusually large increases in some administered
prices, as well as high wage growth.
Bank of England  
Page 73


Administered price increases are also estimated to be adding to services inflation in the euro
area, although to a lesser extent than in the UK (Chart 2.21). After accounting for these
effects, UK services inflation remains materially higher than euro-area services inflation. That
appears to primarily reflect a higher level of UK wage growth over the recent past. Four-
quarter private sector wage growth in the UK was 6.2% in 2024 Q4, compared with a 4.1%
increase in compensation per employee in the euro area. Since wages tend to affect services
prices with a lag of several quarters, past strength in UK wage growth can account for much
of the strength in UK services inflation in the first half of 2025.
The Bank’s Agents’ company visit scores suggest that following the October 2024 budget, a
wedge has opened up between firms’ expected pay growth and expected total labour costs,
probably reflecting higher employer NICs (Chart 2.22). Responses to the DMP Survey
similarly indicate that there has been a larger slowdown in wage increases than there has
been in overall unit costs in the consumer services sector. Contacts of the Bank’s Agents
Chart 2.21: Administered price increases have contributed just over half a per cent to
UK services inflation
Measures of annual services inflation (a)
Sources: Eurostat, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) The data shown in the solid lines are UK CPI services inflation and euro-area HICP services inflation. The dashed lines
show Bank staff’s estimates of the unusual contribution from administered prices to services inflation in 2025. For the UK, this
captures the estimated excess impact of changes in sewerage charges, bus fares, vehicle excise duty and VAT on private
school fees. For the euro area, staff have estimated the excess contribution of HICP services subcomponents judged to
contain significant amounts of administered prices, relative to a pre-Covid baseline. The euro area estimate is likely to be an
upper bound of the true excess contribution from administered prices in 2025. The latest data points shown refer to June
2025.
The increase in employer NICs is likely to delay further declines in services inflation.
Bank of England  
Page 74


report that the rise in unit costs has put further downward pressure on margins, which are
viewed as compressed (Box F). Firms may seek to recover margins by raising prices over
coming months, depending on the strength in demand.
Services inflation is expected to rise from 4.7% in June to around 5.1% in December (Chart
2.19). This rise is driven by base effects due to a large drop in services inflation in the second
half of last year. Annualised monthly rates of services inflation are projected to decline in the
second half of the year as lower wage growth continues to feed through, although that decline
is relatively slow.
The slow expected pace of decline in services inflation partly reflects the fact that lower wage
growth is expected to be partly offset by increases in other labour costs, including employer
NICs, in the near term. It is also due to pay growth having recently slowed by less in sectors
with large direct contributions to the services CPI basket. This is driven in part by the effects
of the NLW increase on the retail and hospitality sector, and could limit reductions in
inflationary pressures in these sectors in the near term.
Chart 2.22: A wedge has opened up between expectations for total labour costs and
pay expectations
Bank of England Agents’ company visit scores (a)
Source: Bank of England Agents.
(a) After visiting companies, Agents assign company visit scores based on information gathered during the meeting. A score
of +5 indicates a rapidly rising level, 0 indicates an unchanged level and -5 a rapidly falling level. Details on the scores can be
found in Relleen et al (2013). The latest data points are for June 2025.
Services inflation is expected to rise in the near term before falling back next year.
Bank of England  
Page 75


Further ahead, services inflation is expected to fall back in the first half of 2026, as lower
wage growth continues to drag and upward pressure from higher employer NICs begins to
fade. As inflation rates remain elevated across a large share of the services CPI basket (Chart
2.23), the expected slowing in inflation will require a broad-based change in price setting
across the whole services sector.
Headline CPI inflation is expected to rise slightly to a peak of 4.0% in September before falling
back to 3.6% by the end of the year. This is higher than the 3.7% peak expected in the May
Report, accounted for mainly by higher expected food price inflation (Box E). In the baseline
projection, a further expected slowing in pay growth means that inflation is projected to fall
back gradually next year (Section 1).
Chart 2.23: Inflation remains elevated across most subcomponents of the services
CPI basket
Weighted share of services subcomponents with inflation rates over 1 percentage point above their
2012–19 averages (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) The chart shows the weighted share of items in the services CPI basket at the 85-item level with monthly inflation rates
over 1 percentage point above their respective 2012–19 average inflation rates. Over this period, headline inflation averaged
1.8%, while services inflation averaged 2.7%. The dashed line shows the 2012–19 average weighted share of items with
inflation rates over 1 percentage point above their respective 2012–19 average inflation rates. The final data point is for June
2025.
Headline CPI inflation is projected to remain around its current rate throughout the
rest of the year, peaking at 4.0% in September.
Bank of England  
Page 76


Inflation expectations can influence CPI inflation through their impact on wage and price-
setting behaviour. The MPC monitors a range of indicators, including surveys of households
and companies as well as those derived from financial market prices, to assess whether
inflation expectations remain consistent with meeting the 2% inflation target in the medium
term.
Survey measures of short-term household inflation expectations had risen ahead of the May
Report, likely reflecting increases in headline inflation and in particular rising food price
inflation (Box E). More recently, households’ near-term expectations were slightly lower in July
than in April according to the Citi/YouGov measure (Chart 2.24, left panel), and also fell back
a little in the Bank of England/Ipsos Inflation Attitudes Survey for 2025 Q2. Meanwhile, the
Citi/YouGov measure of medium-term household inflation expectations has remained
materially above its historical average.
Household inflation expectations remain elevated, though near-term expectations
have fallen back slightly since the May Report.
Chart 2.24: Household inflation expectations are elevated, while businesses’
expectations have risen only slightly this year
Survey-based measures of household and business inflation expectations (a) (b)
Sources: Citigroup, DMP Survey, YouGov and Bank calculations.
(a) Data shown are from the Citi/YouGov survey and are based on responses to the questions: ‘How do you expect consumer
prices of goods and services will develop in the next 12 months?’, and ‘And what do you think will happen to the prices of
goods and services, on average, over the longer term - say five to ten years?’. Dashed lines represent the series averages
over 2010–19. The latest data points are for July 2025.
(b) Data shown are from the DMP Survey and are based on three-month averages of responses to the question: ‘What do
you think the annual CPI inflation rate will be in the UK, one year from now and three years from now?’. The latest data points
are for July 2025. The DMP Survey data have a short back-run, so no historical averages are shown.
Bank of England  
Page 77


One-year ahead CPI expectations of firms responding to the DMP Survey have increased
slightly this year to just over 3% in July, while three-year ahead expectations have been stable
at around 2.8% (Chart 2.24, right panel). The average expectation for firms’ own price growth
one-year ahead was 3.7%, a little lower than at the time of the May Report. Meanwhile, the
Deloitte CFO survey measure of two-year ahead CPI expectations was 2.5% in Q2, down
slightly from 2.6% in Q1.
Financial market participants’ near-term inflation expectations are broadly unchanged since
the May Report. The median respondent to the latest Market Participants Survey expected
CPI inflation of 2.4% one year ahead, up marginally from 2.3% in the May survey. The median
expectation for CPI inflation two years ahead was a little lower at 2.1%. Medium-term inflation
expectations derived from financial markets, such as the RPI-reform adjusted measure of five-
year, five-year forward inflation compensation, have risen slightly since the May Report and
remain a little above pre-Covid averages.
CPI inflation has risen by a little more than expected in recent months and household inflation
expectations remain elevated. With inflation likely to reach 4% briefly in the second half of this
year and salient items such as food prices expected to increase further (Box E), there is a risk
that elevated inflation expectations could become a more material influence on wage
bargaining or price setting elsewhere in the economy and add to the persistence of
inflationary pressures. That said, it is also possible that the role of household inflation
expectations in the wage-setting process could become weaker as the labour market loosens.
The MPC will continue to monitor closely developments in inflation expectations measures,
including any risks they may pose to the ongoing disinflation process.
Businesses’ medium-term CPI inflation expectations have increased only slightly
since the start of the year.
Financial market participants’ expectations for near-term inflation are broadly
unchanged, while medium-term market-based inflation compensation measures have
risen slightly.
The MPC will continue to monitor closely developments in inflation expectations.
Bank of England  
Page 78


Box D: Global uncertainties and their implications for the UK
economy
The MPC’s baseline projections have been produced conditional on various external
assumptions, including international energy prices developing in line with market
futures pricing and global tariff rates remaining at their levels as of 29 July. However,
both energy prices and trade policy announcements have varied significantly since the
publication of the May Report.
The first part of this box investigates the sensitivity of the MPC’s baseline projections
to an unanticipated rise in global energy prices. The second part investigates the
sensitivity of the baseline projections to both a higher level of global tariffs and to
different assumptions around the impact of higher tariffs, including via higher trade
policy uncertainty and a greater impact of trade restrictions on world export prices. The
higher tariff assumption amplifies the economic impact of different modelling
assumptions and therefore demonstrates their relative significance.
1: Higher energy prices
Military action between Iran and Israel, later joined by the US, in June 2025, led to a
peak increase in dollar Brent crude spot oil prices of around 20%. This was a large
rise, though not outside of the normal range of historical oil price changes (Chart A).
Spot natural gas prices rose a little further, by around 25%.
A ceasefire came into effect, and energy prices have fallen back. Brent crude spot oil
prices are around $70 per barrel. However, geopolitical tensions remain. Option pricing
for oil futures, which can be used to calculate a market-implied estimate of the
probability of oil reaching a given price in the future, is consistent with there being a
risk that renewed conflict pushes oil prices up again.
Wider conflict that affects both Iran and the Strait of Hormuz could have large effects,
as this is a key route through which oil and natural gas are exported from other major
energy producing countries. Supplies through the Strait of Hormuz were not disrupted
during the conflict in June and the risk of disruption appears to be low, but a range of
Conflict in the Middle East led to rises in energy prices in June. While energy
prices have fallen since then, market pricing suggests upside risks to prices
remain.
Bank of England  
Page 79


external estimates of the impact of widespread disruption or the cessation of oil
exports through this route suggests global oil prices could rise to between $100–$130
per barrel in this case. Liquified natural gas prices would also be materially affected.
As part of its recent discussions, the MPC considered the sensitivity of its baseline
projections to an unanticipated future rise in energy prices. In doing so, the Committee
drew on experience from the rise in energy prices following Russia’s invasion of
Ukraine in 2022. Higher energy prices would push up consumer price inflation and
reduce GDP.
Energy prices have a direct effect on CPI inflation through petrol and diesel prices, and
utility bills. Motor fuel pump prices make up 2.8% of the consumer price inflation
basket of goods and services. And gas and electricity make up a further 3.4%.
Changes in oil prices tend to be passed through quickly and in full to pump prices.
Chart A: The oil price increase in June 2025 was large, but even larger oil price
increases have occurred before
Frequency distribution of historical four-week US dollar oil price changes (a)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and Bank calculations.
(a) Data cover June 1987 to 29 July 2025. Oil prices are dollar Brent crude. Changes are calculated for each
business day compared to 20 business days earlier. The bars represent oil price changes in 5 percentage point
buckets, the number shown represents the upper bound of that bucket with the exception of the rightmost bar.
Higher energy prices would push up UK CPI inflation through direct effects on
fuel and utility prices, as well as indirect effects through higher production
costs for firms.
Bank of England  
Page 80


Wholesale gas prices feed through directly, albeit with a lag, to household electricity
and gas bills. This is because the Ofgem energy price cap is set quarterly with
reference to previous wholesale prices. The impact on utility bills would be expected to
take around three quarters to fully take effect.
Energy prices also have an indirect effect on CPI inflation through the use of oil and
gas as inputs for other goods and services. Higher energy prices push up production
costs, which would be expected to be passed through to consumer prices over time.
For example, higher gas prices raise UK electricity costs, but since most businesses
have fixed-term contracts, it will take time for these to affect businesses’ costs.
The shorter-term impacts of a hypothetical 10% rise in oil prices on CPI inflation and
GDP, through both the direct and indirect channels outlined above, are depicted in
Chart B. The middle panel shows the modelled response of UK CPI inflation to a global
oil price shock from one of the key models that feeds into the baseline projections
outlined in this Report, alongside empirical estimates from a local projections
specification (Albuquerque et al (2025)).
In this estimation, a 10% peak increase in oil prices (Chart B, left panel) is associated
with a peak increase in CPI inflation of 0.5%. That rise in CPI inflation occurs swiftly
after the rise in oil prices. These results assume that the oil price shock evolves in line
with historical patterns, which show that oil price shocks tend to be temporary, with
prices falling back after peaking.
The estimates in Chart B show the impact of a rise in oil prices. Additional gas price
rises would exacerbate any subsequent increase in CPI inflation. Previous Bank staff
analysis shows that the importance of gas prices for CPI inflation and GDP has grown
relative to oil prices over time.
Bank of England  
Page 81


The impact of energy price changes on CPI inflation will depend on broader economic
conditions, including the behaviour of inflation expectations and the level of spare
capacity in the economy.
Some evidence suggests that inflation expectations may be particularly sensitive to
rises in energy costs. Bank staff analysis finds evidence of asymmetrical formation of
inflation expectations, with rises in prices shifting expectations more than falls in
prices. A high inflation environment can mean households pay more attention to news
about inflation. And evidence shows that the prices of some products, including petrol,
are particularly important for households when they form their inflation expectations
(Chart C in Box E).
Chart B: Oil price shocks are estimated to raise UK CPI inflation and reduce
GDP
Impulse responses to a global oil price shock (a)
Sources: Albuquerque et al (2025) and Bank calculations.
(a) DSGE refers to the estimates taken from one of the main models which underlies the baseline projections in this
Report. The local projections estimates are based on a sequence of regressions where the response of economic
outcomes, including GDP and CPI inflation, is estimated conditional on energy price shocks. The dashed lines are
90% confidence bands around the local projection estimates. The results show impulse responses to a 10% global
oil price increase. Estimates are based on data from 1987–2023.
The impact of higher energy prices on inflation could be exacerbated by
second-round effects on domestic wages and prices, for example if inflation
expectations were to rise.
Bank of England  
Page 82


If inflation expectations were to rise in response to an energy cost increase by more
than was typical in the past, this could lead to additional inflation persistence,
prolonging the period of higher inflation. Higher inflation expectations for households
could lead to upward pressure on aggregate wage growth, which would in turn raise
businesses’ costs and potentially lead to further price rises. And higher inflation
expectations for firms could be internalised into their own price-setting where
anticipated future cost increases are reflected in current prices. Higher inflation
expectations at a time of tight labour markets were a significant factor in the greater
inflation persistence that followed the 2022 energy price shock.
The estimates in Chart B account for the average response of CPI inflation to higher
energy prices over the past, and so implicitly capture the average impact of energy
prices on inflation expectations and subsequent feedthrough to wage and price-setting.
Any additional sensitivity of inflation expectations in the current economic environment
would lead to more inflation persistence, to which monetary policymakers would
respond appropriately.
In an environment where demand is weak relative to potential supply, however, firms
may be more likely to absorb additional energy costs into their margins than if there is
little spare capacity. As noted in Section 2.4, there is growing evidence of spare
capacity within the economy. This could act against any additional inflation persistence
from the interaction between higher inflation expectations and firms’ price-setting
behaviour.
Alongside their effect on inflation, higher energy prices would also reduce UK GDP.
Chart B (right panel) shows the response of UK GDP using the same baseline
projection model and empirical estimates.
Following a swift hypothetical rise in energy prices, GDP falls in the subsequent
quarters before recovering. There is a large degree of uncertainty over the magnitude
of the GDP impact. In the DSGE estimates, the impact on GDP is relatively muted,
with a temporary rise in energy prices of 10% reducing GDP by around 0.1%. That
muted response reflects the fact that firms and households are assumed to substitute
quickly towards non-energy inputs and goods as energy becomes more expensive.
The local projections estimates indicate much larger declines in GDP, consistent with
historical correlations.
Higher energy prices also reduce GDP and can generate a trade-off for
monetary policy between returning inflation to the target and supporting GDP
growth and employment.
Bank of England  
Page 83


As the experience of the 2022 energy price shock demonstrated, one of the challenges
in understanding the impact of energy price rises is assessing how they are
transmitted through the economy. The extent to which firms and households can
substitute away from using energy is important and might change over time. As most
UK homes rely on natural gas for heating their home, one simple example of this issue
is the temperature experienced during winter. Cold weather could reduce households’
ability to reduce their gas usage.
Lower GDP from higher energy prices reflects both weaker supply and demand.
Demand would be expected to fall by more than supply, however, such that the degree
of spare capacity widens. The model underlying the baseline projections suggests that
supply is reduced by around a fifth of the overall reduction in GDP. Combined with
higher inflation, this creates a trade-off for monetary policy between returning inflation
to the target and supporting GDP growth and employment.
There is uncertainty over the size of any impact of higher energy prices on supply,
however, and hence spare capacity. The impact on supply could be greater than
implied by this model if the energy shock is very large and results in supply chains
needing to be reorganised to account for higher energy prices.
The appropriate monetary policy response to an energy price shock will depend on the
size and timing of the impact on CPI inflation, as well as on the level of the output gap.
To the extent that CPI inflation rises while the output gap widens, the shock will create
a trade-off for monetary policy makers. If the shock is short-lived, as in the example
above, monetary policy may not need to respond. But if the shock is larger and more
persistent, as occurred after the 2022 Russian invasion of Ukraine, a higher level of
Bank Rate could be required to meet the inflation target.
2: Greater global trade restrictions
Since March 2025, the US government has announced a range of new tariffs for
countries and products. The US effective tariff rate at the time the baseline projection
was produced was estimated at around 14%, 12 percentage points higher than in
January, but 8 percentage points lower than at the time of the May Report (Chart C).
As part of its recent discussions, the MPC considered the sensitivities in the baseline
projections to both higher global tariffs and to different assumptions around the impact
of higher tariffs, including via higher trade policy uncertainty and a greater impact of
trade restrictions on world export prices. For the purposes of these sensitivities, the US
There remains significant uncertainty over future global trade policy.
Bank of England  
Page 84


effective tariff rate was assumed to climb to over 35% (Chart C). Other countries were
assumed to respond to higher US tariffs, with significant retaliation from China and a
more limited retaliation from other countries.
This exercise was not intended to model a particular likely outcome for global tariff
rates. Indeed, some of the assumptions outlined in the footnote to Chart C are different
to those that have been announced, including the US-EU deal on 27 July. That deal
would lead to US tariff rates on goods from the EU at 15% rather than 30%, although
its impact on the sensitivities below would be small. Nevertheless, the analysis
remains valuable for exploring both the impact of a higher set of tariffs and the
accompanying model sensitivities.
As set out in Box C of the May 2025 Monetary Policy Report, higher bilateral global
tariffs between the US and other countries would be expected to reduce global
demand for UK exports and UK GDP. This reflects: a direct reduction in US imports
Chart C: US tariff rates have increased since the start of this year
Estimated US effective tariff rates (a)
Sources: US Bureau of Economic Analysis, US International Trade Commission, White House and Bank
calculations.
(a) The alternative assumptions diamond was calculated as the combination of the US tariff letters sent in the first
half of July, which would have raised the US effective tariff rate by around 4 percentage points, as well as US
product-specific tariffs, such as pharmaceuticals, and a re-escalation of trade tensions with China. The May 2025
Report diamond is the tariff level assumed for the May Report baseline projections. And the August 2025 Report
diamond is the same for this Report and is based on tariff rates implemented as of 29 July.
There are uncertainties in how any given set of global trade policies will impact
UK GDP…
Bank of England  
Page 85


from the UK due to higher tariffs; a decline in real incomes in affected countries that
reduces demand for imports more broadly; and estimates for shifts in global trade
patterns such as countries selling their goods into new markets.
Estimates of the relationship between trade restrictions and GDP from different
economic models vary. Using the same estimated relationships that underlie the
baseline projections, the higher global tariffs set out above would reduce UK GDP by a
little over an additional 0.2% over the next three years. Around two thirds of that impact
would be expected to materialise over the course of the next year, with the remaining
impact appearing evenly over the following two years. There are also likely to be
longer-run impacts on global and domestic productivity growth.
There are important uncertainties around these estimates, including over the relative
importance of different mechanisms through which higher tariffs impact the economy
as well as around model estimates of their impact.
One area that continues to make economic impacts difficult to estimate is the extent to
which uncertainty over future trade policy reduces GDP. In an environment where trade
policies are uncertain, businesses may be less willing to invest in new production
capacity and there could be a wider impact on business and household sentiment.
Measures of policy uncertainty have fallen back from their peaks in April but could rise
or fall in the future. If measured global trade policy uncertainty were to rise back to the
peak earlier in the year and gradually decline over the next year and a half, estimates
suggest that would reduce UK GDP by around 0.1%.
Within the models used for this analysis, the quantitatively largest channel through
which trade restrictions affect UK prices is their effect on world export prices. Weaker
global demand for exports puts downward pressure on world prices which then passes
through into UK import prices. Based on the higher tariff levels discussed above, world
export prices could fall by an additional 2% over the next three years, which would
cause a peak reduction in UK CPI inflation of around 0.1 percentage points.
Another channel through which global trade restrictions affect domestic prices is the
impact of weaker global demand on spare capacity in the UK. By raising prices of
imports, higher tariffs reduce real incomes in those countries where they have been
increased, which will weigh on demand for UK exports. All else equal this will lead to
additional spare capacity in the UK. Higher tariff levels discussed above could reduce
annual inflation by a little under 0.1 percentage points through this channel.
…as well as prices.
Bank of England  
Page 86


One uncertainty regarding the future path of world export prices relates to a possible
change in the pattern of trade flows due to new trade restrictions. Specifically, the
impact of lower global export prices on UK inflation could be compounded if countries
formerly exporting goods to a third country attempt to shift some of this trade to the
UK. This may necessitate a fall in the prices of these goods. This effect could be
amplified if other countries respond to this additional competition by also reducing their
export prices to the UK.
The extent to which export flows shift to the UK in response to US and retaliatory tariffs
is difficult to project. Bank staff analysis of the impact of tariff increases on trade flows
during previous US administrations suggests limited evidence for significant shifts in
export flows to the UK in previous episodes of higher tariffs. This suggests that there
may be limited impacts on UK import prices beyond the effects on global export prices
mentioned above. However, as announced tariff increases have been larger than those
previous examples, there could be larger effects in the current period. Monitoring high-
frequency trade flows data is important for understanding how these effects may
materialise in the current economic environment.
One way to assess the potential importance of this channel is to adjust the assumed
import price elasticities underlying the baseline projections. It is possible the lost US
demand could lead to bigger reductions in exporters’ prices if demand from the rest of
the world proves less responsive to price cuts. Assuming a non-US import price
elasticity near the bottom of the range of empirical estimates, combined with spillovers
from shifting trade patterns leading to a greater increase in global price competition,
would be enough to further reduce UK CPI inflation from the assumed higher tariff level
above by around 0.1 percentage points in 2027.
The sensitivities above are also dependent on the financial market reaction to changes
in trade restrictions. In particular, the assumed trade policy retaliation of other
countries to higher US tariffs is important for the estimated financial market effects of
higher tariffs.
One important financial market channel for the impact of global trade restrictions on
UK GDP and inflation is how much exchange rates move in response to those
restrictions. It is difficult to predict movements in the sterling exchange rate in response
to future tariff developments, however, and any movements will depend on the extent
of retaliation as well as broader market risk sentiment.
The extent to which financial market responses amplify or offset higher global
trade restrictions is also uncertain.
Bank of England  
Page 87


Broader financial market moves could plausibly amplify the negative impact of higher
global trade restrictions on UK GDP and inflation. A combination of higher uncertainty
and weaker global growth would be expected to reduce risky asset prices, for example
equity prices. These changes in risky asset prices would also drive a reduction in GDP.
Plausible estimates of this channel, based on the higher tariffs in Chart C, suggest a
further reduction in GDP of around 0.2% after three years and a small reduction in CPI
inflation. These estimates were derived from the ECB-Global semi-structural model
and the Bank’s main forecasting model.
Significant uncertainty remains over future global trade policies, as well as the extent
to which changing trade policies affect the UK inflation outlook. The MPC continues to
monitor the effects of trade restrictions as they materialise in the UK. This includes the
extent to which the economic impacts appear to be in line with model-based estimates
and are materialising through the expected channels outlined in this box. The MPC will
learn more about the true impacts over time, as some effects are likely to emerge
relatively slowly.
The MPC continues to monitor the effects of changing global trade restrictions
and the associated impact on the UK.
Bank of England  
Page 88


Box E: The outlook for food price inflation
Food consumer price inflation rose to 4.5% in June, materially higher than expected at
the time of the May Report. While food price inflation remains much lower than the
double-digit rates seen in 2022 and 2023, it is well above its pre-Covid average of
around 1½%. Food accounts for about 11% of the overall consumption basket of UK
households, and there is evidence that food prices can have an outsized effect on
households’ inflation perceptions and expectations (Anesti et al (2025) and Bonciani
et al (2024)).
This box discusses the current drivers of food price inflation, including global
agricultural commodity prices as well as domestic factors such as rising labour costs
and regulatory changes. The box then sets out an outlook for food price inflation,
informed by conversations with the Bank’s Agents’ contacts in the food industry, before
discussing the link between food price inflation and household inflation expectations.
UK food price inflation is materially affected by movements in global agricultural
commodity prices. That is because many food items are globally traded goods, with
their prices largely determined in international markets. For instance, the UK imports
large amounts of agricultural products that cannot be produced domestically, such as
cocoa and coffee beans. But there is also significant trade in agricultural goods that
are domestically produced. For example, the UK imported around 240 thousand
tonnes of beef in 2024, mainly from Ireland, while exporting 130 of the 900 thousand
tonnes of beef produced domestically, mainly to continental Europe.
The S&P Global GSCI global agricultural price index has increased by around 8% over
the past year. That is materially above the average annual increase of 2.8% since
1995, but well below the increase of over 60% observed in 2021.
Within this, cattle prices have risen by almost 20%. Several contacts noted that dry
weather conditions are pushing up the production costs of beef and some dairy
products in the UK and elsewhere, as cows must be fed silage earlier in the year due
to less grass growth.
There have also been large increases in the wholesale prices of coffee beans and
cocoa over the past two years. Droughts in major coffee-producing regions like Brazil
have led to reduced crop yields, while heavier than usual rainfall and the outbreak of
Some agricultural commodity prices have increased sharply this year, pushing
up food price inflation.
Bank of England  
Page 89


plant diseases have contributed to smaller cocoa harvests in West Africa. At the same
time, there is evidence that growing demand for coffee in emerging markets such as
China has contributed to the rise in global coffee bean prices.
In contrast, the wholesale prices for sugar and olive oil have fallen materially. The latter
is driven mainly by more favourable weather conditions in Spain, which produces
almost half of the world’s olive oil, with production recovering after droughts in recent
years.
Changes in wholesale prices are passed through to retail prices with a lag, in part
reflecting delivery contracts that are made a year in advance. That said, pass-through
for perishable goods such as food has historically tended to be faster than for durable
consumption goods (Box D of the November 2024 Monetary Policy Report). The
pace of wholesale price increases has slowed in recent months, which is expected to
reduce pressures on retail food price inflation in 2026 if sustained.
Movements in global agricultural prices have been important drivers of recent food
consumer price inflation in the UK. In June, UK CPI subcomponent inflation rates for
beef, butter, chocolate and coffee were elevated, while the inflation rates of olive oil
and sugar were negative (Chart A), broadly consistent with recent movements in global
wholesale prices.
Chart A: Inflation rates for some common food items have reflected
movements in global prices
Annual inflation rates for selected food subcomponents (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) The chart shows annual inflation rates for selected subclasses (COICOP 5) of the CPI basket in June 2025. The
labels include the subclass weights within food and non-alcoholic beverages.
Bank of England  
Page 90


To the extent that food prices are driven by global agricultural prices, they should tend
to move in the same direction across countries. As Chart B illustrates, UK and euro-
area CPI food price inflation rates have moved closely together in recent years. Staff
analysis also finds that in recent months, the retail prices of individual food items in the
UK and euro area have moved in the same direction, pointing to underlying commodity
prices being a common driver.
Nevertheless, food price inflation is currently over 1½ percentage points higher in the
UK than in the euro area. Compositional differences between the UK and euro-area
CPI food baskets could in principle explain some of that difference. But reweighting
euro-area food inflation with UK item weights suggests that this effect is currently
small. There are instead several UK-specific factors that could account for the
difference, namely higher increases in labour costs and the forthcoming introduction of
the framework for the Extended Producer Responsibility (EPR) for packaging
discussed below.
In addition to global agricultural commodity prices, domestic labour costs are currently
an important driver of food price inflation. UK wage growth has moderated but remains
significantly higher than in the euro area (Section 2.5). And annual regular pay growth
has been particularly strong in the food manufacturing sector (7.0%) and in the retail
Chart B: Food price inflation has recently picked up by more in the UK than in
the euro area
Annual food price inflation (a)
Sources: Eurostat, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) The food price inflation rates shown here include non-alcoholic beverages. The final data points are for June
2025.
Higher labour costs are contributing to food price inflation in the UK.
Bank of England  
Page 91


sector (7.6%), compared with 4.9% for aggregate private sector regular AWE growth in
the three months to May. That is in part because a relatively high proportion of staff in
these sectors are paid at or close to the National Living Wage (NLW), which increased
by 6.7% in April. Furthermore, overall labour costs of supermarkets are likely to have
been disproportionately affected by the lower threshold at which employers start
paying NICs, in part because a relatively high proportion of supermarket staff is
employed part-time.
These material increases in labour costs are likely to have pushed up food prices.
According to the Bank’s Agents’ contacts, most of the labour cost increases associated
with the NLW, but only some of the costs associated with the employer NICs increase,
have so far been passed on to consumers, which has added around 1%–2% to food
prices.
Labour costs are expected to continue to push up food prices in the second half of the
year, although firms may not achieve full pass-through. Contacts noted that consumers
were already responding to high food price inflation by trading down, limiting retailers’
ability to increase prices. For example, sales of own-label items had increased at the
expense of branded products. Customers were also increasingly purchasing cheaper
cuts of meat and buying food staples in larger value packs. To reduce the need for
higher prices, many firms along the supply chain were trying to mitigate cost increases,
including through reductions in headcount. Many contacts also noted that cost
pressures were putting further pressure on profit margins, which were already
compressed.
The Environment Act 2021 introduced the EPR framework for packaging to help the
UK achieve its environmental goals. This framework transfers the costs of packaging
waste management from local government to the businesses that produce the
packaging. By placing these costs on producers, the policy is intended to incentivise
reductions in the use of packaging materials and encourage recycling. The UK
government announced the final details of the scheme in June, and affected firms are
due to receive their first EPR invoices in October. A similar packaging waste regulation
has been introduced in the EU and will come into force in August 2026, which may
push up euro-area food price inflation somewhat next year.
Because packaging costs represent a higher share of food and drinks costs compared
with many other goods, the packaging levy is expected to affect CPI inflation mostly via
food prices. Bank staff estimate that the scheme could add a little over ½% to the level
of food prices if these costs were fully passed through to consumers.
A new framework to reduce packaging waste is expected to push up food price
inflation further in the second half of the year.
Bank of England  
Page 92


The Bank’s Agents’ contacts report that some suppliers started passing on the
expected costs of EPR in the first half of the year, ahead of the scheme’s
implementation. This may be because some UK grocers are increasingly operating on
longer-term contracts with major UK food suppliers, which is leading suppliers to be
more forward-looking in their pricing strategies. That said, most of the pass-through is
still likely to occur towards the end of the year, which will push up somewhat on food
price inflation.
Bank staff expect food price inflation to be around 5% in 2025 Q3, 1½ percentage
points higher than expected in the May Report, before rising further to 5½% by the end
of this year (Chart 2.19). Food price inflation is projected to account for about 0.5
percentage points of the expected deviation in CPI inflation from the 2% target in H2.
Bank staff expect food price inflation to fall back gradually next year as pressures from
labour cost increases fade and global wholesale food price inflation returns to historical
averages. This is broadly in line with intelligence from the Banks’ Agents, who report
that most contacts expect food inflation to approach 5%–5.5% in the second half of the
year before falling back to around 2%–3% in 2026.
There are material uncertainties around this projection. Consumers could continue
switching to lower cost items to a greater degree than expected, which would put
additional pressure on retailers to limit price increases. Acting in the opposite direction,
global agricultural commodity prices could increase further, for instance if higher
energy prices were materially to raise key input costs, or extreme weather events due
to climate change were to negatively impact food production (Parker (2025)). Several
contacts also noted that consumers had become more conscious of the environmental
and animal welfare implications of their food consumption. This change in consumer
preferences was already contributing to higher price pressures and was likely to
continue to do so in the future. Higher-welfare animal products are more expensive to
produce, and the necessary changes to supply chains can take several years and
require substantial investment.
The MPC monitors food prices closely, in part because they can have an outsized
influence on inflation expectations. Household expectations for future inflation comove
closely with perceptions of current inflation, which in turn are sensitive to price
changes observed in people’s daily lives, and particularly to changes in salient items
such as food (D’Acunto et al (2021) and Anesti et al (2025)).
Food price inflation is expected to rise to around 5.5% by the end of the year,
before falling back gradually in 2026.
Households’ inflation expectations can be strongly influenced by
developments in food prices.
Bank of England  
Page 93


The currently elevated level of households’ near-term inflation expectations (Section
2.5) is likely to have been driven in part by high food price inflation. Recent Bank staff
analysis extending Anesti et al (2025) shows that a 1 percentage point increase in the
contribution of food prices to CPI inflation was historically associated with a roughly 1
percentage point increase in the Citi/YouGov measure of one year ahead household
inflation expectations. However, since 2022 this effect has increased to 1.8 percentage
points. That is consistent with previous Bank staff work, which suggested that
households’ inflation expectations had become more sensitive to aggregate price
changes since the most recent period of very high inflation (Section 2.5 of the May
2025 Monetary Policy Report). Household inflation expectations have also become
more sensitive to petrol prices but remain relatively less sensitive to broader core
inflation (Chart C).
Chart C: Households’ near-term inflation expectations have been particularly
sensitive to developments in food price inflation
Estimated average response of household inflation expectations to changes in selected
CPI components (a)
Sources: Citigroup, ONS, YouGov and Bank calculations.
(a) The chart shows the estimated coefficients from regressions of changes in Citi/YouGov one year ahead
household inflation expectations on changes in the contributions of food price inflation, energy price inflation and
core CPI inflation to headline CPI inflation. The pre-2022 estimation period runs from 2005 Q1 to 2021 Q4, while the
post-2022 estimation period runs from 2022 Q1 to 2025 Q2.
The MPC will continue to monitor food price inflation, including potential
effects on inflation expectations and any resulting risks to the disinflation
process.
Bank of England  
Page 94


CPI inflation has risen in recent months, driven in part by higher food price inflation.
While households’ near-term inflation expectations have fallen back slightly in the
latest data, they remain elevated. That is likely to be due, in part, to the rise in food
price inflation combined with households’ attentiveness to food prices.
The expected further increases in food price inflation, against a backdrop of elevated
headline inflation, means that inflation expectations could remain elevated or even
increase further in the second half of the year. This could raise the risk that economic
mechanisms such as those outlined in the higher inflation persistence scenario in Box
A of the May 2025 Monetary Policy Report could begin to operate. The MPC will
monitor closely developments in inflation expectations measures, including any risks
they could pose to the ongoing disinflation process. The MPC will respond
appropriately to ensure that inflation expectations remain anchored, and inflation
returns to the 2% target in the medium term.
Bank of England  
Page 95


Box F: Agents’ update on business conditions
This box presents a summary of the Agents’ intelligence gathered in the six weeks to
early July that was considered by the MPC at its August meeting.
Sentiment remains subdued across retail, manufacturing, construction and business
services, unchanged from the update given in the Agents’ summary of business
conditions – 2025 Q2. Weak demand is expected to continue for the rest of 2025.
Uncertainty continues to weigh on export expectations, even though the impact of US
tariffs has so far been milder than feared.
Agents report a slightly looser labour market, both in terms of employment intentions
and easing recruitment difficulties. Intelligence on pay settlements for 2025 continues
to remain broadly in line with the Agents’ January pay survey at 3.7%. Contacts note
that lower inflation and a looser labour market than over the past few years are driving
lower settlements.
Food price inflation is now expected to peak at 5.0%–5.5% in the autumn. And
consumer goods inflation is rising as retailers pass on their supply chain and own cost
increases. Consumer services inflation remains elevated and stable.
Supermarkets say turnover growth is being driven by price rises, with sales volumes at
best up only marginally on last year. Contacts continue to report strong sales of
premium ready meals, as customers switch from eating out. Retailers report that
higher footfall is generally being offset by lower spend per customer. Heightened
consumer caution continues to inhibit sales of more expensive durable goods.
Restaurants report flat volumes, although some pub chains report relatively strong
growth supported by good weather. Fast food retailers see continued evidence of
trading down as they gain higher-income customers but lose those on lower incomes
with volumes falling overall. Home delivery volumes continue to grow strongly. The
experience of hotels and visitor attractions is mixed but suggests a relatively flat
market. Airports, ports, rail, and tour operators now report low growth in volumes and
expect a further slowing.
Demand for consumer goods and services remains weak. Contacts expect this
to continue for the rest of 2025, citing low consumer confidence.
Investment intentions remain subdued though regular replacement and update
investment continues.
Bank of England  
Page 96


Uncertainty related to weak demand, tax, regulation and wider government policy (for
example, inheritance tax, business assets relief, Employment Rights Bill, Extended
Producer Responsibility (EPR) regulation), as well as geopolitical instability continues
to cause contacts to hold back or delay investment. Concerns about soft demand and
growth prospects mean contacts generally do not need to expand capacity and are
tending to stretch out the replacement cycle for machinery and vehicles. Contacts are
reluctant to take on new borrowing even though they also tend not to have much
financial headroom to fund investment.
The cost of labour and desire to grow without increasing headcount means that
investment in software solutions, AI and low-cost automation is quite widespread and,
because it can generally be financed incrementally, it is treated more like operational
expenditure than capital spending. Although mention of AI is prevalent its use tends to
be more experimental rather than a wholesale implementation.
Contacts report that the pace of decline in exports to the EU continues to ease,
although recovery remains constrained by post-Brexit trade frictions and weak
demand. Growth in exports to the US is weaker, with softer demand linked to higher
tariffs. Demand from China and the Middle East is slightly softer. Defence and
aerospace exports continue to grow strongly as do exports of advisory services.
Tourism from Asia remains subdued, and the number of US visitors has declined
further.
The direct impact of US tariffs is milder than feared but more general tariff-related
uncertainty still weighs on sentiment, though less so recently. Some contacts paused
exports in April but have since resumed them. Some report increased Chinese supply
into Europe, mainly in finished goods, but few observe this as putting downward
pressure on price inflation. Goods exporters to the US are increasingly prioritising
supply chain resilience and face some pressure to cut prices. Contacts welcomed new
UK trade deals with the US and India, and Common Understanding with the EU.
Demand for audit, advisory and tax services remains strong. There are some tentative
signs of merger and acquisition activity recovering, which is expected to continue
should domestic uncertainty subside and the cost of finance fall. Restructuring and
insolvency activity continue to edge up on the same period last year. Demand for IT
services is still mixed. Although clients are cautious about spending on larger projects,
there is strong growth in AI and cybersecurity. Growth in corporate hospitality and
Manufactured goods exports volumes weakened slightly further on last year
owing to US tariffs. Services export values growth has held up.
Business services volumes growth remains weak. Contacts are still cautious
about the outlook, expecting only a modest pickup in volume growth into 2026.
Bank of England  
Page 97


marketing remains weak, as businesses limit discretionary spend. Logistics and
wholesaling contacts report broadly stable volumes on last year. Recruitment activity
remains down on last year, but there are some signs of stabilisation as businesses
address pockets of skill shortages or seek advice on reducing their workforce.
While supply chains have normalised from the high stock levels built up after the
pandemic, reducing stock and delaying orders are common themes as companies
seek to manage costs.
Contacts report that US tariffs and electric vehicle competition from overseas
producers is dampening automotive sector output. A few construction suppliers to
house builders are seeing modest order growth, but other output is flat or falling as
projects, for example in the renewables sector, continue to be delayed. Output of
consumer goods and food and drink remains subdued as consumers limit discretionary
spend. Manufacturers supplying energy infrastructure projects are more positive. The
aviation sector has good order books, but lack of availability of components and
related phasing of delivery has constrained the pace of growth. Strong demand
persists in the defence sector.
Commercial construction projects continue to be delayed or shelved, alongside a more
general slowing in commercial activity. Contacts reported delays to public sector
projects ahead of the Spending Review. While the review has increased clarity around
government and infrastructure projects, some remain concerned that these delays will
persist. House builders now mostly report growth in new build rates, despite frequent
mention of planning delays. High-rise development is hampered by new planning
regulations and higher costs. Housing association spending remains focused on repair
and maintenance. Outside of the High Speed 2 rail network and the Hinkley Point
power station, infrastructure spending remains subdued for the most part.
The annual rate of decline in manufacturing volumes eased owing to the slight
lessening in trade uncertainty. Despite this, the weak domestic market and
subdued new orders mean confidence remains weak. Some expected
improvement in weaker subsectors should lead to modest overall
manufacturing output growth in 2026.
The annual pace of decline in construction output is slightly worse, mainly due
to a further softening in commercial activity. While the medium-term outlook is
positive, some remain cautious about the extent of recovery in 2026.
Employment intentions are slightly weaker than in previous rounds owing
largely to higher labour costs, related to higher National Insurance
contributions (NICs). However, indications are that considerable adjustment
Bank of England  
Page 98


Larger firms and those in consumer-facing sectors have been the most active in
reducing headcount. While recruitment freezes are the most common means, Agents
are starting to hear more mentions of redundancies, though mainly voluntary. Contacts
also report that new employment rights legislation may dampen labour demand further.
Many contacts view automation, AI, or the offshoring of some roles as a solution to
increased labour costs, or a way to grow output without increasing headcount. Some
manufacturers see production overseas as better value.
Agents see further evidence of recruitment difficulties easing. Many contacts observe
that the balance of power in the labour market has shifted more towards employers,
and that recruitment conditions are now normal for less skilled occupations. Even in
specialist roles where skills shortages remain, contacts report some improvement in
their ability to recruit.
Contacts note that lower inflation and a looser labour market than over the past few
years are driving lower settlements, with some freezing pay or delaying pay rises,
although total labour costs are growing owing to NICs. Most contacts are not yet able
to give a figure for 2026, but some report that they see pressures easing further and
are budgeting for settlements in the 2%–4% range with a rough average of 3%–3.5%.
Potential upside risks to this include the impact of the current period of above-target
CPIU inflation, unions bargaining for higher increases, and next year’s increase in the
National Living Wage (NLW).
Higher prices, lower margins, lower pay settlements and reduced labour input are the
most commonly cited channels to mitigate NICs and NLW cost pressures. Some firms
facing lower margins this year will potentially take further action on prices, pay, and
headcount into 2026.
Contacts are reporting some increase in spare capacity, particularly in manufacturing
industries where demand is weak. For some, automation and investment are providing
additional capacity.
has taken place already with many firms having reduced headcount over the
last year.
Intelligence on pay settlements for 2025 continues to remain broadly in line
with the Agents’ January pay survey at 3.7%.
The combination of higher labour costs and EPR has put pressure on firms to
recover their margins via price increases, although many are not able to
recover as much as they would like. Consequently, pressures to restore
margins will persist.
Bank of England  
Page 99


Weak demand is making it difficult for firms to increase prices to the extent they would
like in the face of these higher costs. This is leading many contacts to try to reduce
other costs. This strategy may rebuild their margins, but it could take several quarters.
Materials’ cost inflation is modestly positive as is inflation of imported finished goods,
reflecting a pickup in the cost of energy, labour, freight and some commodities. The 90-
day pause on tariffs has made it difficult to gauge the impact tariffs will have on supply
chains but the effects to date have been modest. Most contacts find themselves in a
holding pattern waiting for a response. Until tariffs are fully enacted, there remains
significant uncertainty around their impact on costs and how firms will respond.
Manufacturers’ domestic prices are increasing as they pass on some of their higher
input and labour costs, where demand allows. Business-to-business price inflation is
easing gradually, but the pace of decline is mixed across sectors.
Consumer goods inflation is rising as retailers pass on their supply chain and own cost
increases. This is most evident in food price inflation which is now expected to peak
between 5.0%–5.5% in the autumn. Although higher NLW and NIC costs are already
being reflected in higher food prices, the majority of EPR costs are still to be felt. There
are limited signs yet of competition in the grocery sector taking the edge off this
expected peak in food price inflation. Non-food goods price inflation remains modest,
reflecting soft input costs and weak demand.
Consumer services inflation remains elevated and stable. The moderation in services
inflation has paused as companies have passed on higher labour and other input costs
to the extent demand allows.
Bank lending appetite is positive but targeted. Competition for safer lending is
intensifying, with profitable firms able to refinance or increase borrowing at better
spreads. However, credit remains tight for those sectors struggling financially.
Alternative finance is accessible, but at higher rates. Early-stage finance is tighter than
usual.
Credit demand remains weak. Contacts are cautious around the timing of market
refinancing, due to high market volatility and lower liquidity. Higher capital gains tax
has dampened transactional demand since April, but rising enquiries suggest some
recovery in 2025 H2. Demand for working capital and asset finance is holding up.
Corporate credit availability remains close to normal in aggregate, with
increased competition for the more creditworthy. Credit demand remains weak,
but there are signs of some recovery.
Bank of England  
Page 100


Secondary market demand is subdued, while supply is picking up. Demand is
strongest at the cheaper end, while expensive homes are selling more slowly. Estate
agents have mixed views, but most expect prices to remain flat over 2025.
Demand for rental properties continues to outstrip supply as more buy-to-let landlords
exit the sector adding to the supply of homes for sale. This supply squeeze is
supporting rent inflation. Some landlords are concerned arrears might rise once the
Renters Reform Bill becomes enacted in law.
Demand is weaker in the housing market now that the temporary increase in
activity ahead of stamp duty changes in England has fallen away.
Bank of England  
Page 101


Annex: Other forecasters’ expectations
This annex reports the results of the Bank’s most recent survey of external forecasters.
Responses were submitted in the two weeks to 25 July and are summarised in Chart A.
These are compared with the MPC’s baseline projections, which are conditioned on a range
of assumptions (Section 1.1) that may differ from those made by external forecasters.
On average, external forecasters expected GDP to rise by 1.1% over the four quarters to
2026 Q3, with four-quarter growth of 1.3% in 2027 Q3 and 1.4% in 2028 Q3 (Chart A, left
panel). The average external forecast is a little below the MPC’s baseline projection for 2026
Q3 of 1.3%, and further below the MPC’s 2027 Q3 and 2028 Q3 projections of 1.5% and
1.7%, respectively.
The average of external forecasters’ expectations for the unemployment rate was 4.9% in
2026 Q3, in line with the MPC’s baseline projection (Chart A, middle panel). External
forecasters expected the unemployment rate to fall to 4.7% in 2027 Q3 and to 4.6% in 2028
Q3. The MPC’s baseline projection falls to and remains 4.8% in 2027 Q3 and 2028 Q3.
CPI inflation was expected to be 2.3% in 2026 Q3, below the MPC’s projection of 2.7% (Chart
A, right panel). The average external forecast was 2.1% for 2027 Q3 and 2.0% for 2028 Q3.
The MPC’s baseline projection is 2.0% in 2027 Q3 and in 2028 Q3. The range of external
forecasts for CPI inflation in 2028 Q3 was very narrow.
Bank of England  
Page 102


Chart A: At the three-year horizon, external forecasters expected four-quarter GDP
growth to be 1.4%, the unemployment rate to be 4.6%, and CPI inflation to be 2.0%
Projections for GDP, the unemployment rate and CPI inflation
Bank of England  
Page 103


Glossary and other information
AWE – average weekly earnings.
CPI – consumer prices index.
CPI inflation – inflation measured by the consumer prices index.
DMP – Decision Maker Panel.
ERI – exchange rate index.
GDP – gross domestic product.
GSCI – Goldman Sachs Commodity Index.
HICP – harmonised index of consumer prices.
LFS – Labour Force Survey.
MaPS – Market Participants Survey.
OIS – overnight index swap.
PMI – purchasing managers’ index.
RPI – retail prices index.
Glossary of selected data and instruments
AI – artificial intelligence.
APF – Asset Purchase Facility.
BCC – British Chambers of Commerce.
CBI – Confederation of British Industry.
CFO – chief financial officer.
CIPD – Chartered Institute of Personnel and Development.
COICOP – Classification of Individual Consumption by Purpose.
Abbreviations
Bank of England  
Page 104


DMO – Debt Management Office.
ECB – European Central Bank.
EPR – Extended Producer Responsibility.
EU – European Union.
FCA – Financial Conduct Authority.
FNAB – food and non-alcoholic beverages.
FPC – Financial Policy Committee.
FTSE – Financial Times Stock Exchange.
GfK – Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung, Great Britain Ltd.
GVA – gross value added.
HMRC – His Majesty’s Revenue and Customs.
IAS – Inflation Attitudes Survey.
ILO – International Labour Organization.
IMF – International Monetary Fund.
IS – investment saving.
LTI – loan to income.
LTV – loan to value.
MIDAS – mixed-data sampling.
MPC – Monetary Policy Committee.
MTIC – missing trader intra-community.
NICs – National Insurance contributions.
NLW – National Living Wage.
OBR – Office for Budget Responsibility.
Ofgem – Office of Gas and Electricity Markets.
Bank of England  
Page 105


ONS – Office for National Statistics.
OPEC – Organization of the Petroleum Exporting Countries.
PMI – purchasing managers’ index.
PPP – purchasing power parity.
PSD – Product Sales Data.
QE – quantitative easing.
QT – quantitative tightening.
REC – Recruitment and Employment Confederation.
RTI – Real-Time Information.
S&P – Standard & Poor’s.
SDLT – Stamp Duty Land Tax.
VAT – Value Added Tax.
V/U – vacancies to unemployment.
Except where otherwise stated, the source of the data used in charts and tables is the Bank of
England or the Office for National Statistics (ONS) and all data, apart from financial markets
data and results from the Decision Maker Panel (DMP) Survey, are seasonally adjusted.
n.a. = not available.
Because of rounding, the sum of the separate items may sometimes differ from the total
shown.
On the horizontal axes of graphs, larger ticks denote the first observation within the relevant
period, eg data for the first quarter of the year.
Symbols and conventions
Bank of England  
Page 106
