BANK: BOE
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: Monetary Policy Report - April 2026
DATE: 01/06/2026
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/monetary-policy-report/2026/april/monetary-policy-report-april-2026.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Bank of England
Monetary Policy Report 
Monetary Policy Committee  
April 2026
Bank of England  


Monetary policy at the Bank of England 
The objectives of monetary policy 
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) sets monetary policy to keep inflation low and stable, 
which supports growth and jobs. Subject to maintaining price stability, the MPC is also 
required to support the Government’s economic policy.  
The Government has set the MPC a target for the 12-month increase in the Consumer Prices 
Index of 2%. The 2% inflation target is symmetric and applies at all times. The MPC’s remit 
recognises, however, that the actual inflation rate will depart from its target as a result of 
shocks and disturbances, and that attempts to keep inflation at target in these circumstances 
may cause undesirable volatility in output.  
The Monetary Policy Report 
The MPC is committed to clear, transparent communication. The Monetary Policy Report is a 
key part of that.  
We have made some changes to the structure and content of the Report so that it reflects 
better the wide range of inputs that are informing monetary policy, as explained in this 
Quarterly Bulletin article. The purpose of the document is to set out the analysis that 
informed policy discussions.   
The Report is produced quarterly by Bank staff under the guidance of the members of the 
MPC. It has been prepared and published by the Bank of England in accordance with section 
18 of the Bank of England Act 1998. 
The Monetary Policy Committee 
• Andrew Bailey, Chair
• Sarah Breeden
• Swati Dhingra
• Megan Greene
• Clare Lombardelli
• Catherine L Mann
• Huw Pill
• Dave Ramsden
• Alan Taylor
Bank of England  
Page 1


PowerPoint™ versions of the Monetary Policy Report charts and Excel spreadsheets of the 
data underlying most of them are available at http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/monetary-
policy-report/2026/april-2026. The ‘Projections Databank’ is an additional Excel 
spreadsheet containing a wide range of information relating to the central projection, as well 
as projections for the scenarios.  
© Bank of England 2026 
ISSN 2633-7819 
 
Bank of England  
Page 2


 Contents 
Monetary Policy Summary 
4 
Monetary Policy Overview 
5 
1: Current economic conditions 
9 
  1.1: Inflation 
9 
  1.2: Activity  
19 
  1.3: Global and financial conditions 
26 
2: Topical policy issues 
33 
Box A: How could conflict in the Middle East affect households? 
33 
Box B: How might firms respond to higher energy prices? 
38 
Box C: How will prevailing economic conditions affect the impact of the energy 
shock on inflation? 
46 
Box D: What do industry-level data imply for the risks to unemployment? 
51 
Box E: How resilient will household spending be to the rise in energy prices? 
56 
Box F: How are global developments affecting UK non-energy import prices?   
64 
3: Outlook, scenarios and risks 
69 
  3.1: Key assumptions and judgements differentiating scenarios 
69 
  3.2: Scenario outcomes 
74 
  3.3: Model-based policy simulations 
80 
Box G: How should monetary policy respond to an energy price shock? 
84 
Annex 1: Model-based policy simulations 
91 
Annex 2: Monetary policy since the February 2026 Report 
103 
Glossary and other information 
104 
Bank of England  
Page 3


Monetary Policy Summary
At its meeting ending on 29 April 2026, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) voted by a
majority of 8–1 to maintain Bank Rate at 3.75%. One member voted to increase Bank Rate by
0.25 percentage points, to 4%.
The conflict in the Middle East means that prospects for global energy prices are highly
uncertain. Monetary policy cannot influence energy prices but will be set to ensure that the
economic adjustment to them occurs in a way that achieves the 2% inflation target
sustainably. The policy stance required to achieve this will depend on the scale and duration
of the shock, and how it propagates through the economy.
The April Monetary Policy Report sets out three scenarios that help to illustrate a range of
possible outcomes for the UK economy.
CPI inflation has increased to 3.3%, and is likely to be higher later this year as the effects of
higher energy prices pass through. There is a risk of material second-round effects in price
and wage-setting, which policy would need to lean against. But the labour market continues to
loosen, and a weakening economy could contain inflationary pressures. Financial conditions
have tightened since the conflict began, which will help to reduce inflation over time.
Taking all the risks to the economic outlook into account, the Committee judges that it is
appropriate to maintain Bank Rate at this meeting.
The Committee will continue to monitor closely the situation in the Middle East and how its
impact propagates through the economy. The Committee stands ready to act as necessary to
ensure that CPI inflation remains on track to meet the 2% target in the medium term.
Bank of England  
Page 4


Monetary Policy Overview
The conflict in the Middle East has changed the outlook for inflation in the UK. The disruption
the conflict has caused to energy supplies has led to a sharp rise in global energy prices. The
immediate effects are already being felt in the UK, for example in higher fuel prices. CPI
inflation increased to 3.3% in March and is likely to be higher later this year as the effects of
higher energy prices pass through. That is a very different picture from three months ago,
when inflation was expected to fall back to close to the 2% target.
Monetary policy cannot undo the increase in global energy prices. And it takes time for
monetary policy to work through the economy, so any action the MPC might take now would
not prevent higher inflation in coming months.
What the MPC will do is set monetary policy to make sure that the effects of the shock do not
become embedded into broad-based inflationary pressures, so that inflation falls back to the
2% target and stays there (Box G: How should monetary policy respond to an energy price
shock?).
The MPC’s current approach to setting interest rates, including today’s decision, is based on
two key judgements.
Key policy judgement 1
Continued weakness in demand and the labour market is likely to lessen the strength
of second-round effects from higher global energy prices. But these effects are likely
to be stronger, the larger and more persistent is the rise in global energy prices.
Higher global energy prices will continue to push up UK inflation this year. That partly reflects
the direct effects from higher global energy prices feeding through into motor fuel and utility
prices faced by UK households (Box A: How could conflict in the Middle East affect
households?). Inflation will also be boosted by indirect effects as companies at home and
abroad pass on increases in their energy costs, and these effects work their way through
supply chains (Box F: How are global developments affecting UK non-energy import prices?).
These indirect effects are likely to be largest for food prices in the near term.
What happens further ahead partly depends on whether higher energy prices affect wage and
price-setting behaviour and feed through into broad-based inflationary pressures – often
referred to as second-round effects.
Bank of England  
Page 5


Some factors are likely to contain the strength of second-round effects at this time. Demand
for labour is subdued. And the unemployment rate has been rising since 2024 and could do
so more rapidly if demand were to weaken further (Box D: What do industry-level data imply
for the risks to unemployment?). Together, these factors are likely to reduce workers’ ability to
bargain for higher wages in response to higher inflation, lessening the extent of second-round
effects (Box C: How will prevailing economic conditions affect the impact of the energy shock
on inflation?).
Similarly, companies’ ability to raise prices in response to higher energy costs is likely to be
limited by weakness in economic activity (Section 1.2), particularly if the squeeze in
households’ income from higher energy prices leads to a marked fall in demand (Box E: How
resilient will household spending be to the rise in energy prices?).
However, the fact that this shock is happening after several years of above-target inflation
could boost the strength of second-round effects. Agency intelligence suggests companies
may look to increase some prices given compressed margins. And survey evidence indicates
that companies’ price-setting is more sensitive than it used to be to increases in headline
inflation (Box B: How might firms respond to higher energy prices?). Households’ inflation
expectations may also be more sensitive to inflation than in the past, particularly as it is likely
to be driven by the prices of highly visible items, such as energy and food. Indeed, some
measures of household inflation expectations have already risen sharply (Section 1.1).
Overall, the MPC judges that current economic conditions are likely to lessen the strength of
second-round effects that monetary policy needs to lean against. But there is uncertainty
around this judgement and the MPC will monitor the evidence as it emerges.
The Committee also judges that second-round effects are likely to be stronger, the larger and
more persistent is the rise in global energy prices. That is because, in such circumstances,
the direct and indirect effects from higher global energy prices would further boost UK
inflation, making it more likely that inflation expectations rise and increasing the chances of
changes in wage and price-setting behaviour.
Key policy judgement 2
Monetary policy needs to balance the costs of leaning too little against second-round
effects and the costs of responding too much. The right balance is likely to change
depending on how events unfold.
The monetary policy setting required to ensure that inflation falls back to the 2% target and
stays there will depend on the scale and duration of the shock caused by the conflict in the
Middle East, and how the shock feeds through the UK economy.
Bank of England  
Page 6


Section 3 sets out three scenarios that help to illustrate how different paths for global energy
prices and any second-round effects on domestic price and wage-setting could affect the UK
economy.
In both Scenarios A and B, assuming monetary policy follows the path implied by market
interest rates in the 15 days to 22 April, inflation rises to a little over 3½ at the end of this year
before falling back. It ends the scenario period a little below the 2% target in Scenario A and
close to 2% in Scenario B. By contrast, the larger energy price shock and stronger second-
round effects in Scenario C mean that inflation rises much more sharply, peaking at over 6%
at the start of 2027, and falls back by less, ending the scenario around 2½%.
Section 3.3 explores how Bank Rate might need to respond in these scenarios if monetary
policy were to follow simple policy rules. Given the inflationary nature of the energy price
shock, almost all of these simple rules show a higher path for Bank Rate on average over the
three-year period in all scenarios compared to what the same rules indicated for the central
projection in the February Report. For Scenario C, they suggest that the path for Bank Rate
would need to be materially higher than the market-implied path in the 15 days to 22 April in
order to return inflation sustainably to the target in the medium term – albeit at the cost of
more slack in the economy.
These simple policy rules assume that everyone knows exactly which scenario is going to
unfold. In reality, there is significant uncertainty about how events will play out. That means
the MPC must form a judgement about how much to lean against any potential second-round
effects. Leaning more strongly would reduce the risk that broad-based inflationary pressures
become embedded. But that would come at the cost of weakening the economy.
At this meeting, the MPC judged that it was appropriate to maintain Bank Rate at 3.75%.
Current economic conditions are likely to lessen the strength of second-round effects that
monetary policy needs to lean against (Key policy judgement 1). There has been some
In Scenario A, oil and gas prices follow the paths implied by futures curves, and household
spending falls by more than would be implied by the historical relationship with real
incomes, as households prioritise saving instead. The combination of the relatively short-
lived energy shock and weakness in demand is assumed to be enough to prevent any
second-round effects in response to the shock.
In Scenario B, energy prices peak at similar levels but remain higher over the rest of the
forecast than in Scenario A. Households’ saving behaviour is assumed to evolve in line
with historical experience. Second-round effects are assumed to be modest.
In Scenario C, energy prices rise sharply and remain elevated for a prolonged period. The
larger energy shock is assumed to lead to much stronger second-round effects than in
Scenario B.
Bank of England  
Page 7


tightening in financial conditions since the conflict began, which is already acting against
second-round effects and will reduce inflation over time.
The Committee will continue to monitor closely the situation in the Middle East and how its
impact propagates through the economy. If there are signs that second-round effects are
likely to be weaker than currently judged – for example because current economic conditions
weigh on them by more – then monetary policy can lean against inflation by less. If there are
signs that second-round effects are likely to be stronger than currently judged – for example
because current economic conditions weigh on them by less, households and companies are
more attentive to rises in inflation after successive supply shocks, or because the shock to
energy prices becomes much larger and more persistent – monetary policy will need to lean
more strongly against those possible effects.
However events unfold, the Committee stands ready to act as necessary to ensure that CPI
inflation remains on track to meet the 2% target in the medium term.
Bank of England  
Page 8


1: Current economic conditions
1.1: Inflation
The upside news to CPI inflation mainly reflected higher fuel prices, which have risen on
account of higher crude oil prices owing to the conflict in the Middle East. Services inflation
was also higher than expected, while core goods inflation was lower.
At the time of the February Report, CPI inflation had been projected to fall by over 1
percentage point to 2.0% by 2026 Q3 (Chart 1.2). The April near-term projection is 1.4
percentage points higher such that CPI inflation is now expected to be 3.3% in Q3. CPI
CPI inflation was 3.3% in March (Chart 1.1), 0.3 percentage points higher than
expected at the time of the February Report.
Chart 1.1: CPI inflation was 3.3% in March
Contributions to CPI inflation (a)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P., Department for Energy Security and Net Zero (DESNZ), ONS and Bank
calculations.
(a) Figures in parentheses are CPI basket weights in 2026, which may not sum to 100% due to rounding.
Data are shown to March 2026. Component-level Bank staff projections are shown from April to September
2026. The food component is defined as food and non-alcoholic beverages. Fuels and lubricants estimates
use weekly DESNZ petrol and diesel price data which cover the first half of April 2026 and are then
projected based on the sterling oil futures curve. Electricity and gas also includes liquid fuels.
Bank of England  
Page 9


inflation is expected to rise somewhat further in 2026 Q4 (Section 3).
The majority of the news over the next six months is due to a larger direct contribution from
higher energy costs (Chart 1.3, green and orange bars). Higher energy costs will also feed
through indirectly to CPI inflation as firms pass higher costs through their supply chains (Chart
1.3, purple bars).
The April near-term CPI projection is consistent with Scenarios A and B outlined in Section 3.
The projection would be higher under Scenario C, in which wholesale oil and gas prices are
assumed to be substantially higher in the near term.
Chart 1.2: Near-term CPI inflation is expected to be higher than in the February Report
Annual CPI inflation (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Bank staff’s short-term inflation forecast only extends for six months. For that reason, the orange
diamond represents the February 2026 central projection for 2026 Q3.
Bank of England  
Page 10


The indirect effects of higher energy prices are expected to build gradually, raising CPI
inflation by around ⅓ of a percentage point in Q3 (Chart 1.4). Based on a range of models
that incorporate energy costs in domestic and imported supply chains, as well as intelligence
from the Bank’s Agents and survey evidence, Bank staff estimate that the pass-through of
indirect effects will be quickest in the near term for food prices (purple bars). Core goods
(aqua bars) and services prices (gold bars) are also expected to increase due to higher
energy costs.
Chart 1.3: A larger direct contribution from higher energy prices is the main driver of
the higher near-term inflation outlook
News to CPI inflation relative to the February 2026 projection (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Bank staff’s short-term inflation forecast only extends for six months. For that reason, the Q3 ‘Other
news’ bar represents the difference between the April Report short-term forecast shown in Chart 1.1 and
the February Report 2026 Q3 projection. The ‘fuels and lubricants’ and ‘electricity and gas’ bars capture
direct CPI news from energy prices since the previous Report, while the ‘Indirect energy impacts’ are based
on a range of model estimates, Agency intelligence and survey evidence. Electricity and gas also includes
liquid fuels.
Bank of England  
Page 11


The conflict in the Middle East has led to a sharp rise in oil and gas prices, reflecting
disruption to current and expected future energy supply (Section 1.3 and Section 3). The
Brent crude front-month oil price peaked at $119 per barrel on 31 March. The front-month oil
futures price was $100 a barrel on average in the 15 UK working days to 22 April, up from $64
in the period leading up to the February Report (Chart 1.5, left panel). The UK wholesale gas
futures curve has also risen, by around 37% on average over the same period (Chart 1.5,
right panel). Oil front-month prices are slightly below the peak observed following Russia’s
invasion of Ukraine, while gas futures prices are substantially lower (Chart 1.5). That
difference may partly reflect a greater share of global oil supply having been disrupted in the
current conflict relative to in 2022.
Chart 1.4: The indirect effects of higher energy prices are expected to build gradually
in the near term
Estimated contribution of the indirect effects of energy prices to annual CPI inflation (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) This chart splits the purple bars in Chart 1.3 into estimated contributions from CPI subcomponents.
These estimates are based on a range of model-based estimates, intelligence from the Bank’s Agents and
survey evidence. The purple bars represent the estimated contribution from food and non-alcoholic
beverages, alcohol and tobacco. This differs from Chart 1.1, where alcohol and tobacco fall instead within
the ‘Other goods’ bars.
Energy prices have risen sharply but remain below 2022 peaks.
Bank of England  
Page 12


The disruption has also led to a sharp rise in the price of diesel relative to the Brent crude oil
price, inflating the difference between the two prices known as the crack spread. Crack
spreads fluctuate over time, but they are typically stable enough that movements in Brent oil
prices provide a good signal for UK petrol and diesel prices. However, because a large share
of global supplies of diesel is refined in the Middle East, the spread has increased
significantly, pushing up diesel prices by more than petrol prices.
Higher oil prices have fed through to higher petrol and diesel pump prices and are expected to
push up CPI inflation further in 2026 Q2 (Chart 1.3, green bars). Higher wholesale gas futures
prices will mostly affect household utility bills from July, following the expected increase in the
Ofgem price cap (Box A).
Chart 1.5: Oil and gas prices have risen notably but remain below 2022 peaks
Wholesale oil and gas prices (a)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and Bank calculations.
(a) Oil prices are Brent crude, in dollars per barrel. Gas prices are Bloomberg UK NBP Natural Gas
Forward Day price. Dark dashed lines refer to respective futures curves using one-month forward prices
based on the 15 working day average to 22 April 2026, the dotted lines are based on the 15 working day
average to 26 January 2026 and the light dashed lines are based on the 7 working day average to 25
October 2022. The final data points shown are forward prices for June 2029.
The outlook for consumer food price inflation is much higher than in the February
Report, while the outlook for core consumer goods inflation is little changed.
Bank of England  
Page 13


Energy is a key input into the production of food and core goods items, so the energy price
shock is expected to raise costs for goods produced both domestically and abroad. UK-
weighted world export price inflation (excluding oil) is set to rise as higher energy prices feed
through to the cost of production abroad (Box F). ONS estimates suggest that imports
account for a little under 40% of the consumer costs of food and core goods items, part of
which reflects imported inputs such as energy and fertiliser.
Consumer food price inflation is expected to rise to 4.6% by September 2026 as higher
energy costs for imported and domestic production feed through (Chart 1.6, right panel).
Increases in other costs such as fertilisers are expected to raise food prices further out (Box
A). Contacts of the Bank’s Agents report that food price inflation could rise to around 6%–7%
by the end of the year, although the timing and magnitude of that rise are uncertain (Agents’
summary of business conditions – April 2026 (ASBC)).
In contrast to the projected strength in consumer food price inflation, core consumer goods
inflation is expected to average 1% over the next six months, broadly as expected at the time
of the February Report (Chart 1.6, left panel). That reflects downside news in March as well
as the fact that indirect pass-through of higher energy costs to core goods is expected to be
much slower than for food. Consistent with that, Agents’ contacts note that they are not
currently seeing significant increases in imported goods prices.
Survey data suggest a possible upside risk to the consumer food and core goods inflation
projections shown in Chart 1.6, although the signal from these data is uncertain. The S&P
Global UK PMI manufacturing input price index has risen sharply in the past few months and
was at its highest level since June 2022 in the April flash release. But since PMI surveys ask
firms whether prices have increased or decreased, rather than about the magnitude of any
change, the sharp rise may capture the fact that the recent increase in energy prices affects a
very wide group of firms, rather than implying a large magnitude of price rises.
Bank of England  
Page 14


Measures of underlying consumer services inflation have remained above rates consistent
with the 2% CPI target. In the three months to March, monthly annualised underlying services
inflation measures were around 4% to 5%, above the roughly 2¾% to 3% range that is
estimated to be consistent with 2% headline inflation. Part of the recent strength appears to
reflect past rises in restaurant and cafe inflation, which tends to have a high weight in these
measures, and may reflect previous rises in food price inflation.
Consumer services inflation is expected to fall from 4.5% in March to 3.8% by September
(Chart 1.6, left panel). That reflects the impact of continued easing in wage growth and a large
fall in April owing to base effects, as unusually large rises in water bills and vehicle excise
duty in 2025 fall out of the annual comparison. Beyond April, the extent of disinflation is
expected to be much less than previously expected. This is due to stronger non-labour input
costs due to the Middle East conflict. Inflation in catering services, for example, which is food
Chart 1.6: Inflation rates for food prices, and to a lesser extent services prices, are
projected to be higher than anticipated at the time of the February Report
Annual inflation rates for components of CPI (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) The core goods component is defined as goods excluding food and non-alcoholic beverages (FNAB),
alcohol, tobacco and energy. Data are to March 2026. Bank staff projections are from April to September
2026. Dashed lines represent the 2012–19 averages, which are 2.7%, 0.9% and 0.5% for services, FNAB
and core goods respectively.
Measures of underlying consumer services inflation remain elevated.
Higher non-labour input costs are expected to slow the services disinflation process.
Bank of England  
Page 15


and energy intensive, is expected to be somewhat higher than expected in the February
Report. And airfares and package holidays prices are expected to rise significantly due to
higher jet fuel costs. Higher prices for airfares and package holidays are likely to be observed
gradually in the CPI, however, as the ONS generally collects these prices one, three and six
months in advance. In addition, some airlines tend to buy fuel in advance.
Inflation expectations
Since the start of the Middle East conflict, short-term inflation compensation measures in
financial markets have risen notably, while medium-term inflation expectations, such as the
five-year, five-year forward inflation swap rate, are only slightly higher. The median
respondent to the latest Markets Participants Survey (MaPS) expected higher CPI inflation
one year ahead, at 2.8% compared with 2.2% in the February survey, but expected inflation to
be 2% at the three-year horizon.
Business inflation and own price expectations have also risen. One-year ahead CPI
expectations of firms responding to the DMP survey increased to 3.5% in the three months to
April, 0.4 percentage points higher than in the three months to February. The more volatile
single month measure rose by 1 percentage point to 4.0% (Chart 1.7, left panel). Firms’ own
price expectations for the year ahead rose by a similar amount (Box B), but three-year ahead
CPI inflation expectations were little changed. Inflation expectations of firms responding to the
2026 Q1 Deloitte CFO survey also rose by 0.6 percentage points, to 3.6% in Q1, while two-
year ahead expectations rose only slightly to 2.7%, up from 2.5%.
Household inflation expectations tend to move closely with observed rises in salient prices
such as food and energy (August 2025 Monetary Policy Report and Box C). But the recent
rise in the Citi/YouGov one-year ahead measure to 5.4% in March, up from 3.3% in February
(Chart 1.7, right panel) was larger than would be typically implied by these relationships. The
5–10 year ahead measure tends to be less sensitive to salient prices but this also rose by 0.9
percentage points between February and March to 4.5%. Both of these measures fell back a
little in the April Citi/YouGov data but remain elevated. Short-term inflation expectations in the
Bank/NMG survey also rose following the onset of the conflict, but by less than in the
Citi/YouGov survey.
Measures of inflation expectations have risen following the increase in energy prices,
especially for households.
Bank of England  
Page 16


Annual private sector regular AWE growth was 3.2% in the three months to February (Chart
1.8), 0.2 percentage points below expectations at the time of the February Report and down
from around 6% at the start of 2025. Alternative indicators continue to point to wage growth
being stronger than AWE, though these indicators have also trended downward. An estimate
of private sector median pay based on HMRC RTI data implies pay growth of 4.4% in the
three months to February, while data from Indeed and the DMP survey imply wage growth of
around 4%, down from over 5% in early 2025. Part of the difference between these alternative
indicators and the AWE data reflects the shifting composition of the workforce towards lower
paid industries in the AWE statistics. ONS estimates suggest this effect pushed down
Chart 1.7: Households’ inflation expectations have risen markedly, but business
expectations have risen by less
Survey-based measures of business (a) and household inflation expectations (b)
Sources: Citigroup, DMP survey, YouGov and Bank calculations.
(a) Data shown are from the DMP survey. The solid lines are three-month averages and the dashed lines
are single month responses. The data are in response to the question: ‘What do you think the annual CPI
inflation rate will be in the UK, one year from now and three years from now?’. The latest data points are for
April 2026, conducted between April 2–17. The DMP survey data have a short back-run, so no historical
averages are shown.
(b) Data shown are from the Citi/YouGov survey and are based on responses to the questions: ‘How do
you expect consumer prices of goods and services will develop in the next 12 months?’, and ‘And what do
you think will happen to the prices of goods and services, on average, over the longer term – say five to ten
years?’. Dashed lines represent the series averages over 2010–19. The latest data points are for March
2026, conducted between 20–23 March. The chart does not show the April 2026 Citi/YouGov data, which
was released after the data cut-off for incorporation in the charts.
Wage growth has continued to slow.
Bank of England  
Page 17


measured wage growth by around 0.5 percentage points in the three months to February. The
dashed line in Chart 1.8, which excludes the impact of these compositional effects, is likely to
provide a clearer indication of inflationary pressures.
Indicators of pay settlements have been little changed in recent months. For 2026 as a whole,
data from the Bank’s Agents’ contacts now suggests a median settlement of 3.5%, 0.1
percentage points higher than the pay survey outcome reported in February. That is slightly
above the central estimate of target consistent wage growth of 3¼% outlined in Box A of the
February 2026 Monetary Policy Report, although there is uncertainty around that estimate.
Chart 1.8: Wage growth has continued to slow
Measures of private sector wage growth (a)
Sources: DMP survey, HMRC, Indeed, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Private sector regular pay growth shows the ONS measure of private sector regular AWE growth (three-
month average on same three-month average a year ago). The DMP shows three-month average realised
pay growth from the DMP survey (three-month average on same three-month average a year ago). HMRC
RTI (three-month average on same three-month average a year ago) shows a proxy of growth in median
pay in the private sector. Staff construct this measure by taking median pay for each industry (excluding
public administration and defence, education, health and social work) and combining them using industry
shares in payrolled employment. Annual growth is then calculated using the Laspeyres formula, holding
industry weights fixed at their levels a year earlier to reduce the influence of changes in workforce
composition. Indeed Wage Tracker shows annual average job title matched pay growth for UK job
vacancies. Latest data points are for the three months to February 2026 for private sector regular pay and
the Indeed Wage Tracker, March 2026 for the HMRC RTI private sector median, and April 2026 for the
DMP survey. Private sector regular pay growth projection diamonds are for 2026 Q1 and 2026 Q2.
Pay settlements data are little changed and most settlements had been agreed before
the recent energy price rises.
Bank of England  
Page 18


The impact of higher expected inflation is unlikely to show up in realised pay settlements data
until the end of the year at the earliest. The majority of pay deals are implemented in January
and April and intelligence from the Bank’s Agents suggests that these pay deals were mostly
agreed around the turn of the year, prior to the recent inflationary shock. Most firms tend to
set basic pay only once a year, so the recent rise in inflation is unlikely to show up this year
unless firms choose to reopen their pay deals. Looking ahead, contacts of the Agents report
that, due to the energy shock, pay deals for 2027 are likely to be somewhat higher than firms
would otherwise have planned. But the backdrop is different to the previous shock in 2022
since the labour market is much looser and margins are constrained (Box B). And so far,
contacts report little sign of firms seeking to top up pay within the year, in light of higher
inflation, in contrast to the 2022–23 period.
Annual private sector AWE growth is expected to average 3.1% in 2026 Q1 before falling
slightly to 3.0% in 2026 Q2 owing to base effects (Chart 1.8).
1.2: Activity
Domestic demand
Underlying GDP, based on the collective steer from business survey indicators, is estimated
to have grown by 0.2% in 2026 Q1 (Chart 1.9). Underlying GDP growth is judged to be below
Bank staff estimates of potential supply growth of around 0.3%–0.4%, consistent with a
growing margin of slack.
Headline GDP growth is expected to have been significantly stronger at 0.5% in 2026 Q1,
owing to an unusually high monthly growth rate of 0.5% in February. That rate is substantially
higher than the signal from survey indicators and follows a pattern of unusually high growth
rates in Q1 in recent years.
The energy supply shock could weigh on GDP growth via lower demand as real income
growth slows (Box E) and via higher uncertainty. Potential supply growth could also be
reduced, for example, if business investment were to fall, firms were to exit or supply chains
were to become disrupted (Box B). The impact of the conflict on near-term growth is expected
to be moderate. Underlying GDP is expected to grow by 0.1% in 2026 Q2, a touch weaker
than expected in the February Report reflecting a small drag from higher uncertainty as firms
reassess the outlook for demand. The S&P Global UK PMI Survey output and new orders
indices were below their historical averages in April, albeit higher than in March. Survey
respondents attributed the weakness to lower business confidence and the postponement of
Pay growth is expected to continue to moderate in the near term.
Underlying GDP growth is expected to remain subdued.
Bank of England  
Page 19


new projects. Contacts of the Bank’s Agents also report that the Middle East conflict has
eroded business confidence, with many citing concerns about the potential impact on demand
and higher input costs.
Household consumption growth was 0.1% in 2025 Q4, unchanged from the past two quarters.
The counterpart to weak consumption has been an elevated saving ratio, which rose by 0.7
percentage points to 9.9% in 2025 Q4, a little below its recent peak. Restrictive monetary
policy has been an important driver of weakness in consumption growth and the elevated
saving ratio. Recent rises in mortgage rates will weigh on consumption growth relative to
expectations at the time of the February Report (Box E).
Chart 1.9: Underlying GDP growth is expected to remain subdued
Quarterly growth in headline GDP and underlying growth implied by business surveys (a)
Sources: Bank of England Agents, BCC, CBI, Lloyds Business Barometer, ONS, S&P Global and Bank
calculations.
(a) The final data point for quarterly headline GDP growth is for 2025 Q4. The diamonds for 2026 Q1 and
2026 Q2 show Bank staff projections. Underlying GDP growth estimates are from a survey indicator model
based on a Staggered-Combination MIDAS approach (Moreira (2025)). The orange diamonds to 2025 Q4
show in-sample fitted values of the survey indicator model, and diamonds for 2026 Q1 and 2026 Q2 show
out-of-sample projections. The orange swathe shows the interquartile range of estimates from individual
survey indicators in the model and values have been interpolated between quarters.
Household consumption growth remains subdued and real income growth is
projected to fall in the near term.
Bank of England  
Page 20


Consumption growth is expected to remain subdued in the near term owing to a weak 
expected path for real income growth. Bank staff project real income to fall by 0.5% in the 
year to 2026 Q2 (Chart 1.10), lower than expected in the February Report, as higher energy 
prices feed through to CPI inflation. The headline GfK consumer confidence index fell 
moderately over March and April, consistent with lower expected real incomes weighing on 
sentiment. The 12-month expectations balance for the general economic situation fell more 
sharply and is now more than 1½ standard deviations below its historical average. The 
savings index, which records whether households think it is currently a good time to save, 
rose by around one standard deviation between February and April.
In light of the weakness in spending indicators, consumption is expected to grow by 0.1% in 
2026 Q2. That exceeds expected growth in real incomes such that the household saving ratio 
is expected to fall to 9.1% in that quarter.
Business investment has been relatively robust, growing by 4.3% over 2025. That strength
was largely concentrated in non-residual buildings and structures assets, and in utilities
industries. Growth in other subcomponents of business investment was weaker.
Chart 1.10: Real income growth is expected to fall in the near term
Contributions to four-quarter growth in real post-tax household disposable income (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Diamonds show Bank staff projections for 2026 Q1 and Q2. Bars may not sum to total due to rounding.
Income includes non-profit institutions serving households and is defined as total available household
resources, deflated by the consumer expenditure deflator. The data are based on ONS codes:
RPQK/((ABJQ+HAYE)/(ABJR+HAYO)).
Business investment growth has been relatively robust but uncertainty is projected to
weigh a little on investment decisions in the near term.
Bank of England  
Page 21


Business investment is expected to fall by 0.6% in 2026 H1 relative to 2025 H2, down from
around 1% growth anticipated in the February Report. That is consistent with a small impact
from higher uncertainty following the onset of conflict in the Middle East. Agency intelligence
suggests that a protracted conflict is likely to dent investment intentions. The share of firms
reporting that overall uncertainty was high or very high has risen in the last few months (Chart
1.11), but it remains lower than the 2022 peak.
Labour market
Chart 1.11: Measures of uncertainty among firms have risen slightly
DMP measures of uncertainty (a)
Source: DMP survey.
(a) The DMP overall uncertainty measure is based on responses to the question ‘How would you rate the
overall uncertainty facing your business at the moment?’. Firms can select an option from a five-point
scale: very low/low/medium/high/very high. The sales and price uncertainty indices are based on the
question ‘Looking a year ahead from the first/second/third/fourth quarter to the first/second/third/fourth
quarter, by what % amount do you expect your sales revenue/price growth to have changed in each of the
following scenarios? (lowest, low, middle, high and highest)’ and respondents were asked to assign a
probability to each scenario. The indices are constructed using the firm-level standard deviations of
expected growth over the next 12 months. These indices are normalised by their values in 2019. The data
are monthly and non-seasonally adjusted. The latest data are for April 2026.
The LFS unemployment rate has fallen and underlying employment has remained flat.
Bank of England  
Page 22


The LFS unemployment rate fell to 4.9% in the three months to February, 0.2 percentage
points lower than both the previous quarter and expectations at the time of the February
Report. The decline was driven entirely by a drop in the participation rate, reflecting an
increase in the number of people who report being inactive because they are studying. Other
indicators remain consistent with easing labour demand: job vacancies fell by around 4% in
2026 Q1, and the LFS redundancy rate remains elevated relative to in recent years.
Reflecting these signals, Bank staff project the unemployment rate to rise to 5.1% in 2026 Q2.
Bank staff judge that underlying employment growth, based on the signal from a range of
measures, has remained flat since early 2025, with no immediate sign of a change following
the onset of the Middle East conflict. Contacts of the Bank’s Agents typically attribute this
weakness to subdued demand and higher labour costs. Survey data suggest a broadly similar
picture, with respondents to the March KPMG/REC survey attributing weakness in permanent
staff placements to uncertainty and relatively high staffing costs.
New analysis by Bank staff is also consistent with weakness in demand having driven lower
employment growth. A structural vector autoregression model, which identifies labour demand
and supply shocks based on movements in employment and real wage growth, attributes
much of the recent slowing in employment growth to lower labour demand (Chart 1.12). That
is because the fall in employment growth over 2025 occurred alongside a slowing in real
wage growth, which the model attributes to demand weakness. The model also finds a small
role for supply in driving the shortfall in employment, which may reflect slower population
growth due to lower net migration. This analysis suggests that the weakness in employment
growth is consistent with some widening in labour market slack.
Bank of England  
Page 23


Employment growth is expected to remain muted in the near term and the energy shock and
the resulting impact on demand could weigh on hiring plans later in the year (Boxes B and D).
Respondents to the April DMP survey expected headcount to be flat in the three months to
April 2027, up from -0.4% realised employment growth over the 12 months to April 2026.
Contacts of the Bank’s Agents report that the conflict in the Middle East has not yet affected
hiring plans, and in general expect employment to be broadly flat over the next year (ASBC –
April 2026).
Chart 1.12: New model-based analysis suggests that lower demand has been
important in driving the deceleration in employment growth since 2024
Model-based decomposition of underlying employment growth (a)
Sources: Bank of England Agents, DMP survey, HMRC, KPMG/REC UK Report on Jobs, Lloyds Business
Barometer, ONS, S&P Global and Bank calculations.
(a) The decomposition is based on a bivariate structural vector autoregression (SVAR) estimated on
monthly UK data from November 2000 to December 2019, using three-month on three-month growth in
underlying employment and real AWE. Bank staff’s indicator-based measure of underlying employment
growth is constructed using a dynamic factor model, following the approach of Doz et al (2011). The model
extracts a common component from monthly survey indicators, capturing comovements across series. The
common component is scaled to align with LFS employment growth between 2000–19. The contributions
from demand and supply are identified using sign restrictions: a demand shock is assumed to move
employment and real wage growth in the same direction, whereas a supply shock pushes them in opposite
directions (Baumeister and Hamilton (2015)). Population growth is treated as a supply factor. The latest
data are for March 2026.
Indicators of labour market tightness are consistent with some degree of spare
capacity in the labour market.
Bank of England  
Page 24


Higher unemployment over recent months and some stabilisation in the number of job
vacancies has meant that the vacancies to unemployment ratio (V/U) remains well below its
equilibrium, consistent with a margin of slack in the labour market (Chart 1.13, left panel). The
net additional hours desired by workers as a percentage of average hours worked, a measure
of underemployment, also suggests more slack relative to in the recent past (Chart 1.13,
middle panel). LFS job-to-job flows remain subdued (Chart 1.13, right panel). Overall, these
data suggest that labour market conditions are considerably looser than at the onset of the
previous energy shock in 2022.
There is nevertheless a high degree of uncertainty over the precise level of slack in the labour
market. Some developments, such as the recent increases in employer NICs and the NLW,
could have caused the non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment (NAIRU) to rise by
weighing on labour demand for a given labour supply (Box F of the November 2025
Monetary Policy Report). That could imply a smaller degree of labour market slack, all else
equal.
Bank of England  
Page 25


Consistent with some further loosening in the labour market and continued weakness in
aggregate demand, spare capacity is judged to have widened a little further. Contacts of the
Bank’s Agents continue to report that there is a degree of spare capacity, in part reflecting
weak demand. The current degree of spare capacity will be important in determining the size
of any second-round effects from the energy price shock (Section 3).
1.3: Global and financial conditions
Global economic activity
Chart 1.13: Labour market conditions are looser than in 2022
Indicators of labour market slack (a)
Sources: Advertising association/World Advertising Research Centre Expenditure Report, ONS and Bank
calculations.
(a) Left panel: the equilibrium V/U ratio is estimated using an error-correction model over the period 1982–
2025. The real cost of vacancy posting and hourly labour productivity are included as long-run determinants
for the level of vacancies. The model also includes controls for short-term movements in these variables
(Stelmach et al (2025)). The latest data are for 2025 Q4. The 2026 Q1 number is a projection based on
data to the three months to February. Middle panel: number of net additional hours that the currently
employed report they would like to work, on average, per week, expressed as a share of average weekly
hours. Latest data are to 2025 Q4. Right panel: the data are two-quarter job-to-job flows, based on total
employment of people aged 16–69. The latest data are for 2025 Q4.
The overall margin of slack in the economy is judged to have widened slightly further.
The outlook for global activity has softened as the Middle East conflict has disrupted
a key energy supply route.
Bank of England  
Page 26


The conflict in the Middle East has resulted in a substantial negative supply shock to the
global economy. The most material economic development has been the effective closure of
the Strait of Hormuz since 28 February. Approximately 25% of seaborne oil, around one fifth
of global liquefied natural gas (LNG) and a significant share of refined products, such as
petrol, diesel and jet fuel, normally transit the Strait. Its closure has therefore put marked
upward pressure on global energy and some other commodity prices (Section 1.1 and Box F).
In addition to disruptions to energy transport routes, damage to energy infrastructure across
parts of the Gulf has further constrained global supply, amplifying upward pressure on world
export prices.
Based on the path of energy futures curves (Chart 1.5), the impact of the Middle East conflict
on global activity is expected to be limited in 2026 Q1 but will start to weigh by just under
0.2% in Q2 and build thereafter, as higher energy prices reduce real household incomes and
raise firms’ costs globally. Consistent with some impact of the conflict on global demand, the
JP Morgan Global Composite PMI new orders index fell in March to its lowest level in over
two years. Risks to global activity are judged to be to the downside, should the rise in energy
prices be greater or more persistent than embodied in energy futures curves (Section 3). The
impact of the Middle East conflict on activity is expected to vary across regions, with net
energy exporters such as the US relatively insulated, and activity in energy-importing
economies such as the UK and euro area more exposed to higher energy prices.
Prior to the conflict, global growth had been resilient and stronger than expected a year ago.
While increases in global trade tariffs had weighed on global growth, trade flows had
remained robust and AI-related investment had supported growth in the US and China.
Financial conditions had been easing. The impact of recent changes to US trade policy, which
have resulted in a lower effective global tariff rate than at the time of the February Report (Box
F), is expected to be small for the UK.
Four-quarter UK-weighted world GDP growth is expected to be 2.3% in 2026 Q1 before
slowing to 2.1% in Q2 (Chart 1.14), in part reflecting lower global demand due to the drag
from higher energy costs.
Bank of England  
Page 27


Financial conditions
Based on the 15-day average of forward interest rates to 22 April, the market-implied path for
Bank Rate rises to 4.2% in early 2027 before gradually falling to 4% by early 2028 (Chart
1.15). The median respondent to the April 2026 Market Participants Survey (MaPS) expected
Bank Rate to remain unchanged through the rest of this year, and to be 3.5% one year ahead
and 3.25% two and three years ahead. The market-implied path for Bank Rate will capture not
only market participants' central expectations for Bank Rate, but also the balance of risks to
the outlook, and risk premia.
The UK market-implied path was just under 60 basis points higher, on average, over the next
three years than in the period leading up to the February Report. Market contacts attribute
that rise to a material change in the perceived balance of risks around the outlook for
Chart 1.14: World GDP growth is expected to slow due to geopolitical developments
Four-quarter UK-weighted global GDP growth with contributions by region (a)
Sources: LSEG Workspace and Bank calculations.
(a) The figures for 2026 Q1 and 2026 Q2 are Bank staff projections. UK-weighted world GDP growth is
constructed using real GDP growth rates of 188 countries weighted according to their shares in UK exports.
The market-implied path for Bank Rate has been higher relative to in the lead up to
the February Report.
Bank of England  
Page 28


monetary policy, as well as an increased risk premium given elevated geopolitical and
macroeconomic uncertainty. Expected real rates as reflected by market-based measures are
estimated to have increased at the three-year horizon. Uncertainty around the outlook for
short-term rates has also increased, as reflected in a rise in the standard deviation of the
option-implied distribution of 12-month three-month forward SONIA rates.
The US and euro-area paths have also risen, although by less than for the UK, and were 19
and 35 basis points higher on average respectively over the next three years.
The upward shift in the market-implied path for Bank Rate has been the primary driver of the
tightening over this period. Longer-term government bond yields have also moved higher. The
sterling ERI has been broadly stable, while UK equities have been volatile but are a little
higher than at the time of the February Report. Market-based measures of uncertainty, such
Chart 1.15: The market-implied paths for policy rates were higher relative to the
February Report across major economies
Policy rates and instantaneous forward curves for the UK, US and euro area (a)
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and Bank calculations.
(a) All data are as of 22 April 2026. The April 2026 curves are estimated based on the 15 UK working days
to 22 April 2026. The February 2026 curves are estimated based on the 15 UK working days to 26 January
2026. The federal funds rate is the upper bound of the announced target range. The market-implied path
for US policy rates is the expected effective federal funds rate. The ECB deposit rate is based on the date
from which changes in policy rates are effective. The final data points are forward rates for June 2029.
Overall UK financial conditions have tightened since the outbreak of the Middle East
conflict.
Bank of England  
Page 29


as the VIX and MOVE Index, which capture option-implied volatility in US equity prices and
US Treasury yields, have increased since the start of the year, but remain below the peaks
seen last year following US tariff announcements and below those observed in 2022.
Domestic credit conditions
Quoted rates on new mortgages have risen by slightly over 100 basis points on average for
75% and 90% loan to value (LTV) mortgages since the February Report (Chart 1.16, left
panel). This reflects faster than average pass-through of the rise in short-term OIS rates,
which is not unusual following large moves in the latter. These rates have fallen a little in
recent weeks, however.
Higher quoted rates will feed through to a higher effective rate on the stock of mortgages (Box
E). Over the next three years, average monthly payments are expected to rise by
approximately £80, although there is substantial variation within this figure and it will depend
partly on the outlook for energy prices and any associated movements in reference rates.
About 53% of UK mortgage holders are expected to see their payments rise, but around 25%
of those who fixed at higher rates should see their payments fall, despite recent increases in
quoted rates.
Other rates, including those on deposits and new bank lending to corporates, have been little
changed since the February Report. That is consistent with Bank Rate having been
unchanged and normal pass-through. Corporate bond yields have increased reflecting moves
in risk-free rates. Credit spreads in household and corporate debt markets remain
compressed by historical standards.
Recent developments in financial markets have begun to pass through to the rates
faced by households and firms.
Bank of England  
Page 30


Lenders responding to the Bank’s Credit Conditions Survey – 2026 Q1 reported increased
availability of secured credit to households and of credit to corporates across firm sizes. That
is consistent with intelligence from the Bank’s Agents (ASBC – April 2026). Housing market
activity has nevertheless remained subdued. Indicators of housing demand such as the RICS
new buyer enquiries net balance have weakened following the rise in borrowing costs,
consistent with an easing in housing demand. While the latest data for mortgage approvals
pre-date recent geopolitical developments, contacts of the Bank’s Agents report that higher
mortgage rates are beginning to weigh on activity, with the full impact likely to be felt over the
coming quarters.
Chart 1.16: Mortgage rates have risen since the February Report, while other rates are
little changed
Household and corporate interest rates and their corresponding reference rates (a)
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg Finance L.P. and Bank calculations.
(a) Household loan and deposit rates are based on average quoted rates and business loan rates are
based on average effective rates on new lending. The Bank’s quoted rates series are weighted monthly
average rates advertised by all UK banks and building societies with products meeting the specific criteria.
Introduction of new Quoted Rates data provides more information. The 75% and 90% LTV mortgage
rates are for two-year fixed-rate products. The reference rate for these and fixed-rate savings bonds is the
two-year OIS rate. The reference rate for £10,000 personal loan rates is the five-year OIS rate but this is
not shown. The two-year OIS rate shows monthly averages, while Bank Rate shows month-end numbers.
Household quoted rates data are not seasonally adjusted. The provisional April 2026 data are shown as
diamonds. For quoted rate series and the two-year OIS rate, these are based on average values to 22 April
2026. The provisional data point for Bank Rate is the rate as of 22 April 2026. The final business loan rate
data are for February 2026.
Bank of England  
Page 31


Annual growth in aggregate broad money has been generally in line with rates seen over
most of last year, at 3.9% in the year to February. Although there is uncertainty over trends in
money velocity, the ratio of broad money to nominal GDP remains below its pre-pandemic
trend, reflecting an erosion of the money overhang that built up during the pandemic and in
the following years (Chart 1.17).
Chart 1.17: Broad money relative to GDP is below its pre-pandemic trend
Ratio of aggregate broad money to nominal GDP (a)
Sources: Bank of England, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Aggregate broad money captures M4 excluding the deposits of intermediate other financial corporations
and is break-adjusted. The dashed line shows the 2012–19 linear trend in the ratio of aggregate broad
money to nominal GDP, projected forward. The final data shown are for 2025 Q4. The diamond represents
a provisional estimate for 2026 Q1, using the latest Bank staff projection for nominal GDP.
Bank of England  
Page 32


2: Topical policy issues
The boxes in this section highlight some of the key pieces of analysis that informed the
MPC’s discussions.
Box A: How could conflict in the Middle East affect
households?
The conflict in the Middle East has raised energy prices. Energy is a necessary
purchase for households and an input that businesses must use for production
throughout supply chains. Higher energy prices directly increase costs for
households. Average petrol pump prices reached a little under 160 pence per litre in
April, for example. There will also be indirect effects as higher energy costs pass
through supply chains, and because the prices of other key input goods, for
example fertilisers used for agriculture, have also increased. Higher inflation itself
may also lead to upward pressure on prices, for example by encouraging higher
wage growth which will further raise firms’ costs, although the extent of this is
uncertain. Additional costs for households mean they are likely to cut back on
spending. Higher inflation is unavoidable, at least in the short term, since the prices
of energy imports have risen. But the MPC will set Bank Rate to ensure that energy
costs do not lead to persistent inflation and that inflation returns sustainably to the
2% target.
Conflict in the Middle East has had a significant impact on the availability and price of
a range of goods, particularly oil and natural gas. Transport through the Strait of
Hormuz, a key shipping route, has been effectively closed and there is limited capacity
on alternative export routes. This has pushed up energy prices globally.
Oil and gas prices directly affect UK households’ costs, via the cost of motor fuels and
household utility bills. Oil prices peaked at a little under $120 per barrel on 31 March,
up from $64 prior to the conflict, and natural gas prices peaked at over 150 pence per
therm up from around 80 pence (Section 1.1). Despite falling back somewhat since
then, wholesale prices are expected to remain elevated. As electricity prices in the UK
tend to be driven, in part, by gas prices, electricity has also become more expensive.
Bank of England  
Page 33


Households mainly buy energy in the form of utilities supplied directly to the home,
such as gas and electricity, and motor fuels, such as petrol and diesel. Some
households also purchase other fuels to heat their homes. Purchases of energy made
up around 8% of household spending in 2024 on average, although this varies widely.
Utilities tend to comprise a larger proportion of lower income households’ spending
(Chart A.1). Expenditure on motor fuels is less related to income but will still vary
widely. For example, those in rural areas, where driving longer distances is typically
required, are likely to be most affected.
The price of household motor fuels tends to move quickly as global oil prices rise.
Average petrol pump prices have risen from just over 130 pence in February, prior to
the conflict, to around 157 pence per litre in the first three weeks of April, and diesel
has risen by more to 190p. This is expected to add around 0.7 percentage points to
April CPI inflation, relative to the projection in the February 2026 Report (Section 1.1).
Chart A.1: Low-income households are more exposed to cost increases than
high-income households
Share of household spending on categories particularly exposed to energy-driven price
rises, by income decile (a)
Source: ONS.
(a) Data are for 2025 although the weights for 2025 are assumed to be the same as for 2024 and
so are likely to be revised.
Bank of England  
Page 34


Household gas and electricity prices are somewhat slower to increase following
wholesale cost increases. A price cap on gas and electricity, set by the energy
regulator, Ofgem, affects how much most households pay for their utilities. Energy
suppliers tend to purchase gas weeks or months in advance of using it, and these
prices are taken into account when Ofgem calculates the energy price cap. The cap is
now expected to rise to close to £1,900 in 2026 Q3 from £1,641 in Q2. This remains
well below the £4,279 peak the cap would have reached in early 2023 had the
Government not introduced the Energy Price Guarantee (EPG). The price cap in future
quarters is more uncertain as energy prices continue to evolve, but it is currently
expected to remain around £1,900 in 2026 Q4. These figures are for households
paying via direct debit; the cap for those paying via prepayment meter and standard
credit is set at different levels, although the movements will be similar to that for direct
debit customers.
Not all households face the same change in utility prices at the same time. Close to
40% of households are on fixed tariffs for electricity and gas, and this is higher than the
roughly 25% of households with fixed tariffs when Russia invaded Ukraine in 2022 Q1.
These households will be protected from higher prices until their contracts end. Around
1.5 million households rely on heating oil, however, for which prices have already
risen. This is particularly common in Northern Ireland, where over half of households
use heating oil. The Government has provided £50 million of support for low-income
households relying on heating oil.
The time of year is also important for the economic impact of higher energy prices. For
example, around three in ten households pay for utilities via prepayment meters or via
standard credit tariffs. These households are less affected by an immediate cost
increase because they can use less energy during the warmer summer months. If
prices are still high in the winter, then these households will face larger rises in costs.
Other households pay for utilities via direct debit which allows them to spread their
payments evenly throughout the year.
Overall, the direct effect of higher energy prices for households is likely to add 0.9
percentage points to CPI inflation by 2026 Q3, compared with the projection in the
February Report.
Households will also be affected by higher energy prices as firms pass on their own
higher energy costs to consumer prices. Many firms plan to pass on these cost
increases to some extent (Box B). These indirect cost increases are expected to add a
further 0.3 percentage points to CPI inflation in 2026 Q3 (Section 1.1).
The prices of non-energy products are likely to rise as well, reducing
household real incomes.
Bank of England  
Page 35


Consumer food prices are expected to rise this year reflecting higher energy and
transport costs (Section 1.1). Food prices may also rise further out due to increases in
the cost of fertiliser. Around a third of global fertiliser exports typically go through the
Strait of Hormuz as natural gas can be used to produce ammonia, an important
component of fertilisers (Box F). The reduction in exports has led to a rapid increase in
fertiliser costs which will raise the production costs of farmers. In addition, less fertiliser
available to use means that global crop yields will be lower. Agents’ contacts report
that many UK farmers have already purchased fertilisers for this season and so are not
facing an immediate increase in costs, but higher fertiliser costs may be important in
the longer term.
Low-income households, on average, spend close to twice as much on food as a
share of their expenditure compared with high-income households (Chart A.1). That
means the effect on real incomes for low-income households will be larger than for
others.
There are a range of other cost increases that may also be material, and these cost
increases may be persistent. For example, some other raw materials, such as
aluminium and other inputs to semiconductors, have risen in price. These cost
increases will pass-through to the prices that households pay over time.
Higher inflation itself may also lead to further upward pressure on prices. This is often
termed second-round effects from a rise in inflation. Second-round effects could result,
for example, from firms raising wages to maintain pay growth in line with inflation for
their employees, which would increase their costs and could lead to firms setting
higher prices. It could also be driven by higher inflation expectations. But the extent of
second-round effects is uncertain and will depend on a range of factors (Box C).
Monetary policy cannot prevent higher inflation in the short term, which is due to the
prices of energy imports having risen. But the MPC will set Bank Rate to ensure that
energy costs do not lead to persistent inflation and that inflation returns sustainably to
the 2% target (Box G).
Higher energy prices will reduce real household incomes, the incomes households
receive after taking account of changes in prices. Households are likely to reduce their
real spending in response, but by less than the fall in incomes (Box E). Following the
2022 energy price shock, household real incomes fell but consumption remained
broadly stable before falling back in 2023. This was partly a result of government
policy, such as the EPG, which reduced household bills and allowed households to
Lower household real incomes will likely lead to somewhat lower consumption.
Bank of England  
Page 36


maintain their consumption. But, based on historical experience, it is likely that
households will again partly maintain their consumption through the latest fall in real
incomes.
Bank of England  
Page 37


Box B: How might firms respond to higher energy prices?
Higher energy prices raise costs for firms and erode customers’ real incomes, which
can reduce demand for the goods and services firms sell. Firms will need to
respond to the energy shock and can do so in several ways, including by allowing
their profit margins to fall, raising their prices, reducing costs and reducing output.
The balance of these responses across firms will partly determine the extent to
which the rise in energy costs feeds through to CPI inflation. Early evidence
suggests that, while firms expect to raise prices, they may not be able to pass
through the full rise in costs and so their profit margins are likely to fall. Compared
with the energy shock in 2022 following the Russian invasion of Ukraine, weaker
demand and a looser labour market mean that firms may also respond to the shock
by reducing their wage bills, although survey responses currently suggest only
modest expected impacts on pay and employment growth. Firms’ actions may
change depending on the size and duration of the energy shock, as well as on how
households react to lower real incomes, and to any monetary or fiscal policy
response.
Global energy prices have risen significantly since the outbreak of the Middle East
conflict (Section 1.1). Firms use energy in the form of oil, gas and electricity to produce
their outputs. Higher energy costs therefore represent a direct increase in overall costs
for firms, and a negative supply shock for the UK economy as it is a net importer of
energy.
The extent of the direct rise in costs varies significantly by firm. Direct spending on
energy, based on the latest data from 2023, averages around 3% of non-energy sector
firms’ intermediate consumption and labour costs. But there is wide variation across
industries: for example, energy is an average of 0.3% of insurance firms’ intermediate
consumption and labour costs, compared with 5.1% for accommodation firms and
29.6% for air transport firms.
The timing of the increase in costs also varies across firms. Nearly 60% of firms report
having a fixed-price contract for gas (Chart B.1) and similar numbers report the same
for electricity. These shares have risen somewhat since 2022. Small firms are
significantly less likely to purchase energy on fixed rates than the average across
firms. Contract length varies, with around half of firms with 10 or more employees
reporting having at least six months before their gas price is reset. This suggests it will
How are firms exposed to higher energy prices?
Bank of England  
Page 38


take time for direct energy costs to feed through fully for many firms, and if energy
prices were to fall back quickly enough some firms may not be affected directly at all.
There is also a range of typical energy contracts across sectors. For example,
construction and education firms are much less likely to have fixed gas contracts.
Besides the direct impact of higher energy costs, firms also face an indirect increase in
costs as the energy shock spreads through supply chains. For example, higher fuel
prices will raise the costs of transporting goods which will be reflected in the costs of
non-energy inputs for firms. This will magnify the effect of higher energy costs but will
feed through with a lag.
Chart B.1: Energy price rises will affect many firms with a lag due to fixed-price
contracts
Share of firms with a fixed-price gas contract (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Long-term fixed contracts represent contracts lasting six months or longer. Some industries only
have survey responses for 2026. Business size is split by employee numbers. ‘Not applicable’ and
‘Not sure’ responses are excluded from the gas contract responses with the remaining answers
rescaled to equal 100%. Data are from the ONS’ Business Insights and Conditions Survey.
Bank of England  
Page 39


Higher energy prices will also lead to a reduction in aggregate demand because, since
the UK is a net energy importer, higher energy costs represent a real cut in domestic
incomes. That reduction in demand is also likely to affect firms gradually and will
depend on how households respond to rising costs (Box E).
Firms can respond to higher energy prices in several ways, each of which could have
differing effects on the inflationary impact of the shock, which in turn will affect the
necessary monetary policy response. It will be important for policymakers to monitor
the relative importance of these responses over coming months.
Firms could choose not to increase prices or take actions to reduce other costs. This
would mean that higher energy costs would result in lower profits because firms would
set a smaller mark-up between the cost of producing their output and the prices they
charge. Following past energy price rises firms’ mark-ups fell and stayed persistently
lower for several years (Manuel et al (2024)). This is likely to happen in response to
the recent rise in energy prices as well, with 68% of firms responding to the latest DMP
survey reporting that they expect lower margins over the next year as a result of higher
energy costs (Chart B.2).
Reductions in margins may be smaller than in response to past energy shocks
because they are already compressed. Agents’ contacts typically report lower margins
than in 2022 and so fewer firms may be able to lower them further to absorb the cost
increases. That said, historical evidence shows that in the aftermath of the 1979 oil
price shock, mark-ups fell further even though they had yet to recover to levels prior to
the 1973 oil price shock.
How can firms respond to higher energy prices and how might it differ from the
response in 2022?
Bank of England  
Page 40


Firms may also respond to higher costs by raising their output prices. 64% of firms
responding to the latest DMP survey are expecting to increase prices as a response to
energy costs over the next year. And the average of firms’ own output price growth
expectations for the year ahead was 4.4% in April, compared with 3.4% in January
(Chart B.3).
Chart B.2: Higher prices and lower profit margins are the most common
responses from firms in response to higher energy costs
Share of firms reporting how they expect the increase in energy prices to affect aspects of
their business over the next year (a)
Source: DMP survey.
(a) Responses were collected between 2–17 April 2026. Results show weighted responses to the
question ‘The war in Iran has led to higher energy prices. How do you expect these increases in
energy prices to affect the following aspects of your business over the next year?’.
Bank of England  
Page 41


Evidence suggests that firms’ own price expectations have become more sensitive to
increases in headline inflation and that firms are changing prices more frequently than
in the past. This may mean that the initial rise in prices is larger than it would have
been historically. The proportion of firms changing prices in response to changing
economic conditions compared with those setting prices at fixed intervals, for example,
has increased in recent years, peaking at 58% in March 2023 compared with a pre-
pandemic estimate of 44%. This proportion has fallen back a little in recent years, to
closer to 50%. These firms tend to exhibit faster pass-through of oil and gas supply
shocks than time-dependent firms who adjust prices at regular intervals (Bunn et al
(2026)).
On balance, Agents’ contacts expect to pass on at least some of their additional costs
because their profit margins are already squeezed. Contacts thought that customers
might be willing to accept higher prices given the highly visible increase in input costs,
although lower household real incomes and higher interest rates could reduce the
extent to which such pass-through is possible (ASBC – April 2026). Indeed, a little
over half of firms report expecting sales volumes to fall in response to higher energy
prices (Chart B.2).
Chart B.3: Firms’ expectations for price growth have increased markedly since
energy prices rose, but wage growth expectations are little changed
Firms’ reported expectations for their own price and wage growth (a)
Source: DMP survey.
(a) Data are responses from the individual monthly surveys.
Bank of England  
Page 42


Rather than raising prices or reducing profit margins, firms could respond to higher
energy costs by reducing other input costs, particularly their wage bill as this tends to
be the largest cost for most firms and easier to change than fixed costs such as
buildings. Labour market conditions are significantly looser now than in 2022, which
may make it easier for firms to reduce wage growth compared with what wage growth
would have been absent energy price rises, since there is less competition for
available workers (Box D). Partly set against this is the fact that firms cannot reduce
wages for workers on the National Living Wage (NLW), and there has been a slight
increase in the NLW coverage rate of around one percentage point between 2022 and
April 2025, when it was 6.6% of employees.
Consistent with firms having some capacity to reduce wage growth, nominal wage
growth expectations in the DMP survey are little changed since the February Report.
Firms responding in April on average expected wage growth of 3.5% over the next
year, the same as in the January survey (Chart B.3).
Any adjustment to wages in response to the energy shock is likely to vary across firms
as they balance the need to reduce costs with potential pressures to raise nominal
wage growth as their employees face higher inflation. While wage expectations
reported in the DMP survey are unchanged since the February Report, 26% of firms
report that higher energy prices will lead them to raise wage growth over the year
ahead (Chart B.2). Past evidence suggests that around 40% of employees work at
firms that set wages using a ‘cost minimiser’ approach (Box B, February 2026
Monetary Policy Report), where labour market conditions, including policies such as
the NLW, are the main drivers of wage growth. Looser labour market conditions should
generally limit increases in wage growth. In contrast, around half of workers are
employed at firms that tend to put relatively greater emphasis on changes in inflation,
albeit with a lag, for example as a result of wage bargaining with their workers. In
either case, any adjustment to wages is likely to happen largely in 2027, as wage
settlements for 2026 are generally already fixed (Section 1.1).
Firms can also reduce employment costs by reducing the number of people they
employ or employees’ average hours worked. Firms may be more likely to use this
margin of adjustment in response to the latest energy price increase than in 2022,
when some Agents’ contacts reported hoarding labour whereby firms continued to
employ workers despite lower output given worries about recruiting in the future.
Current measures of recruitment difficulty are materially lower than in 2022, meaning
that firms may be less concerned about rehiring staff in the future. In addition, although
judged to be still resilient in aggregate (Financial Policy Committee Record – April
2026), small firms' balance sheets are on average slightly weaker than in early 2022
Bank of England  
Page 43


and some firms have higher debt servicing costs. Evidence from the DMP survey
suggests that weaker balance sheet positions are associated with firms choosing to
reduce their own employment by slightly more when facing a fall in income.
Initial evidence suggests that the energy cost rise has had less impact on firms’ future
employment expectations than it has on other potential responses such as output
prices and margins, however. Two-thirds of firms responding to the DMP survey
reported that they expected higher energy prices to have no impact on their
employment (Chart B.2). And Agents’ contacts generally point to employment
remaining at around current levels. These responses may change as the shock
continues to propagate.
Firms can also attempt to reduce other costs in response to higher energy prices. They
might reduce energy costs directly, for example, by reducing their usage of energy or
substituting to alternative sources. This was an important margin of adjustment in 2022
when average energy consumption by firms fell. Some Agents’ contacts have reported
efforts to substitute to other energy sources, such as by installing solar panels.
Overall, early evidence suggests that, although firms do expect to absorb some of the
rise in energy costs within their margins, most firms also expect to raise prices
somewhat in response to the shock. There are fewer signs that firms are expecting to
raise wage growth, consistent with there being spare capacity in the labour market.
Expectations for employment also appear to be little changed.
Firms’ responses to the energy price shock will also affect the supply capacity of the
economy. The outlook for inflation will depend in part on the impact of the energy price
shock on the relative balance of supply and demand. The impact on potential supply
capacity is uncertain but likely to be negative. Bank staff’s central forecasting models
suggests that around 20% of the total GDP reduction will be matched by a fall in
potential GDP, meaning that – while spare capacity is likely to widen as a result of the
shock – potential supply will also fall. Supply capacity can be reduced through several
channels, including: lower investment reducing the future capital stock, firm closures, a
rise in long-term unemployment, or other hysteresis effects associated with a weaker
economy. The relative importance of each channel is uncertain, particularly as the
scale and persistence of the shock is unknown. And, in the event of constraints in
energy supply, the decline in potential output would be larger.
How might overall supply capacity in the UK be affected by the energy price
shock?
Bank of England  
Page 44


Given the uncertainty in the size and timing of the shock, and in how firms will respond
to it, the MPC will continue to monitor the emerging evidence on the actions firms are
taking and how that will affect the outlook for inflation.
Bank of England  
Page 45


Box C: How will prevailing economic conditions affect the
impact of the energy shock on inflation?
A key question for monetary policy is whether the latest increase in energy prices
will give rise to material second‑round effects on inflation, absent a sufficient
monetary policy response. Evidence suggests that the transmission of oil supply
shocks can depend on the current inflation environment as well as the degree of
tightness in the labour market. Updated evidence from a non-linear time series
model (Box C of the November 2025 Monetary Policy Report) finds that, while the
impact of energy price shocks on inflation tends to be amplified by rising inflation
expectations when CPI inflation is elevated, the inflation response tends to be much
weaker when there is spare capacity in the labour market. This suggests that
current labour market slack will reduce the risk of second-round effects from the
latest energy shock. There are some risks around this conclusion. Increased
responsiveness of household inflation expectations to rises in prices, for example,
could mean that the most recent rise in energy prices evolves differently to past
energy shocks.
The persistence of any rise in inflation following an energy price shock will depend
partly on recent inflation dynamics and spare capacity in the economy. When
prevailing inflation is elevated, households and firms may pay closer attention to a
renewed bout of price increases such that their expectations for future inflation are
more likely to rise. That can feed into wage bargaining and price-setting decisions
meaning that an energy price shock leads to more persistent inflation. The presence of
spare capacity in the economy, either in the form of under-utilised capacity within firms
or of slack in the labour market, may reduce the risk of this outcome occurring. When
the labour market is looser, workers will tend to have less bargaining power over their
wages. Firms may then be able to absorb some of the rise in costs by raising wages to
a lesser degree than otherwise.
Annual CPI inflation averaged 3.3% in the six months to February ahead of the conflict
in the Middle East, well below the elevated rates seen in recent years but a little above
the level at which previous analysis has suggested energy shocks are more likely to be
amplified through higher inflation expectations (Box C of the November 2025
Monetary Policy Report). By contrast, ahead of Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in 2022,
CPI inflation had already risen sharply to around 6%, in part due to a substantial rise in
fuel prices over the preceding year.
How do inflation and labour market conditions differ from 2022?
Bank of England  
Page 46


Short-term household inflation expectations at the start of this year were somewhat
lower than in 2022 (Section 1.1). They have since risen sharply but remain below their
levels during the 2022 energy shock. Labour market conditions are considerably looser
than four years ago (Section 1.2), when the labour market was exceptionally tight. That
tightness reduced firms’ scope to absorb higher energy costs through lower real
wages.
Bank Staff have extended the self-exciting threshold Bayesian vector autoregression
(SET-BVAR) model presented in Box C of the November 2025 Monetary Policy
Report to allow for state-dependencies with regard to different degrees of labour
market tightness alongside prevailing inflation. The model estimates the most likely
level of inflation at which shifts in inflation behaviour become more probable using past
observed historical associations between inflation, inflation expectations, and global
shocks. The results presented below are based on the median threshold presented in
Box C of the November 2025 Monetary Policy Report, of 3.1%. Low and high
inflation regimes – that is, those with prevailing CPI inflation below and above 3.1% –
are then split further into periods of tight and loose labour markets which are identified
according to whether the vacancies to unemployment ratio is above or below its
estimated trend (Stelmach et al (2025)).
The results of this model are shown in Charts C.1 and C.2. The panels in the former
display responses to an adverse energy shock conditional on inflation starting above
the 3.1% estimated threshold. Those in the latter display the estimated responses
when inflation is below that threshold when the shock occurs. Across all panels in
Charts C.1 and C.2, the aqua and orange lines (and associated credibility intervals)
refer to the cases where the labour market is tight or loose, respectively. The panels on
the left show the response of inflation and those on the right show the associated
response of one-year-ahead household inflation expectations.
How have labour market tightness and prevailing inflation affected the
transmission of past energy shocks to inflation?
Bank of England  
Page 47


These results suggest that during periods when inflation was elevated, a higher degree
of labour market tightness meant that global oil supply shocks led to a stronger and
more persistent rise in inflation. This is shown in the left panel of Chart C.1, where the
response of inflation remains muted if there is spare capacity in the labour market
(orange line) but is larger and more persistent when the labour market is tight (aqua
line). The model suggests that the difference in response between the two labour
market regimes is at least in part related to the dynamics of household inflation
Chart C.1: Energy supply shocks have had a larger impact on inflation when
the labour market has been tight
Estimated impulse response functions of CPI inflation and inflation expectations to an
adverse oil supply shock when inflation is above 3.1% (a)
Sources: Bank of England, Citi/YouGov, Känzig (2021), LSEG, ONS, Stelmach et al (2025), and
Bank calculations.
(a) The sample period is January 1989–June 2025; data are monthly. Generalised impulse
response functions (GIRFs) to an oil supply news shock by Känzig (2021) that raises sterling oil
prices by 10% on impact, from a self-exciting threshold Bayesian vector autoregression that
endogenously estimates an inflation threshold (following Gargiulo et al (2026)). The partitioning of
the sample yields four regimes in total, with piecewise-linear coefficients across regimes. Bayesian
estimation is used. The GIRFs account for regime changes over the propagation horizon. The lines
represent the median estimate, and shaded areas show the 68% credibility interval. Results remain
broadly similar over an extended sample starting in January 1976, which yields a larger number of
observations by regime and allows for the inclusion of more control variables, and when using a
filtered unemployment gap as the labour market slack measure. Household inflation expectations
refer to the one-year-ahead measure from the Citi/YouGov survey.
Bank of England  
Page 48


expectations, which have tended to rise sharply during periods when the labour market
has been tight (aqua line, right panel) but not otherwise (orange line, right panel), even
when prevailing inflation has been elevated. These findings are consistent with greater
labour market slack allowing firms to absorb a greater portion of cost pressures
through weaker pay growth, moderating workers’ real-wage expectations and reducing
pass-through to CPI inflation.
There are reasons for caution, however, when drawing conclusions from these results
for the current situation, and it is possible that current inflation conditions lead to more
persistent inflation following the most recent energy shock. First, higher inflation does
appear to play a role in amplifying the inflation response, at least in situations where
the labour market has been tight (comparing the aqua lines in the left panels of Charts
C.1 and C.2). This amplifying role is not evident in the case where inflation is elevated
and the labour market is loose (Chart C.1, orange line in the left panel), but these
results are based on a particularly small number of observations.
Chart C.2: The inflationary impact of energy supply shocks has been smaller
when the prevailing rate of inflation has been lower
Estimated impulse response functions of CPI inflation and inflation expectations to an
adverse oil supply shock when inflation is below 3.1% (a)
(a) Refer to Chart C.1 for model details.
Bank of England  
Page 49


Second, household inflation expectations have risen sharply in response to the current
energy shock whereas in the past they have remained stable when labour market
conditions have been loose (orange lines in the right panels of Charts C.1 and C.2).
The recent rise in household inflation expectations is consistent with households
having a heightened awareness of inflationary developments. Repeated high inflation
episodes – for example over the past five years – may have raised households’
attentiveness to price changes (Pfauti (2024)), especially among salient items (Box E
of the August 2025 Monetary Policy Report). Consistent with that, previously
published analysis showed that household inflation expectations have become more
responsive to inflation outturns compared with the pre-Covid period (Anesti et al
(2025)). Internet search data provide another signal of household inflation
attentiveness (Buelens (2023)). Whereas Google searches for ‘inflation’ rose modestly
and then receded in previous inflationary episodes, search interest since 2021–22 has
declined only gradually and has risen again this year.
Increased responsiveness of inflation expectations to realised inflation developments
could pose upside risks to the extent of second-round effects, relative to the estimates
presented above. Rises in household inflation expectations may mean that households
bargain more strongly for wage increases, for example. The extent to which this is
passed through into higher wage settlements may be limited given spare capacity in
the labour market (Section 1.2). But pass-through will also depend on firms’ pricing
decisions (Box B). To the extent that firms pass through a large portion of the rise in
energy costs to consumer prices, for example, that could lead to wage demands from
households that are higher than otherwise.
Bank of England  
Page 50


Box D: What do industry-level data imply for the risks to
unemployment?
The unemployment rate has risen over the past couple of years and is expected to
rise further (Section 3). The rise in unemployment so far has been unevenly
distributed across industries and dispersion in unemployment rates has increased.
That could potentially mean there is less slack in the labour market than indicated
by the decline in the aggregate vacancies to unemployment (V/U) ratio. Industry-
level data may also point to upside risks to unemployment, including in light of the
recent energy price shock. Firms in some industries – particularly accommodation
and food services – appear particularly vulnerable. Given that unemployment has
already risen in these industries and vacancy rates are low, these vulnerabilities
could pose an upside risk to the aggregate unemployment outlook. But if workers
displaced from these industries are also less able to move into vacancies
elsewhere, then not all of that increase in unemployment may be associated with a
rise in effective labour market slack.
Having been exceptionally tight over 2022–24, conditions in the labour market have
loosened over the past couple of years. The unemployment rate was 4.9% in the three
months to February, up from 3.6% in the three months to July 2022, and the V/U ratio
has fallen below its equilibrium level (Section 1.2).
That rise in unemployment has not been evenly distributed across industries. Chart
D.1 shows how unemployment rates across industries have evolved since 2022. The
shaded area, which captures the range across industries, provides a simple measure
of dispersion in industrial unemployment rates. This dispersion has become more
elevated recently and is somewhat wider than its 2001–19 average, indicating a more
uneven distribution of unemployment across the economy.
In principle, increased dispersion in industry-level unemployment could indicate that
workers are less able than in the past to move into available vacancies in other
industries. If so, then effective labour market slack – which reflects not just the amount
of spare capacity, but how easily unemployed workers can take up available jobs –
may not be as much as indicated by the low level of the V/U ratio.
How has the recent rise in unemployment varied across industries?
Bank of England  
Page 51


The uneven rise in unemployment across industries could suggest upside risks to
aggregate unemployment from here in light of the latest energy shock. Industries in
which unemployment has already risen and vacancy rates are relatively low may be
more likely to experience a further increase in unemployment if labour demand
weakens. Looser labour market conditions mean that workers who become
unemployed may then find it hard to move quickly back into work. If firms in these
industries are particularly exposed to the energy price shock – for example because
they are vulnerable to a fall in discretionary consumer spending – it is possible that
aggregate unemployment could rise by more than expected.
The relationship between vacancies and unemployment can be represented by the
Beveridge curve. As explained in Box E of the November 2025 Monetary Policy
Report, the economy has recently been operating on a ‘flatter’ part of the Beveridge
curve, meaning that weak demand has been accompanied to a greater extent by rising
unemployment rather than further reductions in vacancies.
Chart D.1: Dispersion in unemployment rates across industries has increased
Unemployment rates by previous industry (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) Data show ONS estimates of unemployment by previous industry. This measure will not fully
capture new entrants to the labour market who do not find a job as they have no previous industry,
nor will it reflect the capacity for workers to transition across industries. The shaded area shows the
range of industry-level unemployment rates by previous industry over time. Given data limitations
and relatively small sample sizes, it can be difficult to draw firm conclusions from changes in these
data. These data are not seasonally adjusted. The latest data shown are for the three months to
February 2026.
How vulnerable is industry-level unemployment to the latest energy shock?
Bank of England  
Page 52


Chart D.2 illustrates the Beveridge curve relationship for two industries that have
experienced relatively large rises in unemployment in recent years (Chart D.1). Given
data limitations and small sample sizes, it can be difficult to draw firm conclusions from
changes in the industry-level vacancy and unemployment relationship over time.
Nevertheless, compared with dynamics between 2001 and 2019, the purple dots in
Chart D.2 suggest tentative evidence that the link between vacancies and
unemployment has changed in these industries since 2025, with unemployment now
responding a little more sharply to falls in labour demand. The relationship between
unemployment and vacancies for these industries also appears a little flatter than that
implied by the aggregate Beveridge curve.
Within accommodation and food services, unemployment has risen notably since early
2025 while vacancy rates are relatively low (Chart D.2, purple dots in left panel). This
could reflect a sustained period of rising labour costs following increases in the
National Living Wage (NLW) and employer National Insurance Contributions (NICs), in
conjunction with subdued labour demand. Given the high concentration of low‑paid
jobs in the industry, the resulting cost pressures may have been particularly acute,
reducing firms’ scope to adjust employment solely through hiring.
The professional, scientific and technical activities industry has also seen fairly low
vacancy rates alongside a notable rise in unemployment in recent years (Chart D.2,
purple dots in right panel). This shift in labour market dynamics has been associated
with both slower hiring and an increase in redundancies. Agency intelligence links this
in part to developments in automation and AI, which may have reduced demand for
labour. Recruitment in the industry has meanwhile become increasingly concentrated
in specialist, high‑skill roles, leading to a degree of mismatch between the skills
demanded and those held by available workers.
Bank of England  
Page 53


The energy price shock will raise input costs for firms, who will need to respond by
raising prices, reducing margins or reducing costs (Box B). Intelligence from the Bank’s
Agents and DMP survey suggests little evidence so far of the energy price shock
having affected firms’ employment decisions (Box B and Section 1.2), though contacts
note that employment and investment plans could be pared back if the shock were to
persist or intensify. The outlook for unemployment will depend in part on any monetary
and fiscal response to the energy shock.
Risks to the outlook for unemployment appear particularly pronounced for the
hospitality sector, including accommodation and food which represents around 7% of
total private sector employment. While this industry is not particularly energy intensive,
a high share of spending on accommodation and food services is discretionary,
Chart D.2: Some industries appear particularly exposed to further increases in
unemployment
Industry-level job vacancy and unemployment rates (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) The left panel shows data for the accommodation and food services industry (ONS SIC I) and
the right panel shows the professional, scientific and technical activities industry (ONS SIC M).
ONS vacancies by industry are plotted against ONS estimates of unemployment by previous
industry. The latter will not fully capture new entrants to the labour market who do not find a job as
they have no previous industry, nor will it reflect the capacity for workers to transition across
industries. The aqua line is a simple linear trend based on the 2001−19 data. Data are available
quarterly until 2018 Q1 and are shown monthly (on a three-month rolling average basis) thereafter.
The Covid period has been excluded due to data volatility. These data are not seasonally adjusted.
The latest data, which are indicated in the white diamonds, are for the three months to February
2026.
Bank of England  
Page 54


meaning that it is more likely to be cut if household real incomes fall. Consistent with
that, the industry experienced a rise in unemployment immediately after the previous
energy shock in 2022. And a higher than average proportion of accommodation and
food services firms responding to the latest ONS BICS have reported being ‘very
concerned’ about energy prices, despite their relatively low use of energy.
There are some reasons to believe that hospitality sector unemployment could rise by
more in response to the current energy shock than in 2022. While most aggregate
indicators do not point to acute financial stress at present, with limited signs of a sharp
pickup in the company insolvency rate or across a range of redundancy indicators,
vulnerabilities appear more pronounced in parts of this sector. Industrial breakdowns of
Experian data suggest that accommodation and food services has one of the highest
shares of firms reporting particularly low cash positions among small and medium-
sized enterprises, with around 80% holding cash worth less than one month of
turnover, a higher share than in 2022. This may limit these firms’ ability to retain
workers in the face of continued demand weakness. Intelligence from the Bank’s
Agents suggests that hiring intentions in the hospitality sector have been particularly
weak compared with other sectors, which have shown some tentative improvement in
recent months.
Overall, the industry‑level evidence suggests that labour market loosening has been
uneven across sectors and that some industries, such as accommodation and food,
may be more vulnerable than others to a further increase in unemployment if demand
weakens. Where those industries have already seen a rise in unemployment and
vacancy rates are relatively low, there may be fewer opportunities for displaced
workers to move quickly back into employment. That could increase the risk that
further weakness in demand leads to a larger than expected rise in aggregate
unemployment. If workers displaced from these sectors are also less able to move into
vacancies elsewhere, some of that increase in unemployment could prove persistent,
and may therefore be associated with a smaller increase in effective labour market
slack.
Bank of England  
Page 55


Box E: How resilient will household spending be to the rise in
energy prices?
The recent rise in energy prices will reduce households’ real incomes. Households
tend to reduce consumption by less than any falls in their real incomes, especially
when those falls are expected to be temporary. This is known as consumption
smoothing. As in 2022 following the previous energy price shock, the financial
positions of households appear consistent with households collectively having the
capacity to partially smooth their consumption through the recent energy price rise.
That consumption response is uncertain, however, and perceptions that the rise in
energy prices will be permanent or very long-lasting, or that job losses will increase,
could mean that spending falls more sharply. Recent increases in expected
mortgage rates will also weigh on consumption, in part because higher mortgage
payments will weigh on mortgagor households’ disposable incomes.
Higher energy prices will reduce real incomes for UK households (Box A). Lower real
incomes would typically be associated with lower real household consumption. But
declines in consumption are usually smaller than in incomes as households – perhaps
expecting the reduction in income to be temporary – tend to partially smooth their
consumption in response to the shock. To do this, households may reduce the pace at
which they are currently saving, draw down on existing savings or increase borrowing.
The extent of consumption smoothing will partly depend on whether households have
available savings to use or are able to access credit. This is the focus of the remainder
of the box. But it will also depend on how households expect the income shock to
evolve. If households judge the rise in energy prices to be temporary, they may be
more willing to maintain their current consumption by using savings or borrowing.
Following the initial rise in energy prices in 2022, the aggregate household saving ratio
fell from 7.5% to 4% between Q1 and Q2, suggesting that households smoothed
through part of the fall in real incomes over that period. The saving ratio rose after that,
in part due to the restrictive stance of monetary policy.
As households have experienced a protracted period of high energy prices over recent
years, they may be more likely to perceive the latest shock as permanent and
consequently to reduce consumption. Periods of higher and more volatile inflation can
also increase uncertainty around future real incomes which may further weigh on the
consumption of some households (Mann (2025)). In addition, working-age households
may be less willing to smooth their consumption if they are worried about the risk of job
Bank of England  
Page 56


losses causing further falls in income. Unemployment is higher, and job vacancies
lower, than in 2022 (Box D), although the share of households reporting having saved
more money due to concerns about job loss in response to the 2026 H1 Bank of
England/NMG survey remained low.
The extent of consumption smoothing will be important in determining the impact of the
energy shock on demand in the economy and therefore the potential trade-off that the
MPC faces between the speed at which inflation is returned to the 2% target while
avoiding undesirable volatility in output (Box G).
Some households may choose to maintain consumption by saving less. There appears
to be capacity overall for households to smooth consumption in this way, although
households who save very little – for example those on lower incomes – may not be
able to do so. The household saving ratio was 9.9% in 2025 Q4, above historical
averages and the 7.5% recorded in 2022 Q1. That suggests there is room for the
saving ratio to decline, allowing households to at least partly maintain real
consumption even with reduced real incomes.
Households may also be able to smooth consumption if they do not face liquidity
constraints, for example if they have existing savings to fall back on. In aggregate, the
stock of household bank deposits has fallen relative to incomes since it peaked in
2021–22, suggesting less capacity for consumption smoothing than was the case
during the 2022 energy price shock. However, aggregate deposits remain higher than
pre-pandemic and, according to alternative data on household savings and income
from the 2026 H1 NMG survey, the median level of household savings relative to
income is slightly higher than in 2022. This evidence also suggests some capacity for
households to smooth their consumption through the recent rise in energy prices.
Aggregate data on household savings mask differences across households, however.
The rise in energy prices is likely to disproportionately reduce real incomes for lower-
income households because utility bills make up a larger-than-average share of their
expenditure (Box A). Consistent with that, evidence from the 2022 H2 NMG survey
indicates that lower-income households cut back consumption by more than higher-
income households after the energy price shock in 2022 (Chart E.1, purple bars in left
panel). The share of lower-income households with savings worth less than two weeks
of income is greater than in 2022 (Chart E.1, right panel), all else equal suggesting that
any reduction in consumption could be greater than during the last energy shock for
these households.
Do households have enough savings to smooth consumption?
Bank of England  
Page 57


Acting in the opposite direction, however, a fall in the proportion of liquidity-constrained
high-income households could mean that the overall degree of consumption
smoothing is somewhat greater than in 2022. Since 2022, there has been a modest fall
in the share of high-income households with savings worth less than two weeks of
income (Chart E.1, right panel). Higher-income households account for a
disproportionate share of discretionary consumption, which can be more easily
reduced than spending on essentials when incomes fall. As such, the fall in the share
of higher-income households with few savings could mean that consumption
smoothing is somewhat greater than during the previous energy shock.
Bank of England  
Page 58


Chart E.1: Evidence from the 2022 energy price shock suggests that lower-
income households experiencing higher costs were more likely to cut
spending; there is a lower share of financially insecure high-income
households than in 2022
Actions taken by households in response to higher costs; (a) share of households with
deposits worth less than two weeks of income (b)
Sources: Bank of England/NMG survey and Bank calculations.
(a) The data are from the September 2022 NMG survey. The bars show the share of respondents
within each quintile of the non-equivalised total household gross income distribution for all
households answering how their total spending had been affected by the increase in the cost of
living over the past six months, excluding those who responded ‘Don’t know’. The full responses
corresponding to the aqua, orange and purple bars were ‘Buying the same things or more, despite
higher cost’, ‘Cutting back on some things but not others, spending more money overall’ and
‘Cutting back completely, spending the same money or less’, respectively.
(b) The data are from the March 2022 and March 2026 NMG surveys. Low and high-income
households are defined as those in the lowest fifth and the highest fifth of the non-equivalised total
household gross income distribution for non-retired households, respectively. In addition to the
standard cleaning procedures applied to each wave of the survey, further targeted cleaning was
applied to the data for 2026 H1 to exclude a small number of implausible respondents concentrated
in younger age cohorts. Observations with implausibly high income or savings were excluded using
thresholds based on the 95th percentile of outcomes observed among prime age respondents.
Following these exclusions, survey weights were recalibrated to preserve representativeness.
Can households access enough credit to smooth consumption?
Bank of England  
Page 59


Households with few savings or other liquid assets can also use credit to temporarily
support consumption. Households’ current debt positions appear more favourable than
in 2022. Real household debt stocks are lower, and the aggregate debt to income ratio
has fallen from around 153% in 2022 Q1 to around 132% in 2025 Q4 (Chart E.2, left
panel), primarily driven by a reduction in mortgage borrowing relative to income.
The availability of credit has improved since 2022, which should also help households
to smooth consumption. The Bank’s Credit Conditions Survey (CCS) has shown
improvements in lenders’ reported availability of both secured and unsecured credit,
including credit card borrowing. And the latest expectations, reported for the three-
month period to the end of February 2026, point towards a further improvement in
credit availability (Chart E.2, diamonds in right panel). Taken together with the
reduction in household indebtedness, this suggests that households may collectively
have greater capacity than in 2022 to use borrowing to support consumption
temporarily.
Bank of England  
Page 60


The increased cost of credit, due to recent rises in household interest rates, may affect
the outlook for consumption. Higher energy prices have been accompanied by a rise in
market-implied expectations for future Bank Rate, which has started to feed through
into household borrowing rates (Section 1.3).
Chart E.2: Household debt has fallen relative to income since 2022 and the
availability of credit has improved
Aggregate household debt to income ratio; (a) household credit availability (b)
Sources: Bank of England, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) The measure shown is calculated as consumer credit and mortgage gross debt outstanding as
a proportion of nominal household post-tax income. Household income is defined as post-tax
income adjusted for changes in pension entitlements. This is further adjusted to exclude gross
operating surplus and the effects of financial intermediation services indirectly measured, and to
add back in interest paid. Mortgage interest payments before 2000 are adjusted for the effect of
mortgage interest relief at source. The data are not seasonally adjusted. The final data point is for
2025 Q4.
(b) The results are based on lenders’ own responses to the CCS. The question asked was ‘How
has the availability of secured/unsecured credit provided to households changed?’ and
respondents were asked to account for normal seasonal variations. The diamonds show
expectations over the next three months based on the 2026 Q1 survey. To calculate aggregate
results, each lender is assigned a score based on their response. Scores are positive for lenders
reporting an increase in credit availability and negative for lenders reporting a reduction in credit
availability. Lenders who report that credit conditions have changed ‘a lot’ are assigned twice the
score of those who report that conditions have changed ‘a little’. These scores are then weighted
by lenders’ market shares. The net percentage balances are calculated as the sum of the weighted
scores across lenders and are scaled to lie between ±100.
How might recent rises in household interest rates affect consumption?
Bank of England  
Page 61


One way in which higher rates can lead to lower consumption is via a household debt
channel of monetary policy (Foulis et al (2026)). This channel captures the negative
effects of higher interest rates on house prices, which reduces the extent to which
households can borrow by using housing as collateral, and also reduces mortgagor
households’ disposable incomes due to higher mortgage payments (the cash-flow
channel of monetary policy, Box A of the August 2025 Monetary Policy Report). As
most mortgages are fixed rate, typically refinanced every two to five years, the effects
of increases in mortgage rates feed through only gradually to consumption.
The rise in market interest rates is expected to weigh on household consumption
relative to expectations at the time of the February Report. A microdata-based estimate
of the household debt channel suggests that rises in mortgage rates preceding the
onset of the Middle East conflict will continue to feed through to consumption as
mortgagors refinance over time and will cumulatively reduce the level of consumption
by 0.8% from the start of 2026 to end-2028 (Chart E.3, aqua line). More recent rises in
mortgage rates mean that, based on the latest market-implied interest rates, aggregate
consumption is now expected to fall by a further 0.6 percentage points as a result of
this channel (the difference between the aqua and orange lines).
Bank of England  
Page 62


Chart E.3: The household debt channel is projected to weigh on consumption
by more than expected at the time of the February Report
Projected impact of the household debt channel (a)
Sources: Bank of England, ClearScore, FCA Product Sales Data (PSD), Foulis et al (2026),
Money Dashboard, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) The data from January 2026 to December 2028 are monthly projections. The latest historical
data are from the December 2025 PSD. The projections are informed by the Bank’s quoted
mortgage rate data. The aqua line is consistent with the central projection in the February 2026
Report, and the orange line is consistent with Scenario A in the April 2026 Report. Conditional on
the same market-implied path for Bank Rate as in Scenario A (Section 3.1), the consumption
impacts would be similar to the orange line under Scenario B but could be somewhat higher under
Scenario C, given that the weaker outlook for unemployment and house prices associated with that
scenario could lead to slightly higher expected credit risk, which may be priced into mortgage rates.
However, the differences between all three scenarios would be small relative to the impact of
changes in the market-implied path for interest rates since the February 2026 Report.
Bank of England  
Page 63


Box F: How are global developments affecting UK non-
energy import prices?
Movements in world export prices affect the cost of goods and services imported to
the UK. Over the past year, two important geopolitical developments have
influenced the prices charged by foreign exporters to the UK. Higher global trade
tariffs are judged to have weighed a little on UK non-energy import price inflation
owing to the effects of trade diversion. Any remaining disinflationary effects from
higher tariffs are expected to be far outweighed, however, by the impact of the
conflict in the Middle East. In addition to raising directly the cost of energy for UK
households and businesses, the conflict is expected to increase UK non-energy
import price inflation as foreign exporters pass on the higher cost of producing and
transporting their goods due to higher energy costs (Section 1.1 and Box A).
UK-weighted world export price inflation (excluding the direct effect of oil prices) was
subdued during 2025, in part due to higher global trade tariffs having led to some trade
diversion. The sterling ERI appreciated by 1.3% during that period compared with its
average over 2024, and within that rose 3.2% against the dollar and fell 1.2% against
the euro. Combined with the weakness in world export price inflation, that weighed on
UK non-energy import price inflation (Chart F.1, left panel). The conflict in the Middle
East is expected to push up significantly world export price inflation and consequently
UK non-energy import price inflation this year, however, more than offsetting any
remaining disinflationary effects from trade diversion.
Weak world export price inflation weighed slightly on UK non-energy import
price inflation over 2025, consistent with some small disinflationary effects
from higher trade tariffs. But the conflict in the Middle East is expected to raise
UK non-energy import prices materially over coming quarters.
Bank of England  
Page 64


Global trade tensions intensified last year, with the US increasing its effective tariff rate
on a wide range of countries in March 2025. Bank staff estimate that the global
effective tariff on imports to the US is currently around 12% and the effective tariff rate
on US imports from the UK is around 9%. The effective tariff rate on US imports from
China is around 24%. The slightly lower global tariff rate, relative to what was assumed
Chart F.1: World export price inflation has been subdued, consistent with some
small disinflationary effects from trade diversion
UK-weighted world export prices (excluding the direct effect of oil prices), UK non-energy
import prices and the sterling ERI, (a) Chinese goods export values by destination (b)
Sources: Bank of England, Bloomberg Finance L.P., China Customs – provided by CEIC, Eurostat,
LSEG Workspace, ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) UK-weighted world export prices are based on goods and services exports of 51 countries
weighted according to their shares in UK imports, each measured in their domestic currency. The
sample does not include any major oil exporters (except for the US). The final data point for the
UK-weighted world export prices and UK non-energy import prices series is 2025 Q4. The final
data point for the sterling exchange rate index series is 2026 Q1. Diamonds show Bank staff
projections for UK-weighted world export prices excluding the direct impact of oil and UK non-
energy import prices excluding fuel for 2026 Q1–Q2 for Scenarios A and B. The projection for
Scenario C would be higher.
(b) The bars show contributions to the change in the value of Chinese goods exports by destination
since March 2025. ASEAN stands for the Association of Southeast Asian Nations and RoW stands
for rest of the world. The data are shown in US dollars. The data are to March 2026.
Higher global trade tariffs appear to have led to some trade diversion.
Bank of England  
Page 65


at the time of the February Report, reflects the US administration’s decision to replace
previously imposed tariffs with a new, temporary, uniform 10% tariff on all trade
partners on 20 February 2026.
There is tentative evidence that higher global trade tariffs have led to some trade
diversion, which has put downward pressure on world export price inflation as
exporters have responded to lower demand from the US by attempting to shift some of
their trade elsewhere, requiring a fall in the prices of those exports (Box C of the
February 2025 Monetary Policy Report). The value of Chinese exports to the US has
declined, as expected given the increase in US tariffs. There is limited evidence that
those exports have been directly diverted to the UK or the European Union, however.
While the right panel of Chart F.1 shows that the value of Chinese exports to these
areas has risen, separate data suggest that the volume of those exports has not
increased significantly above previous trends. This is consistent with Bank staff
analysis which found limited evidence of significant shifts in export flows to the UK in
previous episodes of higher tariffs (Box D of the August 2025 Monetary Policy
Report).
There is some evidence of trade diversion to other regions. The value of Chinese
exports to ASEAN and RoW has increased since March 2025 (Chart F.1, right panel).
While data on Chinese export prices to ASEAN and the RoW are not available, Bank
staff estimate that – based on data for Chinese import volumes to the US, euro area
and the UK and the fact that Chinese export prices have overall fallen during this
period – the price of Chinese exports to ASEAN and the RoW has fallen. That would
be consistent with export volumes to those markets having risen.
Rather than trade diversion, the rise in Chinese exports to ASEAN and the rest of the
world could be consistent with some rerouting of exports from China or changes to
supply chains, whereby Chinese exports reach the US via other countries. Rerouting
involves exporting goods originally destined for a market where they would face higher
tariffs via a country facing lower tariffs, without a substantial change in where the
goods are produced. The changes to trade patterns may also reflect a reorganisation
of supply chains whereby instead of exporting the final goods intended for the ultimate
destination, intermediate goods are exported to a country that faces lower tariffs and
final goods are then exported from there (Box C of the February 2025 Monetary
Policy Report). Rerouting or changes to supply chains would imply a smaller
reduction in overall export demand from global trade tariffs, since these goods are
continuing to reach the US. As such it would probably result in smaller disinflationary
effects on global export prices compared with trade diversion.
Bank of England  
Page 66


Beyond the effects of trade diversion or possible rerouting, other factors may have
contributed to a fall in Chinese export prices over the past year. The decline in Chinese
export prices predates the imposition of higher trade tariffs and may reflect weak
domestic demand in China as well as the depreciation of the renminbi effective
exchange rate index over the first half of 2025.
Overall, trade diversion, alongside a broader decline in Chinese export prices, is likely
to have put downward pressure on world export prices and subsequently UK import
prices. The effects of US trade tariffs are expected to weigh on world export prices by
a further 0.4% over the next three years.
In addition to directly raising the cost of energy (Section 1.1), the conflict in the Middle
East has raised the prices of some non-energy goods globally, largely through the
indirect effects of higher energy costs. This has already started to feed through to
higher world export price inflation. Global agricultural prices have risen by around 4.5%
since the start of the conflict, largely owing to the direct effects of rising energy costs
(Box A). The conflict has also pushed up prices of key inputs to fertiliser production,
including urea, ammonia and sulphur, large volumes of which had passed through the
Strait of Hormuz before the start of the conflict. Natural gas, the price of which has
increased sharply, is also a key input into fertiliser production. Changes in fertiliser
prices pass through to food prices with a lag given the length of harvest cycles. If the
conflict were to persist and fertiliser prices to remain high, global food prices would
increase further in the medium term.
Some costs of global goods transportation have also increased since the start of the
conflict. European jet fuel prices have risen by 87% since then, consistent with around
40% of Europe’s jet fuel supply passing through the Strait of Hormuz. Container
shipping costs have so far increased only very slightly (Chart F.2, left panel). This may
partly reflect the fact that the Strait of Hormuz is not a major route for container
shipping and some trade through the Red Sea had already been redirected to
alternative routes, such as via the Cape of Good Hope, following Red Sea disruption in
2024 (May 2024 Monetary Policy Report). Survey evidence from the S&P Global
Manufacturing PMIs suggests that input costs have increased, with the latest UK flash
reading only slightly below its 2022 levels (Chart F.2, right panel). That recent increase
could partly reflect the widespread nature of the shock, rather than the size of the price
rise (Section 1.1).
The conflict in the Middle East is expected to raise world export price inflation
materially, more than offsetting any remaining disinflationary effects from
higher trade tariffs.
Bank of England  
Page 67


The conflict is expected to have raised the level of world export prices by around 1% in
2026 Q1. World export price inflation is expected to peak in 2026 Q3 in Scenarios A
and B, and in 2026 Q4 in Scenario C. Most of the rise in world export prices over the
remainder of this year is judged to be the result of the conflict in the Middle East
(Section 3).
Chart F.2: Global transport costs have risen only slightly following the conflict
in the Middle East; input costs indices have risen by more
Shipping cost indices and survey indicators of global and UK manufacturers’ input costs (a)
(b)
Sources: Baltic Exchange, Freightos Baltic Index, J.P.Morgan, LSEG Workspace, Shanghai
Shipping Exchange, S&P Global and Bank calculations.
(a) ‘Global container transport’ represents the Freightos Baltic Container Index, a global measure of
the cost of container transport. ‘Dry bulk cargo transport’ represents the Baltic Exchange Panamax
Index, a measure of average prices paid for the transport of dry bulk cargo around the world on
Panamax-sized carriers. ‘Container transport from China’ represents the China Containerised
Freight Index, a measure of the cost of container transport from China. The data are monthly
averages of daily data; latest data are to 22 April. The data are not seasonally adjusted.
(b) A reading of above 50 indicates an increase on the previous month while a reading below 50
indicates a fall. The latest data point for the UK series is the flash estimate for April 2026; the latest
data point for the Global series is the final estimate for March 2026.
Bank of England  
Page 68


3: Outlook, scenarios and risks
The conflict in the Middle East has significantly increased the uncertainty surrounding the
UK economic outlook. Given that uncertainty, this section presents three scenarios to help
to illustrate a range of possible outcomes for the UK economy. The scenarios primarily
differ in their assumptions about the paths of global energy prices and the extent of any
second-round effects on domestic price and wage-setting. They are used to assess the
implications of this new economic shock for inflation, activity and aspects of monetary
policy strategy.
 
Across these three scenarios, inflation is higher in the near term than the central projection
in the February Report. The outlook varies depending on the magnitude of the energy
shock and how that propagates through the economy. Larger and more persistent rises in
global energy prices are judged to be likely to lead to bigger second-round effects on
inflation. Given the inflationary nature of the energy price shock, the monetary policy
stance needs to be tighter on average in these scenarios compared with the central
projection in the February Report, and materially so for a scenario in which there is a
further sharp rise in energy prices and strongly persistent second‑round effects. The
appropriate path for Bank Rate will vary depending on how the shock evolves, as well as
how the MPC judges the balance between the costs of leaning too little against second-
round effects and the costs of responding too much.
3.1: Key assumptions and judgements differentiating scenarios
Since the February 2026 Report and following the onset of the conflict in the Middle East, the
UK economy has been hit by a significant energy price shock. There is uncertainty around the
severity and duration of the conflict, its impact on global energy supply and broader trade
disruption, as well as its propagation through the UK economy, which makes the outlook for
inflation and activity highly uncertain.
Recent experience has highlighted the difficulty of forecasting inflation during large and
persistent cost shocks. The Bernanke Review emphasised the value of using a range of
inputs to support policymaking under uncertainty, including considering risks and alternative
scenarios.
Against this backdrop, this section presents three scenarios, A, B and C, which help illustrate
a range of potential outcomes for the UK economy, without any one being designated as a
central projection. MPC members’ individual views on how they are taking account of the
scenarios are set out in the April 2026 minutes.
Bank of England  
Page 69


The scenarios differ along two main dimensions, reflecting the two sources of uncertainty that
are particularly important for the outlook at present (Table 3.A). The first is the future paths of
global oil and gas prices. Scenarios A, B and C are conditioned on alternative paths for
energy prices, reflecting different potential profiles for the severity and persistence of
disruptions to global energy supply. The second is the strength of any second-round effects in
domestic price and wage-setting, which may themselves be related to the magnitude and
persistence of the global energy shock.
All three scenarios are conditioned on a range of other assumptions, including the
Government’s fiscal plans as set out in Budget 2025. For more information see the Scenario
Projections Databank accompanying this Report.
They are also conditioned on the market-implied path for interest rates in the 15 days to 22
April; Section 3.3 illustrates the impact of changing that conditioning assumption for scenario
outcomes by drawing on some simple policy rules.
Table 3.A: Key assumptions and judgements in scenarios
Scenario A
Scenario B
Scenario C
Energy
prices
Energy prices for oil and gas
follow the market futures
curves over the scenario
period.
Energy prices follow the
market futures curves for six
months and then follow the
average of the futures curves
and a constant spot price at
six months for the remainder
of the scenario period.
Energy prices rise sharply –
to a level in the upper tail of
option-implied distributions –
and remain elevated for a
prolonged period.
Second-
round
effects
from new
energy
shock
No second-round effects from
the new energy shock, owing
to weaker worker bargaining
and firm pricing power
stemming from weaker
demand, driven by less
consumption smoothing than
in other scenarios.
Modest additional
second‑round effects,
consistent with some effect
on short-term inflation
expectations and hence
wages.
Stronger and more persistent
additional second‑round
effects, relative to the other
scenarios, stemming from a
greater effect of the energy
shock on inflation
expectations and hence
wages and prices.
Energy price assumptions
The alternative energy price paths in the scenarios are designed to be illustrative, and reflect
heightened unpredictability and uncertainty about the severity and persistence of disruptions
to global energy supply.
Bank of England  
Page 70


Chart 3.1 illustrates the assumed paths for oil and gas prices under each scenario. In
Scenario A, energy prices are conditioned on market futures curves in the 15 UK working
days to 22 April 2026, with oil peaking at $108 per barrel this year before falling to below $80
by 2027 Q1 and to $72 by the end of the scenario period (gold line in left panel). Gas prices
peak at 114 pence per therm before falling to around 60 pence per therm (gold line in right
panel).
Given the risk that energy futures curves understate the potential disruption to energy supply
that has already occurred, or might occur in the future, Scenarios B and C assume energy
prices remain elevated for longer.
In Scenario B, prices peak at $108 per barrel and 114 pence per therm, the same as in
Scenario A, but remain higher over the scenario period. Prices end the scenario period at $81
per barrel and 86 pence per therm, respectively (Chart 3.1, purple lines). In Scenario C, oil
prices rise to a peak of $130 per barrel and gas prices to 211 pence per therm (orange lines),
consistent with continued substantial disruption to Middle Eastern energy supplies. In the first
year, energy prices in this scenario lie in the upper tail of option‑implied distributions. Prices
decline gradually for the rest of the scenario period and remain higher than in Scenarios A
and B for the entire period and end at $92 per barrel and 104 pence per therm.
Bank of England  
Page 71


Potential impacts of second-round effects
The impact of higher energy prices on UK inflation occurs through direct, indirect and second-
round effects on domestic wages and prices, with uncertainty around the second-round
effects judged to be substantial for the policy outlook. The extent to which second-round
effects are likely to occur is state‑dependent and reflects the interaction between the
magnitude and persistence of the energy price shock, changes in inflation expectations and
the degree of spare capacity in the economy (Box C), as well as the policy response (Box G).
The Committee has drawn on lessons from past experience and a wide range of evidence to
better understand and model second-round effects from energy prices (Mrabet and Page
(2023) and Forecast Evaluation Report). But the impact from the new energy shock remains
uncertain. The MPC continues to judge that second-round effects from previous shocks are
continuing to fade, as set out in the February 2026 Report.
Scenario A assumes that there are no new second-round effects as a result of the increase in
energy prices, because slack in the labour market and the relative weakness in demand limits
worker bargaining and firm pricing power. The energy shock is also relatively short-lived in
Chart 3.1: Energy price paths are higher in Scenario C relative to A and B
Brent crude oil (a) and natural gas (b) price paths in Scenarios A, B and C
Sources: Bloomberg Finance L.P. and Bank calculations.
(a) Historical spot prices are quarterly averages of Brent crude oil prices and are in US dollars. The dashed
lines refer to the conditioning assumptions for Scenarios A, B and C, as outlined in Table 3.A. The final data
are for 2029 Q2.
(b) Historical spot prices are quarterly averages of Bloomberg UK NBP Natural Gas Forward Day prices
and are in sterling. The dashed lines refer to the conditioning assumptions for Scenarios A, B and C, as
outlined in Table 3.A. The final data are for 2029 Q2.
Bank of England  
Page 72


this scenario, reducing the risk of second-round effects. Consumer demand is assumed to fall
disproportionately more than has been the case historically, on average. In this scenario,
recent economic experience of high inflation induces households to want to hold more liquidity
to insure against future shocks (Box E), so households smooth their consumption by less than
normal as they see the shock representing a more permanent shift in the price level.
In Scenario B, higher energy prices raise short‑term inflation expectations, leading to
second‑round effects. But those effects are modest, driven in part by a softer labour market
and more slack in the economy since the energy shock in 2022, resulting in weaker worker
bargaining and firm pricing power. Second-round effects in this scenario have been calibrated
using the model in Bernanke and Blanchard (2023), applied to the UK, in which energy price
shocks primarily affect inflation persistence via expectations and wage‑setting (Haskel et al
(2025)), although the magnitudes of the effects could instead be judged to be consistent with
some degree of firm pricing power. There is no additional demand weakness from lower
consumption smoothing in this scenario.
Scenario C is more severe, and so both short and long-term inflation expectations are more
sensitive to persistently elevated inflation outturns and drift higher, including because of the
experience of previously high inflation in 2022. Firms are assumed to have sufficient pricing
power for higher wages and costs to feed through more fully into prices – despite
consumption falling in line with the average response to energy price shocks – resulting in
materially stronger second‑round effects.
In this scenario, the calibration of second-round effects stemming from higher short-term
inflation expectations draws from the Bernanke-Blanchard framework as in Scenario B, scaled
for the larger size and persistence of the energy shock. To calibrate second-round effects
stemming from higher long-term inflation expectations, Bank staff have adjusted COMPASS,
the Bank’s main forecasting model, so that households’ and firms’ recent experience of high
inflation play a greater role in shaping inflation dynamics. This method was also used to
calibrate the higher persistence scenario in the November 2025 Report.
Energy price shocks push up world export prices across all scenarios, relative to the February
2026 Report. World export prices rise in line with the scale of each shock in Scenarios A and
B, but remain elevated for longer even as energy prices gradually fall from their peaks. In
Scenario C, continued substantial disruption to energy supplies encompasses further global
supply‑chain cost pressures and the larger initial price shocks trigger stronger second-round
effects than in Scenarios A and B, as firms pass on higher costs more aggressively to protect
margins and workers seek compensating wage increases. This is consistent with the findings
of the recent Forecast Evaluation Report, which found that, for the 2022 energy shock,
world export prices were more persistent and higher than expected.
Bank of England  
Page 73


3.2: Scenario outcomes
This section sets out how inflation and slack in the economy evolve across the three
illustrative scenarios. They are all conditioned on the market-implied path for Bank Rate in the
15 days to 22 April (Table 3.B and Chart 3.2), which is significantly higher than in the February
Report, peaking at 4.2% in 2027 before gradually falling to 4% by 2028 Q2, relative to a peak
of 3.7% in February.
Comparisons to the February 2026 Monetary Policy Report central projection can be found in
the Scenario Projections Databank accompanying this Report.
Bank of England  
Page 74


Table 3.B: Summary of scenarios (a)
2026 Q2
2027 Q2
2028 Q2
2029 Q2
Scenario A
CPI inflation (b)
3.1
2.9
1.5
1.7
GDP (c)
0.7
0.8
1.7
1.8
Excess supply/Excess demand (d)
-1.1
-1.5
-1.0
-0.8
Unemployment rate (e)
5.1
5.5
5.4
5.1
Private sector regular average weekly earnings (f)
3.0
3.0
2.5
2.7
Energy prices – direct contribution to CPI inflation (g)
0.5
-0.1
-0.3
0.1
World export prices (h)
3.9
0.4
-0.3
-0.5
Scenario B
CPI inflation (b)
3.1
3.2
2.0
2.0
GDP (c)
0.7
0.8
1.7
1.7
Excess supply/Excess demand (d)
-1.1
-1.4
-1.0
-0.8
Unemployment rate (e)
5.1
5.5
5.4
5.2
Private sector regular average weekly earnings (f)
3.0
3.4
2.9
3.0
Energy prices – direct contribution to CPI inflation (g)
0.5
0.1
-0.1
0.1
World export prices (h)
3.9
1.5
0.4
0.1
Scenario C
CPI inflation (b)
3.6
5.6
2.9
2.6
GDP (c)
0.7
0.5
1.7
1.8
Excess supply/Excess demand (d)
-1.1
-1.7
-1.3
-1.0
Unemployment rate (e)
5.1
5.6
5.6
5.3
Private sector regular average weekly earnings (f)
3.1
4.6
4.6
3.7
Energy prices – direct contribution to CPI inflation (g)
0.6
1.3
-0.5
-0.2
World export prices (h)
5.8
4.5
0.5
-0.2
Bank of England  
Page 75


Inflation
Across all three scenarios, CPI inflation is projected to be significantly higher in the near term
than in February, driven by the direct and indirect effects of higher energy prices (Section 1.1
and Boxes A, B and G), and is higher on average across the scenario period.
In Scenario A, CPI inflation rises to 3.6% at the end of 2026 (Chart 3.2, gold line in left panel).
Wage growth rises a little in the near term, but eases back to below 3% by 2027 Q3 (Chart
3.4, gold line in left panel), as labour market conditions loosen due to weak activity. As a
result, there are no second-round effects from the new shock and domestically generated
inflation slows relatively quickly. CPI inflation falls below target at the end of 2027, conditioned
on market interest rates in the 15 days to 22 April, and ends the scenario period at 1.7%. This
is largely due to the direct impact of energy prices falling back, as well as the impact of
persistent slack weighing on inflation.
In Scenario B, inflation peaks at similar levels as in Scenario A, at 3.7% at the end of 2026,
reflecting similar direct impacts in both scenarios (Chart 3.2, purple line in left panel). Inflation
declines as energy prices fall back, but remains elevated for longer in Scenario B due to
energy prices falling more slowly (Chart 3.1). Second‑round effects are modest (Chart 3.3,
purple line), with wage growth rising to 3.5% in 2027 Q1 and declining only gradually
thereafter (Chart 3.4, purple line in left panel). Nonetheless, second-round effects add 0.2
percentage points to CPI during the second year of the scenario (Chart 3.3). In contrast, the
direct contributions from energy make a negative contribution to inflation over that period.
Inflation is around the 2% target in years two and three, conditioned on market interest rates
in the 15 days to 22 April.
In Scenario C, inflation peaks at 6.2% in 2027 Q1 and remains above target for the entire
scenario period, conditioned on market interest rates (Chart 3.2, orange line in left panel). The
direct impact of the pronounced and persistent energy price shock raises inflation by 1.3
(a) The numbers shown in this table are conditioned on the assumptions described in Table 3.A and the
Scenario Projections Databank accompanying this Report. All three scenarios are conditioned on the
same market-implied path for Bank Rate.
(b) Four-quarter inflation rate. Based on ONS series D7BT.
(c) Four-quarter growth in real GDP. Based on ONS series ABMI.
(d) Per cent of potential GDP. A negative figure implies output is below potential and a positive that it is
above.
(e) International Labour Organization (ILO) definition of unemployment. Based on ONS series MGSX.
(f) Private sector average weekly earnings excluding bonuses and arrears of pay. Based on ONS series
KAJ2.
(g) Contribution of fuels and lubricants and gas and electricity prices to four-quarter CPI inflation.
(h) Four-quarter growth in UK-weighted world export prices excluding the direct effect of oil prices.
Bank of England  
Page 76


percentage points in 2027 Q2. Second‑round effects are strongest in this scenario (Chart 3.3,
orange line), and wage growth rises and stays significantly higher relative to Scenarios A and
B. As a result, inflation persistence is materially higher than in the other scenarios, with
inflation ending the scenario at 2.6%.
Chart 3.2: Inflation is higher in the near term and the output gap larger in all Scenarios
relative to the February 2026 MPR central projection
Annual CPI inflation and the level of the output gap in Scenarios A, B and C (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) All three scenarios shown here are conditioned on the same market-implied path for Bank Rate. Further
details on conditioning assumptions can be found in Table 3.A and the Scenario Projections Databank
accompanying this Report. The final projections are for 2029 Q2.
Bank of England  
Page 77


Activity and slack in the economy
In all scenarios, the output gap is wider than projected in February 2026 (Chart 3.2, right
panel), reflecting the impact of tighter financial conditions resulting from the energy shock
(Section 1.3), with some impact from energy prices on demand and real incomes too (Section
5 in Forecast Evaluation Report). The scenarios are all conditioned on the market-implied
path for Bank Rate in the 15 days to 22 April, which is significantly higher than in the February
Report.
Unemployment is also projected to be higher across all three scenarios for most of the
scenario period relative to February 2026 MPR because of lower demand (Chart 3.4, right
panel).
In Scenario A, four-quarter GDP growth slows to 0.5% in 2027 Q1 before recovering to 1.8%
by the end of the scenario period. The output gap widens to -1.6% of potential output at the
end of 2026, before narrowing later in the scenario (Chart 3.2, gold line in right panel).
Reduced consumption smoothing weighs on demand. And while the lack of second‑round
effects helps to contain domestic cost pressures, supporting a rebound in demand, real
Chart 3.3: The impact of second-round effects on inflation in Scenario C is higher than
in Scenario B
Potential additional inflation impacts of second-round effects stemming from the new energy shock
(a)
Source: Bank calculations.
(a) Both scenarios shown here are conditioned on the same market-implied path for Bank Rate. Further
details on conditioning assumptions can be found in Table 3.A and the Scenario Projections Databank
accompanying this Report. The final projections are for 2029 Q2.
Bank of England  
Page 78


incomes remain permanently lower over the scenario period due to the drag from higher yield
curve. The unemployment rate picks up to 5.6% in 2027 Q2 and remains at 5.1% at the end
of the scenario.
In Scenario B, four-quarter GDP growth also weakens, falling to a trough of 0.6% in 2027 Q1,
before recovering somewhat over the scenario period. The output gap widens to -1.5% of
potential output by the end of 2026 and ends the period at -0.8% (Chart 3.2, purple line in
right panel). While households smooth consumption more than in scenario A, the hit to real
income from the energy price shock is larger, which weighs on demand. As a result, the
unemployment rate rises, peaking at 5.5% in 2027, before declining to 5.2% at the end of the
scenario period.
In Scenario C, the combination of high and persistent energy prices, elevated global export
prices and strong second‑round effects, alongside the impact of the higher yield curve, results
in a marked deterioration in activity. Four-quarter GDP growth falls to 0.3% in 2027 Q1. The
output gap widens to -1.7% of potential output by the end of 2026, remaining significantly
negative for an extended period (Chart 3.2, orange line in right panel). Despite weaker
demand and real incomes falling materially in Scenario C, inflation remains elevated for
longer (Chart 3.2, orange line in left panel), reflecting the strength and persistence of
domestic wage and price pressures. The unemployment rate peaks at 5.7% and ends the
scenario period at 5.3%, a little higher than in Scenarios A and B.
Bank of England  
Page 79


3.3: Model-based policy simulations
Monetary policy typically looks through the direct effects of energy shocks and partially looks
through indirect effects but responds to second-round effects (Box G). In response to supply
shocks like an energy supply shock, monetary policy strategy must also factor in the trade-off
between the speed with which inflation is returned to target and the consideration that should
be placed on the variability of output.
Illustrative policy rules, which relate Bank Rate to developments in certain economic
variables, can provide some information about potential paths for Bank Rate for different
scenarios.
Chart 3.4: Wage growth rises more in Scenario C relative to A and B; and
unemployment is higher for most of the period in all scenarios relative to the February
2026 Report
Private sector regular pay growth and the unemployment rate in Scenarios A, B and C (a)
Sources: ONS and Bank calculations.
(a) All three scenarios shown here are conditioned on the same market-implied path for Bank Rate. Further
details on conditioning assumptions can be found in Table 3.A and the Scenario Projections Databank
accompanying this Report. The final projections are for 2029 Q2 and use the ILO definition of
unemployment.
Bank of England  
Page 80


Compared to the central projection in the February Report, under almost all of the illustrative
rules produced by Bank staff, Bank Rate is higher on average over the period in all scenarios
because of the inflationary impact of the energy price shock (Chart 3.5). However, the extent
to which it is higher depends on the scenario and the policy rule considered.
For example, a forward-looking Taylor-type rule in effect looks through the near-term increase
in inflation but responds to the medium-term outlook, including the impact of base effects and
future declines in energy prices in these scenarios, which means that it tends to result in
relatively low paths for Bank Rate across scenarios (Chart 3.5, aqua bars). A
contemporaneous Taylor-type rule that excludes the direct contributions of energy prices to
inflation would only look through the direct effects of the energy price shock, producing
somewhat higher paths for Bank Rate (orange bars). Meanwhile, a contemporaneous Taylor-
type rule that responds to headline inflation would also respond to direct effects, resulting in
materially higher Bank Rate paths (green bars).
Between the February Report and the April Report, the market-implied path for Bank Rate has
shifted up by around 55 basis points on average over the next three years. That increase is
within the range of changes in Bank Rate paths suggested by the rules for Scenario B over
the same period (Chart 3.5). The changes suggested by the policy rules for Scenario A are
somewhat lower, on average.
Bank of England  
Page 81


In Scenario C, the path for Bank Rate is materially higher than the market-implied path in
most illustrative policy rules produced by Bank staff, given the outlook embodies persistent
and material second-round effects which policy needs to act to offset. In staff’s illustrative
model-based projections for Scenario C, for example, Bank Rate rises to around 5.25% by
2027 Q1 (Chart 3.6, left panel), which reduces the projected inflation peak in this scenario and
subsequently returns inflation towards the 2% target more quickly than under the market-
implied path (Chart 3.6, right panel). This would come at the cost of a larger output gap (Chart
3.6, middle panel) and would raise the risk of a recession. In practice, monetary policy makers
would have to judge the balance between the costs of leaning too little against second-round
effects and the costs to output of responding too much. If there are signs of stronger second-
round effects, policymakers may want to put relatively more weight on stabilising inflation in
order to ensure that changes in price and wage-setting behaviour do not become entrenched
(Box G).
Chart 3.5: Compared to the central projection in the February Report, monetary policy
would have to be tighter across different rules and scenarios
Average change in Bank Rate path over the scenario period compared to the same illustrative rule
for the central projection in the February Report (a)
Source: Bank of England.
(a) Annex 1 provides additional detail on the definition of the policy rules shown here and the equivalent
paths for the output gap and inflation. These should not be interpreted as a prescription for how policy is
likely to evolve.
Bank of England  
Page 82


All illustrative policy paths assume that monetary policy makers know which scenario is going
to unfold. In reality, there is uncertainty so, as well as considering what would be the
appropriate policy response for different scenarios, policymakers can also assess whether
and how to set policy robustly across a range of possible scenarios. Over time, the MPC can
monitor the economic outlook to update its view of the risks around it and the appropriate
policy strategy.
Chart 3.6: Bank Rate may need to rise materially in Scenario C to ensure that inflation
returns to the 2% target in the medium term
Scenario C under the market-implied path for Bank Rate and staff’s illustrative model-based
projections (a)
Sources: Bank of England and Bloomberg Finance L.P.
(a) Annex 1 provides additional detail on the definition of the illustrative model-based projections shown
here. These should not be interpreted as a prescription for how policy is likely to evolve.
Bank of England  
Page 83


Box G: How should monetary policy respond to an energy
price shock?
An increase in global energy prices raises UK CPI inflation in the near term. That
higher inflation can lead to second-round effects in domestic wage and price-
setting, which may generate persistent inflationary pressures in the medium term. At
the same time, an energy shock reduces UK households’ real incomes, which could
weigh on demand. Monetary policy typically does not respond to the near-term
effects of an energy shock on inflation but leans against any second-round effects
to ensure that inflation returns to target in the medium term. Because energy shocks
can push up inflation and weigh on activity, monetary policy should consider how
best to manage a trade-off between the speed with which inflation is returned to
target and the consideration that should be placed on the variability of output.
The MPC is tasked with setting UK monetary policy to maintain price stability, defined
by the 2% CPI inflation target which applies at all times. The MPC’s Remit also
recognises, however, that inflation will sometimes depart from its target because of
shocks and disturbances, and that ‘attempts to keep inflation at the inflation target in
these circumstances may cause undesirable volatility in output due to the short term
trade-offs involved’. A sharp increase in energy prices is a textbook example of such a
shock, as it increases inflation while putting downward pressure on demand.
Energy prices are set on global markets and cannot be affected materially by UK
monetary policy. The UK economy is a net energy importer, which means that an
increase in global energy prices is an adverse terms of trade shock because one of the
UK’s key imports has become more expensive. Monetary policy cannot offset this.
Some combination of UK firms, households, and the government must absorb the
resulting loss of real income. The task for monetary policy is to ensure that, as that
adjustment happens, inflation returns sustainably to the 2% target in the medium term.
Energy prices affect UK inflation through several channels, with different potential
implications for monetary policy (Table G.A). The direct effect from pass-through of
changes in global energy prices to the motor fuel and utility prices faced by UK
households is relatively quick. Energy price increases also have indirect effects on
inflation because energy is an important input to the production of many goods and
services. These indirect effects tend to come through somewhat more slowly (Box A).
How does an increase in energy prices matter for monetary policy decisions?
Bank of England  
Page 84


Table G.A: Global energy shocks can affect UK CPI inflation through several
channels
Channel
Mechanism
Typical
speed
Effect on
inflation
Policy
response
Direct effects Increase in motor fuel prices and
household utility prices
Fuel: < 1
month
Utilities: 3–
6 months
Look through
Indirect
effects
Energy cost increases propagate
through supply chains to other
consumer prices
3–24
months
(Partially) look
through
Second-
round effects
Increases in prices beyond direct and
indirect effects via higher inflation
expectations and wage bargaining
12–36
months
Tighten policy
Real income
effects
(Expected) lower real incomes weigh
on demand
12–36
months
Loosen policy/
Trade off
Second-round effects can arise if the increase in energy prices generates persistently
higher inflationary pressures in domestically set wages and prices (Box C). This could
be driven by forward-looking increases in inflation expectations or by backward-looking
real wage and profit resistance (Pill (2026)).
Meanwhile, the decline in real incomes due to the energy shock could lead households
to reduce consumption, weighing on economic activity (Box E).
Monetary policy usually looks through the direct effects of an energy shock on inflation.
That is mainly because monetary policy works with transmission lags, which make it
difficult to lean against direct effects (Bandera et al (2023)). Estimates in the literature
vary, but many studies find that the peak impact of monetary policy on inflation comes
after around 18 to 24 months (Christiano et al (1999), Romer and Romer (2004),
Bernanke et al (2005) and Cloyne and Hürtgen (2016)). So, by the time the impact
of tighter monetary policy would be at its peak, the direct effect of an energy shock has
usually already dropped out of the annual inflation calculation or reversed. This means
Monetary policy often looks through the direct effects of energy shocks on
inflation.
Bank of England  
Page 85


that a policy response large enough to offset direct effects would be likely to push
inflation materially below target in the medium term, resulting in undesirable volatility in
inflation and output.
But even if monetary policy lags were much shorter, it may not be optimal to respond
to the direct effects of an energy shock on inflation. UK monetary policy cannot
materially affect global energy prices, so offsetting the direct effect of an energy price
shock would require pushing down domestic core inflation and wage inflation. This
would create a larger output gap, an increase in unemployment and a decline in real
wages (Broadbent (2021) and Tenreyro (2022)). Looking through the direct effects of
an energy shock avoids such output volatility, as the MPC’s Remit suggests may be
preferable.
Monetary policy transmission lags can also make it difficult to respond to indirect
effects. But because indirect effects tend to come through somewhat more slowly than
direct effects, the argument is less clear cut. A policymaker who places weight on
studies that find relatively short monetary policy lags (Cesa-Bianchi et al (2020) and
Buda et al (2025)) may be inclined to lean against indirect effects. And, if energy cost
increases propagate through supply chains with relatively long lags, an argument for
leaning against them could become stronger. Protracted indirect effects following a
large energy cost increase could keep inflation above target for some time, which
could raise inflation expectations. By leaning against this, a tighter monetary policy
stance could mitigate the development of second-round effects to some extent.
In response to an increase in energy prices, the prices of goods that are energy-
intensive in their production should rise relative to the prices of less energy-intensive
goods. This would encourage consumption to shift towards sectors where inputs are
cheaper insofar as that is possible, reducing the economy-wide use of energy. In
principle, relative prices could adjust by the prices of energy-intensive goods rising or
by the prices of less energy-intensive goods falling. But when there are downward
nominal rigidities that prevent prices or wages from falling, it is easier to achieve the
relative price adjustment through price increases in energy-intensive sectors. This
means that by looking through the indirect effects of energy shocks and letting core
inflation rise, monetary policy can promote the efficient reallocation of resources
across sectors and avoid any reductions in aggregate production and consumption
due to an inefficient use of resources (Guerrieri et al (2021) and Rubbo (2023)).
Monetary policy may want to partially but not fully look through the indirect
effects of an energy shock on inflation.
Bank of England  
Page 86


Allowing core inflation to rise also means that many firms within each sector will have
to adjust their prices, however, which would not be the case if monetary policy offsets
the indirect effects of an energy shock. This can generate inefficient temporary
distortions between the prices of goods with the same energy-intensity of production,
because different firms reset prices and wages at different times (Aoki (2001),
Woodford (2003) and Benigno (2004)). To strike a balance between promoting
efficient relative price adjustments between sectors, but limiting inefficient price
dispersion within sectors, monetary policy may want to partially but not fully look
through indirect effects (Guerrieri et al (2023)).
Monetary policy must lean against second-round effects to ensure that inflation returns
to the 2% target sustainably. But the size of any second-round effects that emerge in
response to an energy shock is uncertain. A small and short-lived energy shock might
not generate any significant second-round effects. But the larger and the more
persistent the shock is, the more likely such effects are to arise, for example because
the shock pushes inflation above thresholds where additional persistence has
historically taken hold (Box C). And second-round effects are more likely to arise if a
sequence of shocks keeps inflation above target for an extended period, as was the
case in 2020–23. The strength of second-round effects is also likely to depend on the
extent of spare capacity in the labour market (Box D) and could be affected by
people’s recent experience of inflation.
In practice, it is difficult to judge when and how strongly monetary policy should
respond to second-round effects. Because monetary policy works with material
transmission lags, it could be costly to wait for conclusive evidence of the strength of
second-round effects, given that some of this evidence will only emerge with a delay
as wage settlements – that are typically annual – are announced and consumer prices
reset (Section 1.1). This means that, by the time policymakers can be certain about the
strength of second-round effects, those effects may already have become entrenched.
When there is uncertainty about the strength of inflation persistence, it may be better
to err on the side of setting policy as if inflation persistence will be significant
(Söderström (2002)). By leaning against potential second-round effects to stop them
from becoming entrenched, monetary policy can reduce the uncertainty about their
size. Setting policy as if second-round effects will not emerge could run the risk of
needing to tighten policy by more in the future to squeeze out entrenched inflation
persistence, at a potentially larger cost to output.
Monetary policy must lean against second-round effects.
Bank of England  
Page 87


Responding early to expected second-round effects also has potential costs, however.
If second-round effects turn out smaller than anticipated, inflation may drop below the
2% target in the medium term as the energy shock fades and tight monetary policy
overly suppresses demand.
Monetary policy makers have to balance these risks by monitoring indicators of
potential second-round effects. They are required to judge continually whether
sufficient evidence has accumulated to take action in order to prevent second-round
effects from becoming entrenched (Monetary Policy Overview).
Energy shocks can generate second-round effects that increase inflationary pressures
in the medium term, but they also weigh on demand, which can result in more slack in
the economy and an increase in unemployment. This means that, subject to returning
inflation to the 2% target in the medium term, monetary policy faces a trade-off: all else
equal, higher inflationary pressures would require a tighter monetary policy stance,
while more slack could motivate a looser monetary policy stance.
The size and persistence of an energy shock, the strength of any resulting second-
round effects on inflation, and the response of demand to the shock will determine the
severity of the trade-off that monetary policy faces. The three scenarios set out in
Section 3 illustrate that a larger or more persistent increase in energy prices is likely to
lead to both larger second-round effects and greater slack, making the trade-off more
acute and long-lasting (Chart 3.2). But there are also uncertainties about the impact of
other factors on the emergence of second-round effects, such as the starting point for
inflation, households’ and firms’ recent inflation experience, the extent of slack in the
economy, and beliefs about how monetary policy makers will react.
How monetary policy makers choose to manage this trade-off depends on the weight
they place on the variability of output relative to the speed at which inflation is returned
to the target. Some policymakers may want to provide more support to output than
others, at the cost of returning inflation to target somewhat more slowly. Policymakers’
preferences may also change over time, as economic developments can change the
appropriate time over which inflation is returned to target. The weight placed on output
stabilisation relative to inflation stabilisation is often captured in policy projections by
the parameter ‘lambda’ (Carney (2017)): a lower lambda means that a policymaker is
focused on returning inflation to target more quickly and is willing to tolerate more
output variability to achieve this.
Monetary policy must consider how best to manage any trade-off between the
speed with which inflation is returned to target and the consideration that
should be placed on the variability of output.
Bank of England  
Page 88


Varying lambda in Bank staff’s model-based projections illustrates that policymakers
who broadly agree on the economic outlook may nevertheless prefer materially
different policy stances if they have different views on how best to manage the trade-
off. An illustrative exercise, shown in the swathes in Chart G.1, shows how Bank Rate
could evolve in the three scenarios discussed in Section 3 depending on different
policymaker preferences. The lower bound of each swathe traces a policy path for the
scenario if the policymaker cares half as much about output stabilisation as they do
about inflation’s deviation from the target, while the upper bound is the path for a
policymaker who only cares about stabilising inflation. These exercises suggest policy
paths that differ from the market curve and do not necessarily reflect policymakers’
assessment of the appropriate path of policy. Nevertheless, they illustrate that different
preferences on how to manage trade-offs can lead to different policy paths: the
swathes are between 50 basis points and 100 basis points wide across the scenarios.
The swathe around Scenario C is wider than the swathes around Scenarios A and B,
which reflects that the trade-off is more acute in the former than in the latter two
scenarios.
Chart G.1: Policy decisions will be affected by policymakers’ views on the
trade-off between the speed with which inflation returns to target and output
volatility
Illustrative model-based policy projections (a)
(a) Annex 1 provides additional detail on the definition of the illustrative model-based projections
shown here and the equivalent paths for the output gap and inflation. These should not be
interpreted as a prescription for how policy is likely to evolve. The solid lines are based on Bank
staff’s standard calibration with λ = 0.25, while the swathes around the solid lies are based on λ = 0
and λ = 0.5.
Bank of England  
Page 89


Evidence on whether the economy is evolving in line with any particular scenario or not
will emerge only gradually. This means that it may not be appropriate to set policy with
only one preferred scenario in mind. For example, a policymaker who expects
Scenario A to unfold but places some weight on the risk of large second-round effects
if Scenario C materialises might want to lean against that risk by setting somewhat
tighter policy than their reaction function for Scenario A alone would suggest. In
contrast, a policymaker who places little to no weight on this risk may not want to
insure against it, but would need to stand ready to adjust policy quickly if needed.
Should clear signs emerge that an adverse energy shock is leading to large second-
round effects, policy would have to be tightened materially. Given the primacy of price
stability in the MPC’s Remit, policymakers may choose to operate with a temporarily
lower lambda, tolerating more output variability to ensure that inflation expectations
remain anchored and inflation returns sustainably to the 2% target. A policymaker’s
lambda may be state-dependent.
Bank of England  
Page 90


Annex 1: Model-based policy simulations 
Endogenous policy simulations are model-based exercises that account for systematic 
feedback between monetary policy and economic outcomes, in both directions. As described 
in Alati et al (2025), Bank staff regularly analyse a range of endogenous policy simulations, 
drawing on simple illustrative policy rules and so-called optimal policy projections1 (OPPs). 
These exercises show how alternative policy approaches affect the economic outcomes that 
can be achieved within a macroeconomic model and can assess how a given approach 
performs in alternative scenarios. 
While a useful input to the monetary policy process, there is no mechanical link between 
endogenous policy simulations and real-world monetary policy decisions. The tools are 
stylised and simplified, so do not reflect the full set of information and uncertainties with 
which policymakers are faced.  
Alternative approaches to endogenous policy 
Bank staff typically consider two approaches to endogenous policy. Under simple policy 
rules, policy is set mechanically according to a reaction function that includes a small number 
of macroeconomic factors. Under OPPs, policy paths are constructed to minimise a loss 
function intended to capture policymakers’ preferences over macroeconomic outcomes. Both 
approaches recognise the remit of the Bank of England. The two approaches have different 
merits and limitations, discussed further in Alati et al (2025). 
Table A1.A provides expressions for four simple policy rules, specified with Bank Rate and 
rates of inflation in annual terms. 𝑖𝑡 denotes annualised nominal Bank Rate, averaged over 
quarter 𝑡. The right-hand side variables in the rules include: year-on-year CPI inflation in the 
current quarter and projections three and five quarters ahead 𝜋𝑡, 𝜋𝑡+3|𝑡 and 𝜋𝑡+5|𝑡; year-on-
year CPI inflation minus the contribution of direct-energy components 𝜋𝑡
𝑁; the output gap in 
the current quarter and five quarters ahead, 𝑦𝑡 and 𝑦𝑡+5|𝑡; and year-on-year GDP growth 
three quarters ahead ∆4𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑡+3|𝑡. For these simulations, 𝑖∗ is constant and assumed to be 3% 
annually, consistent with 2% annual CPI inflation (𝜋∗) and an illustrative long-run trend 
equilibrium annual real rate of 1%. 
Table A1.A: Specification and calibration of simple policy rules in annualised terms 
Policy rule 
Specification 
Contemporaneous Taylor-type rule 
(headline inflation) 
𝑖𝑡= 0.85𝑖𝑡−1 + 0.15(𝑖∗+ 1.5(𝜋𝑡− 𝜋∗) + 0.5𝑦𝑡) 
 
1 Elsewhere in the April 2026 Report, these are referred to as illustrative model-based projections to avoid the 
suggestion that they are preferable to any other endogenous policy simulations. 
Bank of England  
Page 91


Policy rule 
Specification 
Contemporaneous Taylor-type rule 
(non-energy inflation) 
𝑖𝑡= 0.85𝑖𝑡−1 + 0.15(𝑖∗+ 1.5(𝜋𝑡
𝑁− 𝜋∗) + 0.5𝑦𝑡  
Forward-looking Taylor-type rule 
𝑖𝑡= 0.85𝑖𝑡−1 + 0.15(𝑖∗+ 1.5(𝜋𝑡+5|𝑡− 𝜋∗) + 0.5𝑦𝑡+5|𝑡) 
Forward-looking first-difference rule 
Δ𝑖𝑡= 0.5(𝜋𝑡+3|𝑡−𝜋∗) + 0.5∆4𝐺𝐷𝑃𝑡+3|𝑡 
 
The first two rules in Table A1.A are variants of the ‘Taylor rule’ (Taylor (1993) and Taylor 
(1999)). They relate the level of Bank Rate to the level of inflation (or its subcomponents) and 
the amount of excess supply or demand in the economy. The first rule considers headline 
annual CPI inflation and the second considers headline annual CPI inflation minus the 
contribution from direct energy components. The third rule is ‘forward-looking’, containing 
five-quarter-ahead projections of macroeconomic variables on the right-hand side, as in 
Batini and Haldane (1999). The fourth rule in the table is a variant of a ‘first-difference’ rule 
(Orphanides (2003)). It relates the change in Bank Rate to changes in demand and 
deviations of inflation from target.  
Staff have made changes to the specification and parametrisation of the rules shown in  
Table A1.A relative to the November 2025 and February 2026 Reports, as they adapt  
model-based inputs to policymaking. First, staff have added the contemporaneous  
Taylor-type rule with headline inflation to the set of rules. Comparing this to the 
contemporaneous Taylor-type rule with non-energy inflation can illustrate the macroeconomic 
implications of policy responding to different components of inflation. Second, in adding this 
rule – which is closer to the original Taylor (1993) specification – staff have lowered the 
coefficient on the output gap (from 2 to 0.5 in annualised space) to align more closely with 
the original parametrisation. This change has been applied to all Taylor-type rules for 
consistency. Third, staff have increased the coefficients in the forward-looking first-difference 
rule to explore more responsive paths for Bank Rate. 
OPPs are simulated using a loss function that weighs up deviations of inflation from target, 
variation in the output gap and changes in interest rates. In this Report, the OPPs are 
calibrated with a weight on output-gap stabilisation relative to inflation stabilisation, 𝜆, of 0.25 
and a weight on interest-rate smoothing, 𝛿, of 60. As Alati et al (2025) describe, Bank staff 
carry out endogenous policy simulations using a variant of COMPASS, the Bank’s medium-
scale DSGE model described in Albuquerque et al (2025).2 
 
2 In addition to the variables entering the rules in quarterly terms, input data are transformed into ‘model’ 
variables via detrending (explained in Section 3.2 of Albuquerque et al (2025)), such that the rule strictly holds 
only for ‘model’ variables. 
Bank of England  
Page 92


Illustrative endogenous paths for alternative projections 
Section 3 of the Report discusses a subset of illustrative endogenous paths salient to the 
current conjuncture. Tables A1.B–D report illustrative paths for Bank Rate in the scenarios for 
the full range of endogenous policy approaches discussed in this Annex, alongside the 
market-implied path that underpins those scenarios. Tables A1.E–G and Tables A1.H–J 
report corresponding illustrative projections for seasonally adjusted annual CPI inflation and 
the output gap, respectively.  
 
Bank of England  
Page 93


Table A1.B: Illustrative paths for Bank Rate in Scenario A (per cent) 
 
Scenario A (Bank Rate) 
 
Contemporaneous 
Taylor-type rule 
(headline inflation) 
Contemporaneous 
Taylor-type rule 
(non-energy 
inflation) 
Forward-
looking 
Taylor-type 
rule 
Forward-
looking first-
difference 
rule 
Optimal 
policy 
projection 
Memo: 
under 
market 
path 
2026 Q2 
3.8 
3.8 
3.8 
4.0 
4.0 
3.8 
2026 Q3 
4.0 
3.9 
3.7 
4.2 
4.2 
4.0 
2026 Q4 
4.2 
4.0 
3.6 
4.3 
4.2 
4.1 
2027 Q1 
4.3 
4.2 
3.5 
4.2 
4.2 
4.2 
2027 Q2 
4.4 
4.3 
3.4 
4.0 
4.1 
4.2 
2027 Q3 
4.3 
4.3 
3.3 
3.9 
4.0 
4.2 
2027 Q4 
4.0 
4.1 
3.3 
3.9 
3.8 
4.1 
2028 Q1 
3.8 
3.9 
3.2 
3.9 
3.7 
4.1 
2028 Q2 
3.6 
3.8 
3.2 
3.9 
3.6 
4.0 
2028 Q3 
3.5 
3.7 
3.2 
3.9 
3.6 
4.0 
2028 Q4 
3.4 
3.6 
3.2 
3.9 
3.5 
4.0 
2029 Q1 
3.3 
3.5 
3.2 
4.0 
3.5 
4.0 
2029 Q2 
3.3 
3.4 
3.2 
4.0 
3.4 
4.0 
 
 
 
Bank of England  
Page 94


Table A1.C: Illustrative paths for Bank Rate in Scenario B (per cent) 
 
Scenario B (Bank Rate) 
 
Contemporaneous 
Taylor-type rule 
(headline inflation) 
Contemporaneous 
Taylor-type rule 
(non-energy 
inflation) 
Forward-
looking 
Taylor-type 
rule 
Forward-
looking first-
difference 
rule 
Optimal 
policy 
projection 
Memo: 
under 
market 
path 
2026 Q2 
3.8 
3.8 
3.9 
3.9 
4.0 
3.8 
2026 Q3 
3.9 
3.8 
3.9 
4.1 
4.2 
4.0 
2026 Q4 
4.1 
4.0 
3.8 
4.2 
4.3 
4.1 
2027 Q1 
4.3 
4.1 
3.7 
4.2 
4.4 
4.2 
2027 Q2 
4.4 
4.2 
3.7 
4.1 
4.3 
4.2 
2027 Q3 
4.3 
4.3 
3.6 
4.1 
4.2 
4.2 
2027 Q4 
4.2 
4.2 
3.6 
4.1 
4.2 
4.1 
2028 Q1 
4.0 
4.0 
3.5 
4.1 
4.1 
4.1 
2028 Q2 
3.9 
3.9 
3.5 
4.1 
4.0 
4.0 
2028 Q3 
3.8 
3.8 
3.4 
4.2 
3.9 
4.0 
2028 Q4 
3.7 
3.8 
3.4 
4.2 
3.9 
4.0 
2029 Q1 
3.6 
3.7 
3.4 
4.3 
3.8 
4.0 
2029 Q2 
3.5 
3.5 
3.4 
4.3 
3.8 
4.0 
 
 
 
Bank of England  
Page 95


Table A1.D: Illustrative paths for Bank Rate in Scenario C (per cent) 
 
Scenario C (Bank Rate) 
 
Contemporaneous 
Taylor-type rule 
(headline inflation) 
Contemporaneous 
Taylor-type rule 
(non-energy 
inflation) 
Forward-
looking 
Taylor-type 
rule 
Forward-
looking first-
difference 
rule 
Optimal 
policy 
projection 
Memo: 
under 
market 
path 
2026 Q2 
3.9 
3.8 
4.1 
4.3 
4.4 
3.8 
2026 Q3 
4.3 
4.0 
4.2 
4.7 
4.9 
4.0 
2026 Q4 
4.8 
4.2 
4.2 
4.8 
5.2 
4.1 
2027 Q1 
5.2 
4.4 
4.2 
4.8 
5.3 
4.2 
2027 Q2 
5.5 
4.6 
4.2 
4.7 
5.3 
4.2 
2027 Q3 
5.4 
4.7 
4.1 
4.7 
5.2 
4.2 
2027 Q4 
5.2 
4.7 
4.1 
4.7 
5.1 
4.1 
2028 Q1 
4.9 
4.6 
4.0 
4.8 
5.0 
4.1 
2028 Q2 
4.7 
4.6 
4.0 
4.8 
4.9 
4.0 
2028 Q3 
4.5 
4.5 
3.9 
4.9 
4.8 
4.0 
2028 Q4 
4.4 
4.4 
3.9 
4.9 
4.7 
4.0 
2029 Q1 
4.2 
4.3 
3.9 
5.0 
4.6 
4.0 
2029 Q2 
4.1 
4.2 
3.8 
5.1 
4.5 
4.0 
 
 
 
Bank of England  
Page 96


Table A1.E: Illustrative paths for four-quarter CPI inflation in Scenario A (per cent) 
 
Scenario A (CPI inflation) 
 
Contemporaneous 
Taylor-type rule 
(headline inflation) 
Contemporaneous 
Taylor-type rule 
(non-energy 
inflation) 
Forward-
looking 
Taylor-type 
rule 
Forward-
looking first-
difference 
rule 
Optimal 
policy 
projection 
Memo: 
under 
market 
path 
2026 Q2 
3.2 
3.2 
3.3 
3.1 
3.2 
3.1 
2026 Q3 
3.5 
3.5 
3.7 
3.4 
3.5 
3.3 
2026 Q4 
3.9 
3.9 
4.2 
3.7 
3.9 
3.6 
2027 Q1 
3.8 
3.8 
4.1 
3.5 
3.8 
3.4 
2027 Q2 
3.3 
3.3 
3.6 
3.0 
3.2 
2.9 
2027 Q3 
2.7 
2.7 
3.0 
2.4 
2.7 
2.3 
2027 Q4 
2.2 
2.1 
2.3 
1.8 
2.1 
1.7 
2028 Q1 
1.9 
1.8 
2.0 
1.6 
1.8 
1.4 
2028 Q2 
1.9 
1.9 
2.0 
1.6 
1.8 
1.5 
2028 Q3 
2.0 
2.0 
2.0 
1.7 
1.9 
1.6 
2028 Q4 
2.0 
2.0 
2.1 
1.7 
1.9 
1.6 
2029 Q1 
2.1 
2.0 
2.1 
1.8 
2.0 
1.7 
2029 Q2 
2.0 
2.0 
2.0 
1.7 
1.9 
1.7 
 
 
 
Bank of England  
Page 97


Table A1.F: Illustrative paths for four-quarter CPI inflation in Scenario B (per cent) 
 
Scenario B (CPI inflation) 
 
Contemporaneous 
Taylor-type rule 
(headline inflation) 
Contemporaneous 
Taylor-type rule 
(non-energy 
inflation) 
Forward-
looking 
Taylor-
type rule 
Forward-
looking first-
difference 
rule 
Optimal 
policy 
projection 
Memo: 
under 
market 
path 
2026 Q2 
3.2 
3.2 
3.2 
3.1 
3.1 
3.1 
2026 Q3 
3.4 
3.5 
3.6 
3.2 
3.3 
3.3 
2026 Q4 
3.9 
3.9 
4.1 
3.6 
3.7 
3.7 
2027 Q1 
3.8 
3.9 
4.1 
3.4 
3.7 
3.6 
2027 Q2 
3.5 
3.5 
3.7 
3.0 
3.3 
3.2 
2027 Q3 
3.1 
3.1 
3.3 
2.6 
2.9 
2.8 
2027 Q4 
2.6 
2.5 
2.7 
2.1 
2.4 
2.3 
2028 Q1 
2.3 
2.3 
2.4 
1.8 
2.1 
2.0 
2028 Q2 
2.3 
2.3 
2.4 
1.8 
2.1 
2.0 
2028 Q3 
2.3 
2.3 
2.4 
1.9 
2.1 
2.0 
2028 Q4 
2.3 
2.3 
2.4 
1.9 
2.1 
2.0 
2029 Q1 
2.3 
2.3 
2.3 
1.9 
2.1 
2.0 
2029 Q2 
2.2 
2.2 
2.2 
1.9 
2.1 
2.0 
 
 
 
Bank of England  
Page 98


Table A1.G: Illustrative paths for four-quarter CPI inflation in Scenario C (per cent) 
 
Scenario C (CPI inflation) 
 
Contemporaneous 
Taylor-type rule 
(headline inflation) 
Contemporaneous 
Taylor-type rule 
(non-energy 
inflation) 
Forward-
looking 
Taylor-type 
rule 
Forward-
looking first-
difference 
rule 
Optimal 
policy 
projection 
Memo: 
under 
market 
path 
2026 Q2 
3.4 
3.5 
3.6 
3.3 
3.4 
3.6 
2026 Q3 
4.9 
5.0 
5.2 
4.6 
4.7 
5.2 
2026 Q4 
5.6 
5.7 
6.0 
5.0 
5.3 
6.0 
2027 Q1 
5.7 
5.8 
6.3 
5.0 
5.3 
6.2 
2027 Q2 
5.2 
5.3 
5.7 
4.5 
4.9 
5.6 
2027 Q3 
3.8 
3.9 
4.3 
3.0 
3.5 
4.1 
2027 Q4 
3.2 
3.3 
3.6 
2.5 
2.9 
3.5 
2028 Q1 
2.9 
2.9 
3.2 
2.1 
2.5 
3.0 
2028 Q2 
2.8 
2.8 
3.1 
2.0 
2.5 
2.9 
2028 Q3 
2.8 
2.7 
3.0 
1.9 
2.5 
2.8 
2028 Q4 
2.7 
2.6 
2.9 
1.8 
2.4 
2.7 
2029 Q1 
2.6 
2.6 
2.8 
1.8 
2.3 
2.6 
2029 Q2 
2.6 
2.6 
2.8 
1.8 
2.3 
2.6 
 
 
 
Bank of England  
Page 99


Table A1.H: Illustrative paths for the output gap in Scenario A (per cent) 
 
Scenario A (output gap) 
 
Contemporaneous 
Taylor-type rule 
(headline inflation) 
Contemporaneous 
Taylor-type rule 
(non-energy 
inflation) 
Forward-
looking 
Taylor-type 
rule 
Forward-
looking first-
difference 
rule 
Optimal 
policy 
projection 
Memo: 
under 
market 
path 
2026 Q2 
-1.0 
-1.0 
-0.9 
-1.1 
-1.0 
-1.1 
2026 Q3 
-1.2 
-1.2 
-1.0 
-1.3 
-1.2 
-1.4 
2026 Q4 
-1.3 
-1.3 
-1.0 
-1.5 
-1.3 
-1.6 
2027 Q1 
-1.2 
-1.2 
-0.9 
-1.4 
-1.2 
-1.5 
2027 Q2 
-1.1 
-1.1 
-0.8 
-1.3 
-1.1 
-1.5 
2027 Q3 
-0.9 
-1.0 
-0.6 
-1.2 
-1.0 
-1.3 
2027 Q4 
-0.8 
-0.8 
-0.5 
-1.1 
-0.8 
-1.2 
2028 Q1 
-0.6 
-0.7 
-0.4 
-1.0 
-0.7 
-1.1 
2028 Q2 
-0.5 
-0.6 
-0.3 
-0.9 
-0.6 
-1.0 
2028 Q3 
-0.4 
-0.5 
-0.3 
-0.8 
-0.5 
-1.0 
2028 Q4 
-0.4 
-0.4 
-0.2 
-0.8 
-0.5 
-0.9 
2029 Q1 
-0.3 
-0.4 
-0.2 
-0.7 
-0.4 
-0.8 
2029 Q2 
-0.2 
-0.3 
-0.2 
-0.7 
-0.4 
-0.8 
 
 
 
Bank of England  
Page 100


Table A1.I: Illustrative paths for the output gap in Scenario B (per cent) 
 
Scenario B (output gap) 
 
Contemporaneous 
Taylor-type rule 
(headline) 
Contemporaneous 
Taylor-type rule 
(non-energy) 
Forward-
looking 
Taylor-type 
rule 
Forward-
looking first-
difference 
rule 
Optimal 
policy 
projection 
Memo: 
under 
market 
path 
2026 Q2 
-1.0 
-1.0 
-0.9 
-1.2 
-1.1 
-1.1 
2026 Q3 
-1.2 
-1.2 
-1.0 
-1.4 
-1.3 
-1.3 
2026 Q4 
-1.4 
-1.3 
-1.1 
-1.6 
-1.5 
-1.5 
2027 Q1 
-1.3 
-1.3 
-1.0 
-1.6 
-1.4 
-1.4 
2027 Q2 
-1.2 
-1.2 
-0.9 
-1.5 
-1.3 
-1.4 
2027 Q3 
-1.0 
-1.0 
-0.8 
-1.4 
-1.2 
-1.3 
2027 Q4 
-0.9 
-0.9 
-0.7 
-1.3 
-1.1 
-1.2 
2028 Q1 
-0.8 
-0.8 
-0.6 
-1.2 
-1.0 
-1.1 
2028 Q2 
-0.7 
-0.7 
-0.5 
-1.2 
-0.9 
-1.0 
2028 Q3 
-0.6 
-0.6 
-0.5 
-1.1 
-0.8 
-1.0 
2028 Q4 
-0.6 
-0.6 
-0.4 
-1.1 
-0.8 
-0.9 
2029 Q1 
-0.5 
-0.5 
-0.4 
-1.1 
-0.7 
-0.9 
2029 Q2 
-0.5 
-0.5 
-0.3 
-1.0 
-0.7 
-0.8 
 
 
 
Bank of England  
Page 101


Table A1.J: Illustrative paths for the output gap in Scenario C (per cent) 
 
Scenario C (output gap) 
 
Contemporaneous 
Taylor-type rule 
(headline) 
Contemporaneous 
Taylor-type rule 
(non-energy) 
Forward-
looking 
Taylor-type 
rule 
Forward-
looking first-
difference 
rule 
Optimal 
policy 
projection 
Memo: 
under 
market 
path 
2026 Q2 
-1.3 
-1.2 
-1.1 
-1.5 
-1.4 
-1.1 
2026 Q3 
-1.7 
-1.6 
-1.4 
-2.0 
-1.9 
-1.5 
2026 Q4 
-2.0 
-1.9 
-1.6 
-2.4 
-2.3 
-1.7 
2027 Q1 
-2.1 
-1.9 
-1.6 
-2.5 
-2.3 
-1.7 
2027 Q2 
-2.1 
-1.9 
-1.5 
-2.5 
-2.3 
-1.7 
2027 Q3 
-1.9 
-1.8 
-1.4 
-2.5 
-2.2 
-1.6 
2027 Q4 
-1.8 
-1.7 
-1.3 
-2.4 
-2.1 
-1.5 
2028 Q1 
-1.6 
-1.6 
-1.2 
-2.4 
-2.0 
-1.4 
2028 Q2 
-1.5 
-1.5 
-1.1 
-2.3 
-1.8 
-1.3 
2028 Q3 
-1.4 
-1.4 
-1.0 
-2.2 
-1.7 
-1.2 
2028 Q4 
-1.3 
-1.3 
-1.0 
-2.1 
-1.6 
-1.2 
2029 Q1 
-1.1 
-1.2 
-0.9 
-2.1 
-1.5 
-1.1 
2029 Q2 
-1.0 
-1.1 
-0.8 
-2.0 
-1.4 
-1.0 
 
 
 
Bank of England  
Page 102


At its meeting ending on 18 March 2026, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) voted
unanimously to maintain Bank Rate at 3.75%.
Conflict in the Middle East had caused a significant increase in global energy and other
commodity prices, which would affect households’ fuel and utility prices and have indirect
effects via businesses’ costs. Prior to this, there had been continued disinflation in domestic
prices and wages. CPI inflation would be higher in the near term as a result of the new shock
to the economy.
Monetary policy could not influence global energy prices but aimed to ensure that the
economic adjustment to them occurred in a way that achieved the 2% target sustainably. The
MPC was alert to the increased risk of domestic inflationary pressures through second-round
effects in wage and price-setting, the risk of which would be greater the longer higher energy
prices persisted. The MPC was also assessing the implications for inflation of the weakening
in economic activity that was likely to result from higher energy costs.
The Committee would continue to monitor closely the situation in the Middle East and its
impact on global energy supply and energy prices. It stood ready to act as necessary to
ensure that CPI inflation remained on track to meet the 2% target in the medium term.
Annex 2: Monetary policy since the February 2026 Report
Bank of England  
Page 103


Glossary and other information
ASBC – Agents’ summary of business conditions.
AWE – average weekly earnings.
BICS – Business Insights and Conditions Survey.
CCS – Credit Conditions Survey.
COMPASS – Central Organising Model for Projection Analysis and Scenario Simulation.
CPI – consumer prices index.
CPI inflation – inflation measured by the consumer prices index.
DMP – Decision Maker Panel.
ERI – excess reportable income.
GDP – gross domestic product.
LFS – Labour Force Survey.
MaPS – Market Participants Survey.
OIS – overnight index swap.
PMI – purchasing managers’ index.
PSD – product sales data.
SONIA – Sterling Overnight Index Average.
Glossary of selected data and instruments
AI – artificial intelligence.
ASEAN – Association of Southeast Asian Nations.
BCC – British Chambers of Commerce.
CBI – Confederation of British Industry.
Abbreviations
Bank of England  
Page 104


CFO – chief financial officer.
DESNZ – Department for Energy Security and Net Zero.
ECB – European Central Bank.
EPG – Energy Price Guarantee.
EU – European Union.
FCA – Financial Conduct Authority.
FNAB – food and non-alcoholic beverages.
GfK – Gesellschaft für Konsumforschung, Great Britain Ltd.
GIRFs – Generalised impulse response functions.
HMRC – His Majesty’s Revenue and Customs.
ILO – International Labour Organization.
LNG – liquefied natural gas.
LTV – loan to value.
MIDAS – mixed-data sampling.
MPC – Monetary Policy Committee.
NAIRU – non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment.
NICs – National Insurance contributions.
NLW – National Living Wage.
Ofgem – Office of Gas and Electricity Markets.
ONS – Office for National Statistics.
ONS SIC – ONS Standard Industrial Classification.
OPP – optimal policy projection.
REC – Recruitment and Employment Confederation.
RoW – rest of the world.
Bank of England  
Page 105


RTI – Real-Time Information.
S&P – Standard & Poor’s.
SET-BVAR – self-exciting threshold Bayesian vector autoregression.
V/U – vacancies to unemployment.
Except where otherwise stated, the source of the data used in charts and tables is the Bank of
England or the Office for National Statistics (ONS) and all data, apart from financial markets
data and results from the Decision Maker Panel (DMP) survey, are seasonally adjusted.
n.a. = not available.
Because of rounding, the sum of the separate items may sometimes differ from the total
shown.
On the horizontal axes of graphs, larger ticks denote the first observation within the relevant
period, eg data for the first quarter of the year.
Symbols and conventions
Bank of England  
Page 106
