BANK: BOC
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Speech by Sharon Kozicki, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada
DATE: 13/06/2024
SPEAKER: Sharon Kozicki
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2024/06/speech-sharon-kozicki-june-13-2024/
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech by Sharon Kozicki, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada
June 13, 2024
Share this page on Facebook
Share this page on Facebook
Share this page on X
Share this page on X
Share this page on LinkedIn
Share this page on LinkedIn
Share this page by email
Share this page by email
OTTAWA – On Thursday, June 13, 2024, Sharon Kozicki, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, will speak before the Canadian Association for Business Economics (CABE) hosted by the Ottawa Economics Association (OEA).
Topic
The Bank of Canada's use of exceptional monetary policy tools in the COVID-19 pandemic: From Quantitative Easing to Quantitative Tightening
Time
09:50 (Eastern Time)
Place
Rideau Club
15th Floor
99 Bank Street
Ottawa, Ontario
Lock-Up
At 08:05 (ET), journalists are invited to review copies of the speech, under embargo, at the Bank’s head office in Ottawa. Please use the Bank of Canada Museum entrance, located at 30 Bank Street (corner of Bank and Wellington), and bring photo ID.
For security reasons, journalists wishing to attend must confirm their presence by contacting
Media Relations
before noon (ET) on Wednesday, June 12, 2024. Those who have not registered will not be admitted to the lock-up.
The embargo will be lifted at 09:35 (ET).
Distribution
The Deputy Governor’s text will be available on the Bank’s
website
at 09:35 (ET).
Media Availability
There will be no media availability for this event.
Audience Q&A
There will be an audience Q&A period.
Webcast
Audio and video
webcasts
of the speech will be available.
Note
Media wishing to attend are asked to contact
oea.manager023@gmail.com
.
For more information, please contact
Media Relations
.
Content Type(s)
:
Press
,
Media advisories
Related Information
June 13, 2024
Speech: Canadian Association for Business Economics (CABE)
The Bank of Canada's use of exceptional monetary policy tools in the COVID-19 pandemic: From Quantitative Easing to Quantitative Tightening
— Deputy Governor Sharon Kozicki speaks before the Canadian Association for Business Economics (CABE). (9:50 (ET) approx.).
Content Type(s)
:
Press
,
Speeches and appearances
,
Webcasts
