BANK: BOC
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Speech by Sharon Kozicki, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada
DATE: 05/06/2025
SPEAKER: Sharon Kozicki
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2025/06/speech-sharon-kozicki-june-5-2025/
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech by Sharon Kozicki, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada
June 5, 2025
Share this page on Facebook
Share this page on Facebook
Share this page on X
Share this page on X
Share this page on LinkedIn
Share this page on LinkedIn
Share this page by email
Share this page by email
OTTAWA – On Thursday, June 5, 2025, Sharon Kozicki, Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, will speak before C.D. Howe Institute in Toronto.
Topic
Talking to Canadians: How real-world insights shape monetary policy
Time
12:35 (Eastern Time)
Place
Toronto, ON
Lock-Up
At 10:50 (ET), journalists are invited to review copies of the speech, under embargo, at the Bank’s head office in Ottawa. Please use the Bank of Canada Museum entrance, located at 30 Bank Street (corner of Bank and Wellington), and bring photo ID.
For security reasons, journalists wishing to attend must confirm their presence by contacting
Media Relations
before 14:00 (ET) on Wednesday, June 4, 2025. Those who have not registered will not be admitted to the lock-up.
The embargo will be lifted at 12:20 (ET).
Distribution
The Deputy Governor’s text will be available on the Bank’s
website
at 12:20 (ET).
Media Availability
There will be no media availability for this event.
Accredited journalists who wish to participate remotely must contact Media Relations for connection information before 14:00 (ET) on Wednesday, June 4, 2025.
Audience Q&A
There will be an audience Q&A period.
Webcast
Audio and video
webcasts
of the speech and media questions will be available.
Note
Media wishing to attend the event need to email
to register.
Content Type(s)
:
Press
,
Media advisories
Related information
June 5, 2025
Speech: C.D. Howe Institute
Talking to Canadians: How real-world insights shape monetary policy
— Deputy Governor Sharon Kozicki speaks before the C.D. Howe Institute in Toronto (12:35 (ET) approx.).
Content Type(s)
:
Press
,
Speeches and appearances
,
Webcasts
