BANK: BOC
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Speech by Michelle Alexopoulos, External Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada
DATE: 13/05/2026
SPEAKER: Michelle Alexopoulos
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.bankofcanada.ca/2026/05/speech-michelle-alexopoulos-2026-05-13/
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech by Michelle Alexopoulos, External Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada
May 13, 2026
Share this page on Facebook
Share this page on Facebook
Share this page on X
Share this page on X
Share this page on LinkedIn
Share this page on LinkedIn
Share this page by email
Share this page by email
OTTAWA – On Wednesday, May 13, 2026, Michelle Alexopoulos, External Deputy Governor of the Bank of Canada, will speak at the Ottawa Economics Association (OEA) and the Canadian Association for Business Economics (CABE) 2026 Spring Policy Conference.
Topic
AI adoption, productivity and economic potential in Canada
Time
11:20 (Eastern Time)
Place
Quebec Room
Fairmont Chateau Laurier
1 Rideau St, Ottawa, ON
Lock-Up
At 9:35 (ET), journalists are invited to review copies of the speech, under embargo, at the Bank’s head office in Ottawa. Please use the Bank of Canada Museum entrance, located at 30 Bank Street (corner of Bank and Wellington), and bring photo ID.
For security reasons, journalists wishing to attend must confirm their presence by contacting
Media Relations
before 14:00 (ET) on Tuesday, May 12, 2026. Those who have not registered will not be admitted to the lock-up.
The embargo will be lifted at 11:05 (ET).
Distribution
The External Deputy Governor’s text will be available on the Bank’s
website
at 11:05 (ET).
Media Availability
There will be no media availability for this event.
Audience Q&A
There will be a moderated Q&A period.
Webcast
Audio and video
webcasts
of the speech will be available.
Note
Media wishing to attend are asked to contact
For more information, please contact
Media Relations
.
Content Type(s)
:
Press
,
Media advisories
Related Information
May 13, 2026
Speech: Ottawa Economics Association (OEA) and the Canadian Association for Business Economics (CABE)
AI adoption, productivity and economic potential in Canada
— External Deputy Governor Michelle Alexopoulos speaks at the Ottawa Economics Association (OEA) and the Canadian Association for Business Economics (CABE) 2026 Spring Policy Conference (11:20 (ET) approx.).
Content Type(s)
:
Press
,
Speeches and appearances
,
Webcasts
