BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Australian Financial Markets: Looking Back and Looking Ahead – Sydney
DATE: 25/02/2000
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2000/sp-ag-250200.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Australian Financial Markets: Looking Back and Looking Ahead
Ric Battellino
Assistant Governor (Financial Markets)
Address to the Australian Finance and Capital Markets Conference
Sydney
–
25 February 2000
Download
74KB
In my talk today, I would like to cover three issues:
How have Australian financial markets changed in the 15 or so years since financial

 deregulation was completed?
How do they compare with those in other countries?
How might they develop over the next 15 years?
Changes since Financial Deregulation
It has now been about 15 years since the process of financial deregulation in Australia

 was completed. The process had started in the 1970s with the gradual removal

 of controls over bank interest rates, but picked up speed in the early 1980s.

 Key steps along the way were the removal of other controls on banks, freeing

 up of interest rates on government securities (by adopting tender arrangements

 for new issues), floating the exchange rate and finally, in the mid 1980s,

 opening up the banking system to foreign competition.
What has been the impact of this on financial markets and the financial system more

 generally? It is not possible to answer this question with precision, of course,

 because the impact of deregulation cannot be disentangled from the other forces

 at work, such as technological change and economic development. But, notwithstanding

 this qualification, I would say that deregulation has contributed to four key

 financial developments over the past 15 years:
strong growth in the size of financial markets and in their sophistication;
an increase in the overall size of the financial sector relative to the economy;
a tendency towards disintermediation – i.e. for borrowers and lenders to bypass

 financial intermediaries and deal directly with each other; and
increased efficiency in the financial system, with competitive pressure (eventually)

 reducing interest margins and putting downward pressure on costs.
The expansion of financial markets
There can be no doubt that over the past 15 years there has been tremendous development

 in Australia's financial markets. Growth in turnover in the major market

 sectors has generally exceeded 20 per cent a year over the period, or about

 three times the rate of growth of nominal GDP (Table 1). The main exception

 to this is the Commonwealth Government securities market, where turnover has

 levelled off recently as the amount of this debt on issue has fallen with a

 run of budget surpluses.
Table 1: Daily Turnover in Australian Financial Markets
1985
$m
1999
$m
Average annual growth
Per cent
Foreign exchange
5,000
77,000
22
Bond market
Securities
1,000
(a)
4,000
14
Futures contracts
100
7,000
35
Money market
Securities
600
(a)
7,000
20
Futures contracts
1,000
30,000
26
Repurchase agreements
200
(a)
15,000
38
Equities
Physical
50
1,000
26
Futures contracts
100
2,000
21
Memo item:
Nominal GDP
(b)
230,000
600,000
7
(a) Estimated
(b) Annual
Sources:
Australian Financial Markets Report
, AFMA, 1999; Sydney Futures

 Exchange; Australian Stock Exchange. Figures for foreign exchange, physical

 securities and repurchase agreements are on a financial year basis; futures

 contracts are on a calendar year basis.
A feature of Australian markets is that they have developed in a balanced way, with

 foreign exchange, fixed interest, money and equity markets all increasing at

 broadly similar rates over the period. Some people may find this unremarkable,

 but it does not always happen. In some countries, for example, lopsided markets

 develop – e.g. with foreign exchange trading being disproportionately

 large.
The balanced development in Australia reflects both a lack of regulatory distortions

 (or incentives) and the fact that Australian markets have developed primarily

 to service the domestic economy, which is itself quite large and diversified.
The one segment of the market that was slow to develop was the domestic corporate

 bond market. Only very recently has it grown to any size. Previously, strong

 competition from the euro markets and the banking sector, and high inflation,

 tended to retard the growth in this market.
The rise in market activity has been accompanied and underpinned by improvements

 in market infrastructure. In the prudential sphere, Australia adopted the Basel

 capital framework for banks early in the piece. Australia's settlements

 systems – Austraclear, RITS and CHESS – comply with the highest

 international standards and Australia's RTGS system is among the best with

 a very high coverage of wholesale transactions and integration of securities

 and funds flows.
The rise in financial activity more generally
The expansion in financial activity has not been confined purely to market trading.

 Holdings of financial assets by the community have expanded rapidly –

 at a much faster rate than national income (Graph 1).
Graph 1
In the 1960s and 1970s, the ratio of financial assets to GDP was fairly steady, at

 a little over 100 per cent – i.e. holdings of financial assets were about

 the same size as national income. This was a period when access to financing

 was rationed through quantitative controls, and it is clear now that this stopped

 the development of the financial system. The ratio of financial assets to GDP

 has since increased to over 250 per cent, with the community's holdings

 of financial assets having increased on average by 12 per cent a year since

 the mid 1980s, almost twice the pace of nominal GDP growth.
As I will show in more detail later, this tendency for financial assets to grow faster

 than income is common in most developed countries, but particularly in those

 that have deregulated markets. It reflects not only the accumulation of wealth

 but increased specialisation in the financial system.
Disintermediation
Not all sectors of the financial system have shared equally in this expansion. Non-bank

 financial intermediaries – credit unions and building societies –

 have in fact shrunk in size as the competitive advantage they had enjoyed when

 banks were regulated has been removed (Graph 2).
Graph 2
Banks responded quickly to deregulation, with a very sharp expansion in financing

 in the mid-to-late 1980s (with subsequent temporary adverse consequences for

 their profitability). The community's holdings of financial assets with

 banks are still growing faster than income, but they are no longer the fastest

 growing segment. Rather, that honour now goes to funds managers. In addition,

 recently there has been a substantial increase in direct holdings of financial

 assets (mainly equities). A recent survey by the Australian Stock Exchange

 showed that 54 per cent of adult Australians now hold shares directly or through

 personally managed funds, up from 22 per cent in 1991.
This relative shift in assets away from intermediaries towards funds managers and

 direct holdings is being pushed from both the demand and supply sides. An important

 influence has been the expansion of superannuation. Practically all permanent

 employees now receive superannuation benefits, compared with 45 per cent 15

 years ago (Graph 3). This is diverting savings into funds managers rather

 than traditional intermediaries, which is in turn creating demand for securities

 and allowing borrowers to approach the market directly rather than seeking

 loans from intermediaries. The process has been supported by improved market

 infrastructure – e.g. information systems, custody and settlement facilities,

 and ratings agencies – which has made it easier for borrowers and lenders

 to deal directly with each other.
Graph 3
In the background, another factor has been at work. More explicit recognition by

 banks of their cost of capital has seen them become more willing to shift assets

 off their balance sheets if they consider that those assets are not providing

 a sufficient return.
With banks' traditional borrowing and lending activities under strong competitive

 pressure, they have had to diversify the range of services they provide, transforming

 themselves from relatively narrowly-based intermediaries to diversified financial

 service providers. Part of this has been through their banking arms (the expansion

 into new lending products such as home-equity loans and margin lending), part

 has been by supplying assets to the funds managers through securitisation,

 and part has been by moving directly into funds management, insurance and so

 on.
One market segment that has benefited from all this, particularly in an environment

 where governments have sharply cut back on their issues of securities, is the

 non-government bond market. This market was slow to develop in the early post-deregulation

 period but it has increased very quickly in recent years.
The stock of non-government bonds on issue has increased threefold over the past

 four years to $66 billion, surpassing State Government paper on issue ($52

 billion) and within reach of Commonwealth Government securities on issue (Graph 4).

 It is worth noting, of course, that liquidity in this market still falls a

 long way short of that in Commonwealth or State Government paper (Graph 5).
Graph 4
Graph 5
There is substantial scope for the market in non-government bonds to grow further,

 as it is still relatively small by international standards. For example, only

 about 10 per cent of housing loans are securitised in Australia, compared with

 50 per cent in the United States.
Falling margins and cost reductions
One of the consequences of deregulation was expected to be increased competition.

 Signs of this are now clearly evident in the financial system, but the process

 took longer than expected to work through.
One of the factors that contributed to the slowness of the response was high inflation

 and the high interest rates that accompanied it. In that environment, banks

 had such a strong competitive advantage through their ability to raise low-cost

 retail deposits that other lenders, which had to rely on higher-cost wholesale

 funds, could not compete. It was not until the fall in inflation and interest

 rates in the 1990s that alternative lenders began to get a foothold, and the

 process of reducing interest margins began to accelerate.
Interest margins of banks are now about 40 per cent lower than in the late 1980s.

 Housing borrowers and, more recently, small businesses, have been the main

 beneficiaries. This fall in margins has been reflected in the operating income

 of banks decreasing from about 5.5 per cent of assets to about 4 per cent now,

 notwithstanding increased income from fees (Graph 6). To some extent,

 increased fees have been one of the by-products of increased competition in

 lending, as the latter has reduced the ability of banks to cross-subsidise

 services – i.e. pressure on interest margins has reduced banks' capacity

 to use this source of income to subsidise other services to retail clients.
Graph 6
The fall in banks' operating income has been matched by a similar fall in operating

 costs. In other words, increased competition has led to cost reductions rather

 than falling profits. Banks' return on equity remains about the same now

 as in the second half of the 1980s (Graph 7). One sign of the downward

 pressure being applied to costs can be seen in the employment figures for the

 finance sector. Even though total financing activity in the economy has expanded

 over the past 15 years at a rate about twice that of GDP, employment in the

 finance sector has fallen relative to total employment (Graph 8). The

 sector now accounts for 3½ per cent of total employment, compared with

 4½ per cent in the second half of the 1980s. No doubt, within this,

 there has been a big compositional swing away from bank tellers to funds managers

 and investment bankers.
Graph 7
Graph 8
What about funds managers' fees? This industry in Australia is at an earlier

 stage of development than banking, so we should not yet expect to see the same

 degree of pressure on margins. But some signs of reduced fees have been evident

 recently. According to
Intech
, the average fee charged on specialist domestic share funds

 has fallen by 11 per cent over the past three years, while that on specialised

 fixed-interest funds has fallen by 7 per cent. Fees on pooled superannuation

 funds, on the other hand, have not changed much, while fees on overseas investments

 (both shares and fixed interest) have risen.
Expectations are that the internet and technological change will hasten the reduction

 of margins and costs for banks and funds managers.
How does Australia's Financial System Compare with Those of Other Countries?
The broad trends evident in Australia have also been apparent to varying degrees

 in other industrial countries. Around the developed world, turnover in financial

 markets has grown quickly; holdings of financial assets have grown faster than

 economies in general; and a growing share of financing is bypassing the banking

 system.
Where does Australia sit in this spectrum of financial development?
In terms of financial market size (measured by turnover) Australia ranks above its

 economic size in foreign exchange and some derivatives markets, and broadly

 in line with its economic size in equity and fixed-interest markets (Table 2).
Table 2: Financial Markets – World Rankings
Gross domestic product
(a)
Foreign exchange turnover
(b)
Equity market
turnover
Fixed-interest market turnover
By market
By currency
Physical market
Futures market
(c)
Physical market
(d)
Futures market
(e)
US
Japan
Germany
France
UK
Italy
China
Brazil
Canada
Spain
Mexico
Netherlands
India
Australia
UK
US
Japan
Singapore
Germany
Switzerland
Hong Kong
France
Australia
US dollar
Euro
Japanese yen
Pound sterling
Swiss

 franc
Canadian dollar
Aust dollar
US
Taiwan
Germany
UK
Japan
Switzerland
Hong Kong
Spain
France
Canada
Netherlands
Italy
Australia
US
Germany
Japan
France
Italy
UK
Korea
Spain
Hong Kong
Singapore
Switzerland
Australia
US
Japan
Germany
Italy
France
UK
Canada
Netherlands
Belgium
Denmark
Spain
Switzerland
Sweden
Australia
US
UK
Germany
Japan
Singapore
Australia
(a) Nominal GDP, 1998. Source: ‘World Financial Markets’, J.P. Morgan,

 January 2000
(b) Source:
Central Bank Survey of Foreign Exchange and Derivatives Market Activity
,

 BIS, 1998
(c) Share market index futures. Source: Various exchanges,

 Futures and OTC World magazine
(d) Bond market outstanding (total

 publicly listed). Source: ‘How Big is the World Bond Market?’,

 Salomon Smith Barney, July 1999
(e) Includes money market futures

 contracts. Source: Various exchanges, Futures and OTC World magazine
On other measures of financial development, such as the overall size of financial

 assets relative to nominal GDP, Australia is similar to countries such as Canada

 and Japan, but below the large European countries, and well below the US. Partly

 this is a reflection of relative economic development and wealth. There is

 a tendency for the financial sector to be larger relative to the economy, the

 higher is the per capita income of the country (Graph 9).
Graph 9
Financial development is also reflected, to a degree, in the structure of the financial

 system, rather than simply its size. One criterion, for example, is the extent

 to which countries rely on capital markets, rather than intermediaries, to

 allocate financing. On this measure, among the large industrial countries,

 the US is at one extreme and Germany at the other. Less than 30 per cent of

 the financing in the US economy is allocated through financial intermediaries,

 whereas in Germany the figure is around 75 per cent (Graph 10). Funds

 managers are more than twice as important as intermediaries in the US, but

 relatively unimportant in Germany. In this context, it is not surprising that

 the equity and corporate debt markets are very much larger (relative to GDP)

 in the US than in Germany, (Graphs 11 and 12). Which is the best method of

 allocating finance is, no doubt, a matter of debate but the relative performance

 of the US and European economies over the past decade would lead at least some

 to suggest that there are advantages in relying directly on capital markets.
Graph 10
Graph 11
Graph 12
Leaving aside the extremes of the US and Germany, most other major countries have

 a greater balance in their mix of intermediary-based and capital market-based

 financing. Australia is in this group, with around 60 per cent of funding provided

 by intermediaries. But a number of other countries of similar size to Australia

 (e.g. Sweden and the Netherlands) are more towards the US model, and my guess

 is that that is where we are heading in the future.
Before I start looking ahead, however, let me finish the international comparison

 by focusing on the costs of financing. The facts here suggest that we have

 moved into line with industrial country norms, after having been well above

 in the 1980s. This is particularly the case for housing loans, where the average

 margin of banks has fallen to around 1.75 percentage points (the same as in

 other comparable countries) after having been well above (Graph 13). This

 pattern also holds for interest margins overall. Similarly, in the case of

 profitability, Australian banks are in line with comparable overseas banks

 (Graph 14).
Graph 13
Graph 14
How Might the Financial System Develop over the Next 15 Years?
As I flagged at the outset, I will conclude by speculating a little about how the

 financial system might evolve over the next 15 years. In doing so, I will focus

 on broad structural trends rather than the cyclical swings that will inevitably

 happen.
Looking at where Australian financial markets sit in the world spectrum, the current

 situation might best be described as ‘work-in-progress’. Even though

 the financial sector has grown strongly, its size relative to the economy is

 still well behind the US, which in many respects might be seen as being at

 the leading edge of financial development and innovation.
Predicting how the financial system will develop is not something that can be done

 with precision. For one thing, it is hard to judge how much of the recent expansion,

 particularly in funds management, is cyclical – i.e. related to the strong

 performance of share markets – and how much is structural.
Table 3: A Scenario for the Australian Financial System
Assets held with
intermediaries
Assets held with
funds managers
Total
$b
$b
$b
Per cent of GDP
(a)
2000
810
520
1,330
225
2015
2,150
2,350
4,500
310
Average annual growth rates
(per cent)
1985–1999
11
16
12
2000–2015
7
11
9
(a) Nominal GDP assumed to grow by 6 per cent a year
But one simple approach might be to say: given that the Australian financial system,

 in terms of size relative to the economy, is now roughly where the US system

 was 15 years ago, let's assume that in 15 years' time we reach the

 point where the US is now. Under this scenario, the Australian financial system

 might look something like Table 3 above.
Is such a scenario feasible? Is it consistent with current levels of savings in the

 economy, with realistic rates of increase in asset values, etc? I think the

 answer to these questions is ‘yes’.
The financial system would reach this size if, for example, its growth rate averaged

 9 per cent a year over the next 15 years, a rate about 3 percentage points

 a year more than the likely growth rate of national income. That should be

 feasible: it is less than the annual average growth rate over the past 15 years,

 both in absolute terms and relative to GDP growth.
Whether it can be achieved will depend to an important degree on the rate of national

 savings and the rate of growth of asset prices, but reasonable assumptions

 suggest it is likely. For instance, such an outcome would be achieved if the

 community acquired financial assets at around the same rate as in the past,

 and if asset prices increased in real terms by 3 per cent a year. Hopefully,

 we might be able to achieve more than this if the increased contributions towards

 superannuation are not offset by reduced savings through other means.
Our experience, and that of the US, suggests that assets held with financial intermediaries

 will grow less quickly than other financial assets – on average only

 a little faster than GDP. If that is the case, the balance of financial assets

 will shift further in the direction of funds managers. That, in turn, will

 create additional demand for equity investments and corporate debt, in the

 latter's case particularly if governments continue to refrain from big

 debt issues. It would not be unrealistic, for example, to expect corporate

 bond issues to grow to the point where they accounted for 30–40 per cent

 of the economy's total debt needs, up from 15 per cent at present. That

 would be similar to where Canada is now, though still below where the US is.
Conclusion
Trends over the past 15 years and comparisons with other countries suggest that the

 Australian financial system will, on average, continue to grow faster than

 GDP, and that growth will be concentrated in the assets held with funds managers.

 This will continue to underpin expansion in financial market activity, particularly

 in emerging areas such as corporate debt. This is good news for more than just

 those working in financial markets. As the financial markets grow and mature,

 competition will produce greater benefits for the users, in terms of choice

 of products and more competitive interest rates and fees. And the economic

 performance of the country should also benefit. A diversified financial system

 with dynamic financial markets is more efficient at channelling funds to the

 most productive areas of the economy, and better able to help the economy absorb

 the various shocks to which it will no doubt be subjected from time to time.
