BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: ‘Speed Limits’, Growth and Monetary Policy – Canberra
DATE: 31/05/2000
SPEAKER: Canberra
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2000/sp-ag-310500.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
‘Speed Limits’, Growth and Monetary Policy
Glenn Stevens
Assistant Governor (Economic)
Address to Economic Society of Australia,

 Canberra Branch Symposium on ‘Speed Limits to Growth: Interest Rate Adjustment and the

 Management of the Economy’
Canberra
–
31 May 2000
Download
57KB
In a month's time, the 1999/2000 financial year will end. It will be a further

 two or three months until we get statistics for economic performance in the

 June quarter, but we could expect that those data will show that the Australian

 economy has completed nine years of continuous growth, at an average rate of

 just over 4 per cent per annum. It has been well documented that this compares

 favourably with earlier history, and with performance in many, in fact most,

 other countries.
As good as this performance has been, attention is tending to focus on prospects

 for sustaining that expansion into its tenth and eleventh years. This is as

 it should be: that we have a debate of this nature says a lot about the nature

 of economic performance in this expansion, and the improvements in both the

 institutional structure of policy making and in policy execution.
The advertised topic for today's discussion is that of ‘speed limits’.

 I prefer to think in terms of managing the economy's expansion, and so

 will come at things from that perspective. I do not wish to make any comments

 about the short-term monetary policy considerations which may be upper-most

 in the minds of policy-makers. The Bank has recently released the
Semi-Annual Statement on Monetary Policy
and the Governor has made

 his regular appearance before the House of Representatives Committee on Economics,

 Finance and Public Administration, providing ample opportunity for people to

 understand the Bank's current thinking. I come with no new messages. So

 you can all relax from the start. Hopefully, I can do the same.
I would like to begin with some observations about the growth performance we have

 observed, as a way to giving us some basic building blocks for the purposes

 of discussion about how to sustain growth in the period ahead.
Growth in the 1990s
I begin with a few pertinent facts.
Average annual GDP growth has been remarkably similar over the past three decades.

 This average conceals substantial fluctuations, of course. The 1970s saw faster

 growth in the first few years than it did thereafter. The second half of the

 1970s was a period of particularly poor economic performance. Each decade has

 included one serious recession, which explains why average growth rates here

 are lower than the averages which result from computing growth only in the

 periods when the economy was expanding.
Table 1: Macroeconomic Aggregates
Average annual rates
1970s
1980s
1990s
Real GDP growth
3.5
3.3
3.5
Standard deviation of quarterly GDP growth
1.4
1.1
0.7
CPI inflation
10.1
8.3
2.3
Population growth
1.7
1.5
1.2
Labour force growth
2.1
2.4
1.4
Employment growth
1.6
2.4
1.3
Productivity growth (per person)
1.8
0.8
2.2
GDP per capita growth
1.8
1.7
2.2
The latter calculation shows an average growth rate of GDP since the low point of

 the early 1990s recession of 4.1 per cent. This is somewhat lower than the

 corresponding figure for the 1980s, but higher than the 1970s figure. More

 importantly, the length of this expansion exceeds those of the previous two,

 with no sign that it is likely to end in the near term. The obvious point bears

 repeating: prolonging expansions, and being in a position to ameliorate downturns

 if and when they occur, makes a tangible difference to economic performance

 over the long run. The performance of the US economy, currently enjoying the

 longest ‘peace-time’ expansion in its history, has rightly received

 accolades in recent years. We should not forget, however, that this follows

 the second longest expansion (in the 1980s), and that these two were separated

 by what was a relatively mild downturn by historical standards. Two good expansions

 had done a lot to make the US economy the pacesetter, even before talk of the

 ‘new economy’ became common.
Another feature of Australia's performance in the 1990s was that the variability

 of growth, as measured by the standard deviation of quarterly growth rates

 in GDP, has been lower than in the 1980s, and about half that seen in the 1970s.

 In other words, the economy has been more stable. It is surprising that this

 is not remarked on more often.
Graph 1
There are several possible explanations for this outcome, which are not mutually

 exclusive. One is that the world economy was more stable. It was, at least

 as measured by the standard deviation of annual growth rates for the IMF's

 series for world GDP. This is despite the Asian crisis, which made for more

 instability in the growth performance of Australia's trading partners.

 One element of that is that the US economy, in particular, was more stable

 in the 1990s than in the 1980s. Presumably at least partly as a result of these

 factors, the variability of Australia's export growth, and of our terms

 of trade, declined in the 1990s. So the world economy in this respect, though

 not perhaps in others, was more benign.
Another potential explanation is that policy impulses to the Australian economy were

 also more stabilising in the 1990s. This has played an important role. The

 story is partly one of improvements to the institutional structure of policy

 regimes – the gradual development of the inflation-targeting regime is

 one example. The story also includes, I am prepared to claim, better execution

 of policy. Forward-looking policy should usually result in less need for aggressive

 policy adjustments than otherwise, and therefore less economic instability.

 All this was helped by clearer articulation of goals and of the policy adjustments

 in pursuit of them, and by various reforms in product and labour markets which

 made the economy more flexible.
Of course, the domestic and international elements of the story may be related. For

 significant periods of time in the 1990s, developments abroad may have made

 the environment for policy-making easier, at least through the growth and trade

 channels mentioned above. If the shocks emanating from abroad were smaller,

 the policy actions responding to them could be as well. On the other hand,

 while overall exports and terms of trade movements were less variable, the

 1990s was a decade of recurrent international financial crises. One of these,

 the Asian crisis, was a severe test of the robustness and flexibility of the

 Australian economy and of our policy processes. It was a test, I think everyone

 agrees, that we collectively passed in good fashion.
All of this was accompanied by a very good inflation performance. After twenty years

 of high single or low double-digit inflation, inflation as measured by the

 CPI averaged 2.3 per cent in the 1990s, or 2.8 per cent excluding interest

 changes. This was a good performance. For the period of the inflation target,

 since mid 1993, inflation has averaged about 2 per cent.
To be sure, inflation has fallen in virtually every country in the 1990s. But it

 was already on the way down globally in the 1980s, yet Australia shared in

 that only at the margin. It was not until the 1990s, and probably the second

 half of the 1990s, that inflation as a part of life was removed from the Australian

 economy.
These results – both on growth and inflation – should give economists

 more confidence in insisting that, even if getting inflation down is costly,

 maintaining low inflation carries no growth penalty, and in fact is likely

 to assist long-term growth by helping the price mechanism allocate resources

 more effectively.
A few other basic macro statistics of the past decade are of interest. Working-age

 population growth slowed in the 1990s, a result of the baby boom effect waning,

 and a lower immigration intake. Together with an apparent lessening in the

 rate at which female participation rates increased compared with the 1980s,

 this meant that labour-force growth was considerably lower in the 1990s than

 in the 1980s. Employment growth was similarly lower.
Productivity growth, on the other hand, increased. This meant that even though the

 increase in the number of workers each year was smaller, output growth was

 actually slightly higher on average than in the 1980s. With slower overall

 population growth, per capita GDP growth picked up quite noticeably, and in

 fact was at its highest since the 1960s. This is another statistic which should

 get more attention. A pick-up in per capita GDP growth of half a percentage

 point per year makes a tangible difference to living standards if it is extended

 over a long period.
Speed Limits
The title of today's seminar talks about speed limits. Here there is potential

 for ambiguity, if not confusion, but I shall make an attempt to give a perspective.
The discussion of this kind of issue has to confront, at least at the conceptual

 level, the notion of the economy's potential output. It is clearest to

 think of the level of potential output as being that which could be sustained,

 over an extended period, without any upward or downward pressure on inflation.
[1]
Note that this is not the engineering concept of potential output – which would

 perhaps be the maximum physical quantity of goods and services that the economy

 could produce if every worker and every piece of capital equipment were pushed

 to their limits. That notion lacks the sustainability element, calibrated by

 price (or rather inflation) stability, that I think is critical in an economic

 concept of potential output. Note also that this is explicitly a
level
concept, but because the stock of productive resources grows

 each year, that level is increasing all the time: the path of potential output

 is an upward sloping one. We can then say that the slope of that potential

 path is the potential
growth
rate in the longer term – assuming

 that all resources are ‘fully’ utilised.
Graph 2
The distinction between levels and rates of change here is very important. At any

 given time, the economy's
level
of production may be below its potential. In such instances,

 there is the possibility of the economy growing faster than the long-run growth

 rate of potential for a while, in order to narrow the gap between the levels

 of actual and potential output. That is what happens in the recovery from recession.

 It can happen, in fact, for quite extended periods if the surplus capacity

 at the starting point is sufficiently large. It is what has been happening,

 on average, for most of the past nine years in Australia.
In mid 1991, output was a long way below potential. Initially, the upswing in GDP

 was weak, so that the gap between actual and potential output probably continued

 to widen until growth picked up. But the overall growth rate since mid 1991

 of just over 4 per cent appears to have been a little above the economy's

 long-run potential growth rate, as best that can be judged from the data of

 the 1990s, so that the extent of spare capacity has gradually declined –

 as was intended.
What then are the ideas people have in mind when they talk of speed limits?
The Governor has laid to rest several times perceptions which apparently existed

 in some quarters a few years ago that the Bank thought there was a GDP speed

 limit for Australia of 3.5 per cent growth. As the above analysis suggests,

 even if long-run potential growth was thought to be 3.5 per cent – and

 I do not endorse that (or any other) particular number – the economy

 can be allowed to grow faster than long run potential if the
level
of output is below potential to begin with. In fact it should

 be, and would be, encouraged to do so in an inflation-targeting framework,

 unless inflation was forecast to exceed the target for some other reason.
Having considered that issue, are there genuine speed limits?
Clearly, at some point there must be. Economies can overheat if the level of aggregate

 demand outstrips potential supply persistently. Concerns over this have increased

 in the US in the past six months, even with greater optimism about supply potential

 than used to be the case. Additional resources cannot be conjured up indefinitely

 even in very flexible economies. So if an economy were thought to be operating

 above potential, growth would need to be held below the long-run potential

 growth rate to re-align the level of demand with that of potential output.
Speed limit effects might also occur in economies where there is not a general sense

 of persistent excess demand, but simply because the expansion in demand over

 a particular short period is so great that supply cannot be increased quickly

 enough to match it in the short term, even though supply could be increased

 in the long term. This, I think, is the way to understand the increase in inflation

 which occurred in Australia in the mid 1990s. A period of exceptional strength

 in demand and output growth put upward pressure on the growth of labour costs,

 even though the rate of unemployment was still quite high (at 9 to 10 per cent).

 The economy was almost certainly below its long-run sustainable level of output,

 but the short-term dynamics resulted in a noticeable increase in inflation.

 In other words, even with a large degree of spare capacity, there may sometimes

 be a limit to how fast that spare capacity can be reduced, without creating

 inflation problems.
To what extent are either of these two sorts of limits affecting Australia at present?
We cannot be definitive, only approximate. There is less surplus capacity now than

 there was, say, two or three years ago. At the sorts of output growth rates

 which appear to be in prospect for the next year or so, we will probably continue

 to eat into the remaining spare capacity to some extent, though not as quickly

 as we have done in the past couple of years. But while we have to be alert

 for signs of bottlenecks and pressure on prices and wages, there is no compelling

 reason to think that we will significantly exceed the potential level of output

 in the near term. Likewise, the anticipated growth rates do not seem likely

 to break the other kind of short-term speed limit – on most people's

 current forecasts they are likely to be well below what was seen in 1994.
So there are no reasons to think, based on the outlook and policy settings prevailing

 at present, that the expansion will be cut off by having broken ‘speed

 limits’.
Sustaining the Growth
There are good prospects for the expansion continuing. What is the role of policy

 in helping to realise these prospects?
The answer the Bank has given is that monetary policy settings have to be adjusted,

 as the economy's circumstances change. As the press release of 5 April

 stated:
The fundamental reason why interest rates have risen in Australia and in most other

 developed countries over the past year is that the degree of monetary stimulus

 that was appropriate to earlier circumstances is no longer needed.
You know the general history of the past few years well, so I can be brief. Beginning

 in mid 1996, and continuing through mid 1997, monetary policy was eased gradually

 as inflation appeared to be falling back to, and then below, the target. By

 the time cash rates had fallen to 5 per cent, in July 1997, we had become quite

 confident that policy was clearly expansionary, and would facilitate stronger

 growth and, in time, a return of inflation to the target.
As it turned out, the Asian crisis hit at about that time. This reduced Australia's

 national income sharply, and pushed down the exchange rate. Since the economy

 had ample capacity for growth, and inflation was still below the target, policy

 accepted the lower exchange rate, which we expected to put some upward pressure

 on inflation, and accommodated very strong growth in domestic demand from 1997

 to 1999. The expansionary setting was maintained for a considerable time. In

 fact, at the time in late 1998 when prospects for the world economy appeared

 to be most grim, rates declined a little further.
By late in 1999, the scenario looked quite different. It was pretty clear that the

 world economy was in a fully-fledged upswing, with above-average growth rates

 on the cards for 2000 and 2001. This growth is being led by, but is not confined

 to, the United States. The Australian economy had continued to record very

 robust growth. Inflation had increased moderately, and was looking as though

 it would be back in the target zone in the period ahead. The Bank took the

 view, as did central banks in many countries, that the low levels of interest

 rates appropriate for circumstances of downside risks to growth, inflation

 below target, fears in some quarters of global deflation (and financial distress

 in some countries, though not Australia) should not be maintained in a period

 of strengthening world growth, likely waning of disinflationary forces and

 renewed financial optimism. The interest rates which had facilitated inflation

 returning to our target were not likely to be the ones which would keep it

 there. Accordingly, rates have been increased over the ensuing six months.
We do not believe that this sequence of adjustments will stop growth in its tracks.

 It does mean that growth will not be as strong as it probably would have been,

 had we left rates at their lows. But it is appropriate that domestic expenditure

 – where interest rates have their main impact – slow from its 5–6

 per cent growth pace of last year, given that the trade sector of the economy

 will be turning from a major drag on growth to having a neutral or positive

 impact. I do not for a moment want to imply that we think we can fine-tune

 this shift in the sources of growth. But think about a scenario involving already

 strong growth getting a boost from the world recovery, not at an early stage

 of the expansion, but at quite a mature stage, with inflation already tending

 to rise, however gradually. Add to this a tendency at times for the exchange

 rate to weaken. Should monetary policy hold overnight interest rates at the

 same levels as seen in the immediate aftermath of the early 1990s recession

 (and even lower in the case of most borrowing rates)?
The Board considered that a much more prudent approach was to make early, moderate

 adjustments to monetary policy settings, taking them to levels more in keeping

 with changed circumstances. These moves were made not because things had gone

 wrong, but to reduce the probability that inflationary imbalances would develop

 in future. That is, after all, the point of a forward-looking approach to policy.

 Of course policy makers can't, and don't, promise to be able to avoid

 all potential future problems. But they have acted in a way which will lessen

 at least some of the risks, and hence will help to sustain growth in the medium

 term.
Conclusion
Australia's macroeconomic performance in the 1990s ought to give us reason for

 optimism about the future. Good growth, rising living standards, declining

 unemployment and low inflation have coexisted. These are good macroeconomic

 outcomes. A sensible framework for monetary policy has played a part in this,

 and will continue to do so.
Are there, as today's topic implies, speed limits to growth? There are some,

 but they still allow us to make pretty good progress along the economic roadway.

 Adjustments in monetary policy have to play their part in keeping a reasonable

 speed for the economy. That means interest rates move as circumstances change:

 the sensible driver, having crested the hill, eases up on the accelerator as

 the car starts down the other side. A careful approach to policy maximises

 our chances of sustaining economic expansion, helping set the pre-conditions

 for a durable further fall in unemployment, and building on the progress made

 in the 1990s.
Endnote
Note that this discussion takes expectations of inflation as given.
[1]
