BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Shifting Currents in the Global Economy – Melbourne
DATE: 02/02/2001
SPEAKER: Melbourne
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2001/sp-ag-020201.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Shifting Currents in the Global Economy
Glenn Stevens
Assistant Governor (Economic)
CEDA/Telstra Economic and Political Overview
Melbourne
–
2 February 2001
Download
90KB
I would like to thank CEDA for yet another invitation to address this forum in Melbourne.
Following long established custom, I will make some remarks about the international

 conjuncture, with some comments about the possible implications of that for

 Australia. I shall begin by contrasting outcomes in the year just finished

 with what had been expected at this time last year.
Graph 1
The Situation a Year Ago
In early 2000:
it was apparent that the century date change – ‘Y2K’ – had come and gone

 with barely a hiccup;
it was clear that the world economy had grown faster than expected in 1999, as had

 Australia. Prospects for global growth appeared to be improving further;
this was in no small measure due to the fact that the US economy was in the midst

 of a surge in growth, on top of a trajectory which was already stronger than

 the average of recent history;
we had by then also understood that many of the countries in east Asia had staged,

 unexpectedly, a rapid recovery, the strength of which surprised even the optimists;
global financial markets were in the process of changing tone. Share markets had

 boomed in 1999, as the global upswing gathered pace. But by early 2000, financial

 markets were worried about the possibility of synchronised growth in the major

 regions of the world, and the possibility of upward pressure on inflation.

 Between the low point in late 1998 and February 2000, US ten-year bond yields

 rose by 200 basis points;
central banks had begun a tightening phase, which would continue through the first

 half of the year, lifting short-term rates from the low levels reached in

 late 1998.
The prognosis for global growth appeared to be very good. Two risks were identified:
share market valuations seemed high, most notably in the US – but of course

 many who had pointed that out for several years were no longer getting much

 attention.
Graph 2
oil prices had risen sharply, from very low levels in 1998
2000 Outcomes
2000 turned out to be a blue-ribbon year for growth of the global economy.It appears

 that world GDP as measured by the IMF expanded by something between 4 ½

 and 5 per cent. This was the strongest growth for over a decade. It is worth

 repeating that what at one stage looked like it might be a very serious slump

 in global growth in late 1998 and 1999 was averted. The total effect of the

 Asian crisis and all the subsequent events – the relapse of Japan into

 recession, the Russian crisis, the problems in financial markets after LTCM

 and so on – seems to have been to push global growth about one percentage

 point below average for one year in 1998. The difference was made up by 2000.
Much (though not all) of this was due to the exceptional strength of the US economy,

 as everyone knows. During 2000, it was no surprise that attention focused heavily

 on the US. It always does by virtue of the United States' status as the

 largest economy in the world, but there was an additional reason for attention

 in the year just ended, because of the unfolding saga of the ‘new economy’.

 Discussion of the new economy was spurred by rapid technological progress delivering

 rising aggregate productivity growth, new products, and high levels of investment.

 There was intense discussion of the appropriate valuations to be placed on

 the anticipated streams of earnings from those investments. There was perhaps

 somewhat less attention paid in some cases than there should have been to the

 fact that, as in any venture, all of this involved a not inconsiderable degree

 of risk.
Graph 3
It was against this general background that a feature of 2000 was the behaviour of

 asset markets, and capital flows. By the late 1990s asset markets had already

 placed a very high valuation on the earnings from the supply and use of technology

 products by American firms (and their counterparts in other countries). Yet

 these assets, and US assets in general, continued for some time to be very

 attractive to investors, including those in other regions of the world. There

 have been substantial flows of capital to the United States over recent years,

 first attracted by, and in turn helping to sustain, the gains in American asset

 values. These took the form of both portfolio flows, and direct investments

 — through merger and acquisitions.
These flows increased the resources available to the United States. They meant that

 Americans could both consume and invest at a greater rate than would be allowed

 by their own (not insubstantial) resources alone. The counterparts to these

 capital flows have been a decline in the share of current income saved by US

 citizens, a widening in the US current account deficit, and a strengthening

 in the US dollar against most other currencies.
US share prices reached a peak in March, and fell in stages through the rest of the

 year as the tide of optimism about earnings gradually turned, and people became

 more conscious of risk. But exchange rates continued on their earlier course

 for longer, with the result that the euro, introduced in 1999, spent almost

 the first two years of its life declining, influenced by capital flows towards

 the US. As the Governor has pointed out, elements of this story help to explain

 the fortunes of the Australian dollar during 2000 as well.
Graph 4
By year's end, the US share market had recorded a decline from the figure at

 the end of the previous year, for the first time since 1994. If we may proxy

 the ‘high-tech’ sector by the Nasdaq index, it had fallen by almost 50 per

 cent since its peak in March, though some of that decline has been reversed

 during the past month. Finally, the US dollar did not continue the relentless

 upward march of the first half of the year, and other currencies found more

 support, including our own.
The weaker trend in share prices was probably re-inforced by the fact that the US

 economy, having been expected to slow down for four years, finally did. The

 changed picture for wealth of American households has probably in turn played

 some role in softening demand growth. US GDP growth in the second half of 2000

 declined to less than 3 per cent, and to a bit over 1 per cent in the last

 quarter. This compares with the 6 per cent pace in the first half of 2000,

 and an average of over 4 ½ per cent since the end of 1996. A range of

 recent data for the US economy suggest that, first, in the classical ‘old economy’

 areas – like car manufacturing – conditions have been weakening

 for some time and, second, that the boom in the ‘tech’ sector, which for a

 time offset this weakness, is now slowing.
As a result of these developments, people have recently, and rather suddenly, become

 much more pessimistic about near-term US prospects. In response to the shifting

 balance of risks – less risk of accelerating inflation and more risk

 of weakness in aggregate demand – the Federal Reserve has cut short-term

 interest rates in a fairly aggressive fashion. Financial markets have priced

 in further reductions. There has been quite a significant decline in interest

 rates at the longer end of the US yield curve as well.
Graph 5
As a result of these developments, people have recently, and rather suddenly, become

 much more pessimistic about near-term US prospects. In response to the shifting

 balance of risks – less risk of accelerating inflation and more risk

 of weakness in aggregate demand – the Federal Reserve has cut short-term

 interest rates in a fairly aggressive fashion. Financial markets have priced

 in further reductions. There has been quite a significant decline in interest

 rates at the longer end of the US yield curve as well.
In February 2001, then, things look rather different to the way they looked a year

 ago. At the risk of some over-simplification, we might say that in February

 2000, the US economy was accelerating; global growth was picking up; share

 prices were high and rising; global interest rates were tending to rise; and

 the US dollar was strengthening. Oil prices had increased and had further to

 go.
Now, the US economy has (finally) slowed markedly, and forecasts for global growth

 are being reduced. US share prices have fallen appreciably, heavily in some

 areas. US interest rates have peaked and come down noticeably, and the US dollar

 has declined a little. Oil prices have declined, though they remain higher

 than they were during most of the 1990s. Whereas a year ago all the talk was

 about the extent of higher production by the OPEC countries, now production

 has been reduced. This is probably best interpreted as an attempt, in recognition

 of softening prospects for demand, to manage supply in an effort to prevent

 a repeat of the collapse of oil prices which occurred in 1998.
Graph 6
Outlook for 2001
What does this signal about the year ahead?
The consensus among forecasters about international growth has been marked down over

 recent months. This is mainly a result of the noticeably weaker prognosis for

 the US economy, but a softening in some of the short-run data coming out of

 Europe has been taken to imply somewhat weaker growth there in 2001 than last

 year. The Japanese economy remains brittle. Hence after running at 4 ½

 to 5 per cent in 2000, world GDP growth is expected by international forecasters

 to be more like 3 ¾ per cent in 2001. Experience in observing the evolution

 of forecasts in the past suggests to me that the process of downward revision

 to growth forecasts may well have a bit further to go. Even if that were to

 be the case, however, so that world growth ended up being, say, 3 ¼

 to 3 ½ per cent, that would still be close to the average outcome over

 the past thirty years. That would be a notable slowdown from 2000 outcomes,

 but not too bad.
One has to admit that a considerable degree of uncertainty is attached to this prognosis.

 This is quite common at turning points. Everyone can tell something is happening

 which represents an important change in the environment, but it is very hard

 to be dogmatic about how big the change will turn out to be. The reason for

 that is that outcomes depend to no small extent on the psychology of participants

 in markets and economies generally, and on the response of policies.
These sorts of forecasts presume that the US economy does not encounter a prolonged

 slump, but rather regains some speed after a soft first half of 2001.
[1]
People will rightly point to the weakness of recent data in that country and

 worry about a more protracted and deeper slowdown than the consensus of forecasters

 predicts. They might also point to the Fed's recent actions and say that

 this shows the Fed is worried.
Graph 7
It certainly shows that the Fed has discerned, and responded to, a significant change

 to the balance of risks. But that action itself, and the fact that interest

 rates right across the US yield curve have fallen substantially, will help

 to contain incipient forces for weakness in the US. And there are already some

 early signs that the interest-sensitive housing sector of the US economy may

 be beginning to respond to improved conditions for good-quality borrowers.

 These are still quite tentative at this stage, but it would not be surprising

 to see further such signs emerge over coming months.
I think, then, that it is reasonable to conclude that the declines in US interest

 rates have already probably improved the prospects for US and global growth

 in 2002. Many forecasters are assuming further reductions in interest rates.

 I would conjecture that while forecasts for international growth in 2001 might

 be further revised down, a year from now we might well be observing revisions

 in the opposite direction for 2002.
Closer to home, what is envisaged by these forecasters for the Asian region? The

 short answer is somewhat lower growth than last year, as some of the leading

 economies ease back from the break-neck pace which characterised the early

 part of their recovery from the crisis. This is to be expected. It has in fact

 been anticipated for a time now, and has probably taken a little longer to

 occur than originally expected. Overall growth is thought likely to continue,

 though with some quite distinct differences between individual countries within

 the region.
Graph 8
One area to watch is the electronics sector. Some of Asia's fastest growing

 economies have benefited greatly from the expansion in production of IT components.

 In Korea, Singapore, Malaysia and Taiwan, for example, half or more of the

 expansion in industrial production since the low point in 1998 has been in

 the electronics sector. This has been the supply-side counterpart of the rapid

 run-up in investment in information technology by industrial economies, especially

 the US, in recent years. In any long run, such investment seems likely to continue

 to occur, spurred in part by the continually declining cost and rising productivity

 of such equipment. In the short term, however, should there be a temporary

 lull in IT spending around the world, some of Asia's economies would be

 vulnerable to a weakening in growth.
Were that to occur, of course, then it would presumably be open to those countries

 to adopt policies which would work to dampen the effect of export losses, in

 part by expanding domestic demand. Given appropriate responses, there is no

 reason to think that any repeat of the 1997 crisis is on the cards.
Implications for Australia
Over the past year, we expected to see a deceleration in domestic demand in Australia,

 and strong export growth. The exact extent of both has been hard to untangle

 because of the distortions to behaviour occasioned by tax reform, and the Olympic

 Games. These were only temporary factors but their echoes are still being felt.

 Overall, however, that general feature of the economy – slowing domestic

 demand and strengthening exports – is readily observable.
Graph 9
Australian exporters in particular have seen growth in export incomes which has rarely

 been exceeded over the past four decades. For the year to November, for example,

 exports rose by 25 per cent (excluding identifiable effects of the Olympics).

 Growth rates on an annual basis of between 20 and 30 per cent have been maintained

 for the past eight months. And in volume terms the net export component of

 demand growth has turned from negative to positive.
Given even moderate global growth, and an exchange rate which, while above very low

 levels seen a few months ago, is still conferring a distinct competitive advantage

 to Australian exporters, we could reasonably expect quite good gains in exports

 in the coming year, even if they did not match the very strong pace of the

 past year.
The obvious risks to this can be identified. A global slump, if it were to develop,

 would be a serious problem for Australia – as it would be for all exporting

 countries. This is always true. It seems at present, moreover, that the risk

 of this has once again increased, as it did just over two years ago.
What is important in such a situation is the capacity and willingness of the major

 countries to counter, if needed, contractionary forces with judicious use of

 expansionary macro policies. How much scope there is for such actions usually

 depends on the extent of imbalances existing in economies. In the US and Europe,

 with inflation relatively low, at least one potential imbalance does not appear

 to be the problem it has been at other times. In the US, if the current rate

 of core inflation of about 2 ½ per cent turns out to be a cyclical peak,

 it will be lowest one for more than 30 years.
Graph 10
European inflation is even lower. Hence there is no major impediment here to the

 use of expansionary policies if they are needed. US monetary policy has already

 turned in that direction, and US fiscal policy appears likely to follow suit.

 European fiscal policy is likely to move in that direction too over the year

 ahead. It has to be admitted that serious problems linger in Japan –

 but they are probably no worse than they have been for some years.
Some people will no doubt point to the US current account deficit as a significant

 imbalance. To the extent that there is a re-appraisal of the attractiveness

 of US assets, the capital flows which were the counterpart of the widening

 of the US current account will diminish. This will need to be associated with

 some shifts in American consumption and investment patterns. It is obviously

 possible that such adjustments, particularly if they were forced to be abrupt,

 could be difficult to achieve and disruptive. The rest of the world has a vital

 interest in the US economy managing such adjustments in as smooth a manner

 as possible.
At the same time, it is worth pointing out that, other things equal, some reduction

 in capital flows to the US is no bad thing for other countries who seek capital

 to fund growth – like Australia. A continuation of the earlier trend

 towards more and more internationally mobile capital being attracted to the

 US, chasing continually escalating asset values which required ever higher

 growth of future earnings to be sustained, would surely have not been in the

 interests of the US economy or of the rest of the world. To the extent that

 unrealistic assessments of the potential returns from technology and associated

 industries drew real factors of production – capital, labour and intellectual

 effort – to that sector and away from other ‘traditional’ areas, there

 was a potentially quite serious misallocation of resources occurring. Its continuation

 would probably have meant an increasingly difficult adjustment task for the

 Australian economy, as we would effectively have faced a continual increase

 in the cost of capital. From this perspective, some part at least of the recent

 reappraisal about the US economy is probably to be welcomed. This is not in

 any way to deny the seriousness of a real slump in the US economy, were that

 to occur.
Conclusion
Overall then, the global scene is less benign than it seemed a year ago. 2000 was

 a very good year for global growth (even if not for growth in every individual

 country). 2001 was always going to see some moderation in growth. A shock to

 oil prices was always likely to make it harder for industrial countries to

 continue the exceptional run of strong growth with very low inflation they

 had enjoyed in the late 1990s. And the size of the run up in US asset values

 and the additional capital flows associated with it always carried the possibility

 of disruption, both on the way up and the way down.
Hence 2001 has started on a much more uncertain note, and there actually is, to use

 the forecaster's cliché, more than the usual degree of uncertainty

 about the outlook. Whether the world economy slows noticeably, but to a still

 quite reasonable rate of growth, or to something much lower, remains to be

 seen. In the former case, with a still very competitive exchange rate, Australian

 exporters should still be well placed. In the latter case, we would have to

 assume they would find things much more difficult. In either case, the fact

 that the big one-offs in the Australian economy seen in 2000 have already occurred,

 rather than being in prospect, is probably a bonus. An additional advantage

 is the absence of major imbalances in the domestic economy. Whatever conditions

 may come our way, we are as well placed to weather them as we could hope to

 be.
The one thing which perhaps could be said with confidence is that, whereas 2000 was

 a year in which big events at home were the primary focus of economic discussion,

 in 2001 it appears that attention will turn once again, if it has not already,

 to events abroad.
Endnote
It also presumes that there is not a significant reversal of the recent oil price

 decline. That is a reasonable assumption to make in my view, but as before

 there is the risk that it could be wrong. The implications of that are well

 understood so I will not spend any time here going through them.
[1]
