BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Financial System Stability – Some Current Observations – Sydney
DATE: 16/05/2003
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2003/sp-ag-160503.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Financial System Stability – Some Current Observations
John F. Laker
Assistant Governor (Financial System)
Address to the University of Western Sydney Conference on

 ‘Emerging Financial Services in Asia-Pacific’
Sydney
–
16 May 2003
asset quality, banking, debt, global economy, households, housing, insurance
Introduction
It is a pleasure to accept the invitation of the University of Western Sydney to

 address its conference on ‘Emerging Financial Services in Asia-Pacific’.

 The range of papers presented to the conference are illustrative of the ever-growing

 sophistication and complexity of financial services, but the themes of the

 plenary sessions remind us that there are still major challenges to face in

 strengthening the broad ‘architecture’ of the financial system.
This conference is being held after a period of unprecedented turbulence in the global

 economy. Since the new century began, we have faced the weakest international

 economic conditions for many years, accompanied by the unwinding of the tech

 stock bubble and substantial corrections in major equity markets. We have

 witnessed, in rapid succession, three severe shocks: the terrorist attacks

 of 11 September; the failure of Enron; and Argentina's default on its

 sovereign debt. More recently, geopolitical uncertainties over Iraq and the

 Korean Peninsula have at times weighed heavily on market confidence.
Global developments such as these form a crucial backdrop to the setting of monetary

 policy in Australia. Equally, though, they form a crucial backdrop to a vital

 but less publicised role for the Reserve Bank – namely, its role in

 safeguarding the stability of the Australian financial system. This responsibility

 is as old as central banking itself. In our case it was reconfirmed, and given

 sharper focus, by the Australian Government in 1998 when it introduced landmark

 reforms in response to the Financial System Inquiry (the Wallis Committee).
The Reserve Bank's objective is to ensure that financial disturbances in
any
part of the financial system do not ultimately threaten the health

 of the Australian economy. Obviously, this objective is closely linked to

 the Reserve Bank's other policy objectives of low and stable inflation,

 a secure and efficient payments system and smoothly functioning financial

 markets. However, our activities go much further than that. We specifically

 monitor the health of the Australian financial system and we have developed

 a range of ‘macro-prudential’ or financial soundness indicators

 to assist us in this task. These indicators draw on aggregate financial and

 economic data that help gauge the strength of the financial system and provide

 early warning signals of potential vulnerabilities. The Reserve Bank does

 not monitor the financial condition of individual financial institutions –

 this is the preserve of the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA),

 although the two agencies do work closely together.
In my talk today, I would like to share with you some of the latest readings from

 these financial soundness indicators, and our general assessment of how the

 Australian financial system is faring.
The international environment
Although market sentiment now appears to be improving, the global environment over

 recent years has been a difficult one from a financial stability perspective.

 Uncertainty about economic recovery and a retreat by investors from risk-taking

 have combined to generate various signs of financial stress: credit spreads

 have been high and volatile, equity markets have been in sharp decline and

 the balance sheets of financial institutions have been under pressure in a

 number of countries. For all that, however, the global financial system has

 proven resilient.
The indicators on
banking systems
in major financial centres present a mixed view.

 Banks with strong retail franchises have performed reasonably well. The US

 banking system, in particular, has coped better than most, maintaining relatively

 high capital ratios and low levels of non performing assets; to strengthen

 their balance sheets, US banks have been reducing costs, curtailing their

 activities and seeking to improve the management and pricing of risks. The

 US banking index has outperformed the broader US equity market for some time.

 The story is a similar one for banking systems in the United Kingdom and some

 European countries.
Graph 1
Read description
Graph 2
Read description
Clear areas of weakness have nonetheless emerged:
banks that rely heavily on wholesale business have been under considerable pressure.

 Of the ten largest international banks, for example, seven have had their

 long-term rating downgraded by at least one of the major credit rating agencies

 in the past two years. Markets have heavily penalised those international

 banks which have suffered financial losses from lending activities, and reputational

 losses and legal liabilities from dubious business practices;
larger banks in Germany have performed poorly. This has been a reflection of persistent

 economic weakness in Europe, structurally low profitability in banking and

 a rise in non performing loans. German supervisory authorities have twice

 over the past nine months felt the need to issue statements of support for

 German banks; and
Japanese banks continue to labour under problems arising from deflation and the unwinding

 of Japan's earlier asset price bubble. The recognition and resolution

 of impaired asset problems continue to make only halting progress; the most

 recent official estimates suggest that some nine per cent of the total loans

 of Japanese banks are non-performing and private sector estimates are much

 higher.
The
global insurance sector
is a picture of a sector under stress. Weak

 equity and corporate bond markets and their effects on investment income explain

 much of the decline in the share prices of insurance companies at a global

 level, as well as the relative under-performance of European insurers. Life

 insurance companies in countries such as Germany, Switzerland and the United

 Kingdom have locked themselves into annuity products which depend heavily

 on equity returns exceeding guaranteed rates of return on policies, and these

 companies have been hard hit. They have responded to losses on investment

 portfolios by raising capital and reducing their equity holdings, while some

 supervisory authorities have provided leeway on equity valuation rules to

 reduce pressure to sell into declining markets. The global insurance sector

 plays a critical role in absorbing risk in the financial system – including,

 increasingly, as buyers of credit risk from banks through credit derivatives;

 for this reason, the financial condition of the sector and its future appetite

 for risk have become a major focus of international policy-makers.
Graph 3
Read description
Global economic and financial conditions impinge upon the Australian economy and

 Australian financial markets in a number of ways, which the Reserve Bank routinely

 analyses in the setting of monetary policy. From a financial stability perspective,

 our immediate concern is whether Australian financial institutions, particularly

 our internationally active banks, face risks of contagion from global developments.

 On the assets side of their balance sheets, Australian banks do have significant

 exposures to borrowers in overseas economies. These exposures have remained

 broadly constant over the last decade or so at – a little under one-third

 of total assets – but the mix has changed significantly. Lending to

 Japanese borrowers has diminished significantly in importance while lending

 to borrowers in New Zealand has risen to become the single largest country

 exposure, a little above the United Kingdom. The nature of risks facing Australian

 banks in their New Zealand and UK operations – where strong growth in

 mortgage lending has fuelled house price appreciation – bear close similarities

 with their exposures to Australian borrowers.
Table 1: Australian Banks' Lending to Overseas Economies
Per cent of total assets
This table shows Australian banks' lending to various countries as a

 share of banks' overall assets for 1990, 1996 and 2002. It shows that

 lending to Japan has fallen as a share of bank assets while lending to New

 Zealand has increased as a proportion of total assets.
1990
1996
2002
New Zealand
3.7
8.3
8.6
United Kingdom
8.3
7.1
8.0
Euro Area
2.8
2.5
4.4
United States
5.5
3.9
3.9
Japan
5.0
2.7
0.6
Other
4.6
5.1
5.3
Total
30.0
29.6
30.8
Source: APRA
On the liabilities side, Australian banks over the past few years have relied increasingly

 on borrowings in offshore wholesale markets to supplement their domestic deposit

 base. The major Australian banks now source around one-quarter of their liabilities

 offshore. There are no signs that recent global financial market volatility

 has had any impact on these funding programs. Australian banks carry only

 small net foreign exchange exposures on their offshore borrowings, which are

 either denominated in Australian dollars or largely hedged through the use

 of off-balance sheet transactions.
Graph 4
Read description
The Australian financial system
The risk profile of the Australian financial system has changed in important ways

 over the past few years. Traditionally, lending to the business sector has

 been the main source of credit risk for Australian financial institutions,

 and excessive lending in the ‘good times’ was a major contributor

 to previous episodes of financial instability. Over the past decade, however,

 growth in credit to households, particularly for housing, has outstripped

 lending to business and the household sector now has a higher level of debt

 than the business sector. These developments are due, in part, to the strength

 of corporate profits and positive share market sentiment over much of the

 period, which have enabled businesses to make greater use of internal funding

 and equity raisings for expansion. They also reflect strategic decisions by

 some major financial institutions to favour lending to households in the wake

 of their corporate loan loss experiences in the early 1990s. The divergent

 credit trends, which have continued in 2002/03, have resulted in a shift in

 the structure of assets held by financial intermediaries towards lower-risk

 loans. As a consequence, average credit quality has improved.
Graph 5
Read description
Business sector
Lending to the business sector currently accounts for around 45 per cent of total

 credit provided by Australian financial institutions. Latest readings confirm

 that the financial position of the business sector is sound. Corporate profitability

 remains high by historical standards, and although the drought has had an

 impact on rural producers, the profitability of other unincorporated enterprises

 is generally favourable compared with recent years. Debt levels are well below

 their peak of the late 1980s and interest burdens are at historically low

 levels. Credit spreads for low- and high-grade corporate debt have been narrowing,

 partly reflecting a decline in risk aversion by investors, and are now slightly

 below their historical averages. Credit ratings agencies have been sounding

 a more cautionary note about the outlook for credit quality, in line with

 expectations that growth in the Australian economy will slow somewhat over

 the course of this year.
Graph 6
Read description
Within business lending, two sectors have been under somewhat closer scrutiny. The

 first is the rural sector, in view of the protracted drought which persists

 in many areas. Notwithstanding sharp falls in production and the impact on

 some rural communities, it is difficult to see the drought and its consequences

 as a threat to financial stability. Lending to the rural sector accounts for

 less than five per cent of total credit provided by banks. The interest burden

 of the rural sector is low both in historical terms and relative to other

 industries, and declines in revenue seem manageable in light of tax-effective

 savings instruments (such as Farm Management Deposits) and the previous run

 of good rural profits. The other sector is commercial property, where earlier

 episodes of over-investment taking its toll on the financial system come readily

 to mind. Conditions in the office property market deteriorated a little over

 2001 and 2002, with the bursting of the high tech bubble and financial sector

 downsizing pushing up vacancy rates in some areas. Nonetheless, listed property

 trust prices remain well supported and current conditions appear to be better

 than those in the late 1980s: price rises over recent years have been far

 more muted and the build-up in supply has been much less pronounced. Banks

 have considerably reduced their exposures to office property to around three

 per cent of total bank credit (and to around 12 per cent for commercial property

 in general) and have gone to some lengths to strengthen their risk management

 procedures.
Graph 7
Read description
Household sector
Lending to the household sector currently accounts for around 55 per cent of total

 credit provided by Australian financial institutions. Around four-fifths of

 this lending is secured against housing and is provided mainly by the four

 major Australian banks.
Lending to households has been growing at strong double-digit annual rates for some

 time now, and the ratio of household debt to household disposable income has

 reached 125 per cent, in the upper part of the range of other comparable countries.

 The surge in lending has been associated with a sustained rise in residential

 property prices and, over more recent years, with a strong increase in demand

 for credit by property investors. As the Reserve Bank has said on other recent

 occasions, these developments have raised the financial risks facing that

 proportion of households (30 per cent) with housing debt, an issue to which

 I will return shortly. At this juncture, however, the indicators are not pointing

 to obvious signs of financial stress in the household sector. Interest rates

 remain at historically low levels and interest burdens – though on an

 upward trend – are below their peak in the late 1980s/early 1990s; many

 households have a significant cushion from repaying debt ahead of schedule

 (though others are topping up their debt through redraw facilities); and arrears

 on housing and other personal loans continue to breach cyclical lows. Solid

 growth in employment has continued to support household incomes and debt servicing

 capacity.
Graph 8
Read description
Graph 9
Read description
Financial intermediaries
Assessing the health of major groups of borrowers (the business and household sectors)

 is an essential element of the Reserve Bank's financial stability focus.

 In addition, of course, we monitor a range of financial soundness indicators

 to gauge the strength of financial institutions. These include indicators

 of asset quality, capitalisation, profitability and market valuation. The

 readings from these indicators continue to be reassuring.
Asset quality, for example, remains robust. For banks, the ratio of impaired assets

 to total assets was 0.6 per cent at end-March 2003, around the very low levels

 established during the course of the current economic expansion. ‘Distressed’

 assets – a broader measure which includes loans on which payments are

 late (past due) – were 0.8 per cent of total assets. Impaired asset

 ratios are also at cyclical lows for building societies and credit unions.

 These measures of asset quality are, of course, backward looking and more

 forward-looking indicators strike a note of caution. A number of banks have

 noted potential for increased loan delinquencies in parts of their household

 and business exposures – including lending for investor housing –

 and some have tightened lending standards accordingly.
Graph 10
Read description
Financial intermediaries have strong lines of defence if there were to be any deterioration

 in credit quality. Banks hold general provisions of around 0.5 per cent of

 total assets against the possibility of future losses not attributable to

 particular assets. The ratio of specific provisions (written against assets

 already identified as impaired) to total assets is lower, reflecting the sustained

 improvement in asset quality over recent years. Banks maintain aggregate capital

 ratios of around 10 per cent of risk weighted assets, well above minimum required

 levels; the comparable ratios for building societies and credit unions are

 around 14–15 per cent.
Graph 11
Read description
Graph 12
Read description
Notwithstanding the compression of interest margins over recent years, banks in particular

 have been able to maintain high levels of profitability as a result of significant

 asset growth, cost containment and diversification of income sources. For

 the major banks, non-interest income now accounts for almost half of total

 income, a share boosted by recent acquisitions of fund management businesses.

 Declining equity markets have been taking their toll on fund management activities

 but retail banking franchises remain strongly profitable.
Market indicators continue to signal a generally positive view of the credit quality

 of Australian banks. For example, despite recent setbacks, bank share prices

 have out-performed the broader market over a long period. Average spreads

 on long-term US dollar bonds issued (offshore) by Australian banks have regularly

 been lower and less volatile than the average spreads on comparable debt of

 their overseas counterparts.
Vulnerabilities in housing lending
Looking ahead, the main potential source of risk from a financial stability perspective

 would be a substantial correction in the housing market, impacting on the

 balance sheets of financial intermediaries through mortgage defaults. Lending

 for housing has continued to expand at a rapid pace and there are only tentative

 signs of an easing of pressure in the housing market. A flattening or modest

 reversal of house price increases would not in itself be a cause for concern.

 The concern would be a sharp jump in mortgage default rates which triggered

 a more substantial market correction – a scenario more likely to be

 associated with a deterioration in employment conditions or a sharp rise in

 interest rates.
In a recent address, the Governor of the Reserve Bank posed the question ‘Do

 Australian Households Borrow Too

 Much?’
[1]
The broad conclusion was that a proportion of households has clearly taken on more

 risk – in the Governor's words: ‘… I suspect that a significant

 number of households have chosen a debt level which makes sense in good times,

 but does not take into account the fact that bad times will inevitably occur

 at some time or other’. The Governor noted, in particular, the exceptionally

 fast increase in borrowing for property investment, and the accompanying rapid

 expansion in apartment building, which show all the signs of a seriously over-extended

 market.
The obverse to the Governor's question is ‘Do Australian Financial Institutions

 Lend Too Much to Households?’ The Governor opined that ‘[as] far

 as we can judge at this stage, the rise in household debt does not pose a

 significant danger of a financial crisis, i.e., the failure of significant

 financial institutions such as occurred in the early 1990s after the build-up

 in corporate debt’. My remaining remarks today outline some of the factors

 which have led us to this judgment.
Clearly, the general strength and profitability of financial intermediaries in Australia

 over a sustained period underpins our current assessment. However, we have

 also taken into account developments that are specific to housing lending.

 The first is the risk management procedures pursued by banks and other housing

 lenders, and the ‘internal buffers’ on which they may draw. The

 second is the extent to which risks on housing lending are being transferred

 from lenders to other risk-takers.
To guard against the risk of a significant increase in mortgage delinquencies, financial

 intermediaries apply various 'stress tests’ to their housing portfolio,

 looking at the impact of higher interest rates, rising unemployment and falling

 house prices on expected default rates and losses. A key benchmark in loan

 application processes is the capacity of the borrower to service increases

 in interest rates, normally taken to be two percentage points. For lending

 to investors, intermediaries generally make allowance for falling rental yields

 by assuming that the expected rental income is not received in full each year;

 some work on the assumption that the property is vacant for up to three months

 a year. Financial intermediaries have been strengthening their risk management

 capacities in housing lending (and other areas), and it is critical that they

 maintain their lending standards in these headier times. That said, APRA has

 recently found cause to voice concerns about slippages in property lending

 practices.
If default rates were to rise, lenders have two internal buffers to draw on: the

 value of equity supporting the housing loan – commonly measured as the

 loan-to-valuation ratio (LVR) – and the amount of excess repayments

 that borrowers have made at their discretion. Average LVRs appear to be around

 50–60 per cent across lending portfolios but, of course, it is the more

 recent borrowers who will be highly leveraged. Even so, liaison suggests that

 the bulk of new housing loans made by the major banks have LVRs below 80 per

 cent. Recent household survey data suggests that about two-thirds of households

 with mortgage debt repay their housing loans ahead of schedule, and anecdotal

 evidence from banks puts the figure even higher. (Of course, this has been

 influenced by the fact that we have been in a falling interest rate environment.)

 On the other hand, an increasing number of households are now taking advantage

 of new lending products – such as home equity loans and redraw facilities

 – to top up their mortgages, ensuring that their debt levels remain

 higher for longer.
For housing loans with an LVR above 80 per cent, financial intermediaries generally

 have protection in the form of mortgage insurance. In the event of default

 on an insured loan, the lender receives any shortfall between the proceeds

 from the sale of the underlying security (collateral) and the amount of the

 loan outstanding from the mortgage insurer.
Recourse to mortgage insurance is supported by APRA's prudential guidelines.

 In order to qualify for the concessional 50 per cent risk-weight applied to

 housing loans for capital adequacy purposes, loans must either have an LVR

 less than 80 per cent or be covered by mortgage insurance. If this cover is

 to be relied on in hard times, mortgage insurers themselves need to be in

 a strong financial position, and APRA requires that they be at least A-rated.

 In determining credit ratings, ratings agencies require mortgage insurers

 to hold capital sufficient to cover a number of ‘worse-case scenarios’,

 including a prolonged downturn in the economy and substantial falls in house

 prices. To achieve the highest rating, a mortgage insurer would need to be

 able to withstand an increase in insurance claims that was many times more

 than the worst historical claims experience.
Mortgage insurance acts as an important form of risk transfer for financial intermediaries:

 in essence, the credit risk of insured loans is transferred from their balance

 sheets onto the balance sheets of highly rated mortgage insurers. The proviso

 is that intermediaries must be able to satisfy mortgage insurers that they

 have complied fully with all aspects of the underlying insurance contract.

 These contracts may have strict conditions on the reporting of arrears which

 may be easy to satisfy when the volume of delinquencies is low, but less so

 when default rates are increasing sharply. APRA is currently giving this operational

 risk close attention.
Financial intermediaries also use the securitisation market as a means of shedding

 credit risk on housing lending. While the majority of housing debt remains

 on the books of the intermediaries, an increasing proportion of housing loans

 is being securitised by both lenders and mortgage managers. Since the mid-1990s,

 securitised mortgages have risen from $5 billion or three per cent of housing

 debt, to around $75 billion or 17 per cent of housing debt.
Graph 13
Read description
By dispersing credit risk over a wider investor base, rather than allowing it to

 become concentrated on the balance sheets of a small number of financial institutions,

 securitisation has the potential to reduce threats to financial stability.

 At the same time, securitisation can introduce other forms of risks if the

 end-investor lacks the capacity to manage or absorb credit risk, particularly

 as deals become more complex. This does not appear to be a particular concern

 with the residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS) market in Australia.

 The majority of RMBS deals are backed by prime, fully insured mortgages and,

 over time, their performance has typically compared favourably with the mortgages

 retained on the books of financial institutions. As a result, the senior tranche

 of RMBS issues is generally rated AAA and the subordinated tranches, which

 usually cover no more than five per cent of the securities issued, typically

 carry investment-grade ratings.
Financial intermediaries need to be careful to ensure that securitisation does not

 substitute other forms of risk for credit risk. APRA's prudential guidelines

 require authorised deposit-taking institutions to hold adequate capital against

 any exposures arising; to have systems in place to identify, monitor and control

 the risks associated with securitisation; and make clear disclosures about

 risk to investors.
A more recent development in the dispersion of credit risk on housing lending is

 the emergence of ‘non-conforming’ mortgage managers, through which

 borrowers who do not meet standard lending criteria can gain access to housing

 finance that might not otherwise be available. The non-conforming loan market

 in Australia is still only small in overall size (some estimates put it at

 around four to six per cent of housing loans written) but it is growing strongly.

 The rate of arrears on non-conforming loans appears to be much higher than

 the rate on housing lending by traditional lenders.
Does the growth of this market raise any particular concerns from a financial stability

 perspective? Banks fund some of the origination and warehousing of these mortgages

 prior to securitisation and so carry some exposure to non-conforming lenders.

 However, the exposure is only for a limited period and is secured against

 residential property. There may be a less direct impact on financial stability,

 however, via house prices. At this stage of the cycle, the growth in the non-conforming

 loan market is adding to demand pressures in the housing market. If economic

 conditions were to change, however, marginal borrowers are likely to be more

 vulnerable and one might expect them to quickly become distressed sellers

 in adverse circumstances. In this way, the non-conforming loan market might

 become a source of additional cyclicality in house prices.
Concluding comments
Over the past couple of years, the global financial system has been buffeted by a

 number of pressures and some unprecedented shocks. Nonetheless, the system

 has continued to prove resilient and financial stability has been maintained.

 Banking systems, generally speaking, are well capitalised but potential fault

 lines have emerged in the global insurance sector which are receiving close

 scrutiny by policy makers. Recent developments have also exposed weaknesses

 in the financial architecture – in corporate governance, accounting

 and auditing standards in particular – which demand and are receiving

 international attention.
The Australian financial system is not quarantined from global developments but our

 judgment is that it remains in strong condition, underpinned by the continued

 expansion of the Australian economy. Looking ahead, the cloud on the near

 horizon is the substantial build-up in household debt, which may create strains

 for financial institutions if Australia's economic circumstances were

 to deteriorate and mortgage defaults rise sharply. In this setting, the use

 of probabilities of default derived from previous credit cycles to assess

 and manage credit risk on mortgage lending may understate the risks being

 built up. Nonetheless, the ‘buffers’ available, and the redistribution

 of credit risk taking place, provide reassurance that the financial system

 has the capacity to cope with any substantial housing market correction. Individual

 financial institutions which lower their guard could obviously come under

 pressure, but a substantial correction is less likely to generate a systemic

 shock that would threaten overall financial stability.
Endnote
Address by Mr I.J. Macfarlane, Governor, to The Sydney Institute, Sydney, 3 April

 2003, reproduced in RBA
Bulletin
, April 2003.
[1]
