BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Economic Performance and Issues in 2003 – Sydney
DATE: 05/03/2003
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2003/sp-ag-050303.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Economic Performance and Issues in 2003
Malcolm Edey
Assistant Governor (Economic)
Address to Australian Industry Group

 Economy 2003 - Forecasting Industry Prospects Forum
Sydney
–
5 March 2003
Let me begin by thanking the Australian Industry Group for the invitation to speak

 today on the subject of Economic Performance and Issues in 2003. I will approach

 the topic first by reviewing the international situation, and then looking

 at some issues for Australia.
International Developments
For the global economy the year 2002 was, broadly speaking, a year of modest recovery

 after the very weak performance of the previous year. Using growth in the G7

 economies as a barometer for the global business cycle, the trough in the recent

 downturn occurred at the end of 2001. At that time, G7 growth on a year-ended

 basis dipped slightly below zero, the first negative result on this measure

 since the early 1980s. Last year, on currently available figures, growth picked

 up to just over 2 per cent, a better result but still below what was recorded

 during most of the 1990s.
Graph 1
Read description
But the important story of the past year is not so much this aggregate pick-up in

 growth as the changes in momentum that occurred during the course of the year.

 As we have described in recent quarterly
Statements
, the last year broadly evolved in two phases. The early

 and middle part of last year was a period of greater optimism, particularly

 in the United States, as it became apparent that a recovery was getting under

 way. This period was characterised by a resumption of growth in output and

 employment in the US, with apparent spillover effects to other parts of the

 world as international trade also took on a firmer trend. While growth in Europe

 generally remained disappointing, Japan and a number of other east Asian economies

 were strengthening during this period, with a pick-up in exports across the

 region playing an important role in the overall improvement.
Towards the end of the year, the global recovery began to lose some of that momentum.

 This was evident in a range of indicators for the US which weakened in the

 fourth quarter, as well as a general weakening in exports experienced by a

 number of countries towards the end of the year. Financial markets broadly

 reflected these shifts in global conditions and, as is often the case, they

 to some extent anticipated them. Global equity markets declined for much of

 the second half of 2002 and bond yields fell in all the major international

 markets, generally reflecting the assessment that prospects for the global

 economy had deteriorated. To put all this in perspective, however, we need

 to be clear that the major economies did not go into outright contraction in

 the final quarter of last year: they continued to grow, but at a much reduced

 pace.
I have gone to the trouble of outlining that background because it helps us to formulate

 what seems to be the key question for the global outlook in 2003: what is the

 nature of the current weak spot in global growth, and how long should it be

 expected to last? Since we are talking about forecasts, there can be no definitive

 answer to this, but I will try to make some relevant observations about prospects

 in two key areas – the US, and non-Japan Asia.
The US economy has been a key driver of the global business cycle and will remain

 quite central to the prospects for ongoing recovery. Although the US recorded

 reasonably good growth last year (peaking at an annual rate of 3.3 per cent

 in the September quarter), the economy is still being affected by some of the

 imbalances that had earlier pushed it into recession. Of particular note is

 the low level of business profits and poor financial condition of many US businesses

 at present. The US economy has also been affected by a substantial overhang

 of business investment that was built up in the second half of the 1990s. While

 this now appears to have been largely worked off, some overhang remains in

 particular sectors, notably in telecommunications. One consequence of all this

 is that there has been an extended period of contraction in US business investment,

 though on current indications this decline has now stopped.
On the more positive side, the US household sector has remained quite resilient through

 the last couple of years. Consumer spending has continued to grow, and low

 interest rates are promoting an expansion in housing construction activity.

 It should also be noted that the US economy is receiving considerable policy

 stimulus. The Fed funds rate has been cut by a total of 525 basis points since

 early 2001, so that in real terms it has been close to zero or negative for

 more than a year. At the same time the US government's fiscal position has

 swung sharply in an expansionary direction. Between 2000 and 2002, the budget

 moved from a surplus of around 2 per cent of GDP to a deficit of similar size.

 So there was a net swing of around 4 percentage points, which can be taken

 as a rough measure of the fiscal position's contribution to growth of the economy.

 A further package currently under consideration will (if adopted) add further

 to this stimulus. In some important respects these measures can be expected

 to have a bigger impact than the counter-cyclical policies that assisted recovery

 in the early 1990s. The current fiscal stimulus is considerably larger than

 the one that occurred in the early 1990s. The interest rate reductions in the

 current episode have not been as large in absolute terms as occurred on the

 previous occasion, but they were implemented more quickly.
Graph 2
Read description
To put the current period in perspective it is also instructive to compare the overall

 growth performance with the two previous recoveries, in the early 90s and early

 80s. Of the two, the current US cycle to date has been much more like the one

 that occurred in the early 90s, with a relatively shallow trough and a correspondingly

 modest upturn. In terms of GDP, the current upturn has run slightly ahead of

 the pace recorded in the early 90s, while the employment paths are almost identical.

 Another similarity is that the early 90s recovery was for some time quite hesitant

 and there was lingering scepticism in the early stages as to whether it would

 be sustained. The same is occurring in the current cycle. At this stage the

 best guess is for a return to moderate growth, and this is broadly the path

 that is built into the Consensus forecasts shown in the chart. But there remains

 a risk that the recent period of weakness will prove to be more prolonged.
Graph 3
Read description
I would also like to make some observations about the non-Japan Asian region, which

 was a relative bright spot during 2002. While there have been some quite wide

 disparities in economic performance across individual countries, the region

 as a whole has been growing strongly, having experienced only a brief pause

 during 2001. Exports have of course been an important driver of growth, and

 hence the region benefited from the general improvement in international conditions

 during much of 2002. But it is interesting to note that in recent years, growth

 in east Asia has been increasingly sourced from domestic demand. As a result

 of this, growth held up relatively well during the international downturn in

 2001 and, while exports weakened a bit towards the end of last year, the region

 as a whole continued to perform well.
Graph 4
Read description
Perhaps the stand-out feature of any review of east Asian economic trends is the

 rapid growth of the Chinese economy. China has been a consistently strong performer

 over the past decade, with official GDP figures showing an average growth rate

 of nearly 10 per cent per annum. Even though these data may be poorly measured,

 there is no doubt that China's importance in the global economy and in international

 trade have steadily increased, and will continue to do so for the foreseeable

 future. Over the 10 years to 2001, for example, China's share in world trade

 roughly doubled, to just under 5 per cent. Australia seems well placed to benefit

 from these trends. China has been moderately over-represented in Australia's

 mix of export destinations, and the growth of Australia's exports to China

 in recent years has broadly kept pace with the rapid growth in China's overall

 trade.
Graph 5
Read description
The Australian Economy
Let me turn now to some issues for the domestic economy. In doing so, I will be drawing

 on the themes presented three weeks ago in our quarterly
Statement on Monetary Policy
.
The past year has been characterised by rapid growth in domestic demand, partly offset

 by a strong contractionary effect from the export sector. In reviewing these

 trends it will be dangerous for me to say too much about precise numbers, since

 there is a set of new national accounts figures coming out during the course

 of this speech. Nonetheless the broad outlines are quite clear. Last year,

 Australia's exports grew only by 2 per cent in real terms, a weak result when

 set against an average annual growth rate of 8 per cent over the past decade.

 With imports still growing strongly, net exports overall reduced growth of

 the economy by more than 3 percentage points over the year. This was the biggest

 net contractionary effect from this source since the late 1980s. Special factors

 certainly contributed to this – particularly the drought, the downturn

 in international tourism and a jump in aircraft imports – but it is also

 clear that Australia's external sector continued to feel the more general effects

 of sub-par performance in the global economy.
Graph 6
Read description
Working in the other direction, domestic demand has been growing rapidly over the

 past 18 months or so. Consumer spending has been expanding and growth has been

 supported by the upswing in housing construction and in business investment.

 The net effect of all this has been that the economy continued to post reasonable

 growth, though the pace is slowing and the housing construction cycle looks

 to be nearing a peak.
I will not be giving a detailed set of forecasts but before summing up I want to

 focus a bit more on two aspects of the domestic economic scene. One is the

 general condition of the business sector. Throughout the last few years the

 situation of the Australian business sector has contrasted quite markedly with

 the one I described earlier for the US. In the main, and despite some high-profile

 exceptions, profits of Australian businesses in aggregate have remained at

 a good level by historical standards, and businesses have generally managed

 their balance sheets quite conservatively. There was substantial de-leveraging

 in the early 1990s, and aggregate corporate debt has since remained low. One

 indicator of this is the ratio of corporate interest obligations to profits,

 which has been close to historical lows throughout the recent period.
Graph 7
Read description
Australian businesses also avoided the sort of investment overhang built up in the

 US in the late 1990s. With this background, business investment spending entered

 a solid upswing in 2002, coming off a relatively low base. Conditions still

 appear broadly supportive of further growth in this area, although outcomes

 will of course be sensitive to changes in business sentiment and expectations

 about the international outlook, where there have been some signs of greater

 caution of late. The latest reading we have on investment plans, from last

 week's Capex survey, points to further growth, though not as rapid as the exceptional

 growth seen recently.
Graph 8
Read description
The other area that I will focus on briefly is the rural sector. On latest estimates,

 the drought conditions of 2002 will have reduced farm production by almost

 25 per cent, and this translates into a much larger fall in net farm incomes.

 The overall effect on the economy has been significant, probably reducing GDP

 in the current financial year by something approaching 1 per cent. In terms

 of the fall in production, this makes it the most severe drought since the

 early 1980s. On some other benchmarks, based on absolute rainfall deficiencies,

 it is the most severe in a century. It is much too early yet to form a reliable

 assessment of prospects for the farm sector in 2003/04. Even given improved

 weather conditions, some of the effects of the drought will linger on for some

 time. Nonetheless, the historical record suggests that aggregate farm production

 has the potential to turn around quite quickly, and the recent rains across

 much of the country do offer the prospect of a better year ahead.
Graph 9
Read description
To sum up the general economic situation, I don't think I can do better than re-state

 the main themes expressed in our recent
Statement on

 Monetary Policy
. The international environment is quite an uncertain

 one, and the outlook now is not as promising as it seemed to be at this time

 last year. Most observers still expect a gradual pick-up later in the year,

 but that would still mean a further period of sub-par growth in the major economies.

 In Australia these effects have, to date, been largely offset by the strength

 of domestic demand. But looking ahead, some rebalancing of growth is expected,

 with domestic demand slowing and the drag from net exports being gradually

 wound back; this is likely to mean the overall pace of growth being a bit slower

 than we have been accustomed to recently. Even so, Australia still seems well-positioned

 to perform relatively well in what is a fairly difficult international environment.
