BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Recent Developments in Asian Bond Markets – Sydney
DATE: 15/12/2004
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2004/sp-ag-151204.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Recent Developments in Asian Bond Markets
Ric Battellino
Assistant Governor (Financial Markets)
Talk to the 17
th
Australasian Finance &

 Banking Conference
Sydney
–
15 December 2004
Download
158KB
Introduction
Following the Asian crisis, there was widespread agreement that Asian economies would

 benefit from having larger and more developed bond markets. In response, authorities

 in the region began work, both at the national level and the regional level,

 on a wide range of initiatives in pursuit of that objective.
Many of these initiatives are still in their early stages, but already there has

 been substantial development in regional bond markets in terms of both size

 and depth. In several respects, however, regional markets continue to lag behind

 those in some of the mature economies, leading commentators to question some

 of the initiatives on the grounds that they have been ineffective or not well-sequenced.
This criticism is, I feel, partly based on unrealistic expectations. It may also

 reflect a misunderstanding of what the authorities are trying to achieve. I

 thought it might be useful, therefore, to run through recent developments in

 Asian bond markets, outline the various initiatives that are under way, and

 try to address some of the criticisms that have been made.
Bond Financing in Asia
At the time of the crisis, Asian economies on the whole were very dependent on their

 banking systems for the provision of finance. Banks provided about 80 per cent

 of the debt financing in the economy, while bond markets provided only 20 per

 cent. (Graph 1)
The proportion of bond financing was low not only by the standards of mature economies,

 but also relative to other emerging markets. In mature economies, bond financing

 typically accounts for about 30–40 per cent of total debt financing,

 though as much as 60 per cent in the US.
Graph 1
Read description
That the Asian region fell short of the figures in the mature economies should be

 of no surprise, since the share of bond financing tends to increase as economies

 mature. There are various reasons why this is so. For one thing, bond markets

 require an extensive infrastructure, including well-developed accounting, legal

 and regulatory systems, payments and settlements systems, ratings agencies,

 networks of brokers to sell bonds and so on. Bond financing is also more suited

 to well-established companies whose operations and credit standing are well

 known. In emerging markets, where the corporate sector is developing rapidly

 and small and medium enterprises dominate, it is understandable that banks

 have a comparative advantage in the provision of financing, as they are better

 able to know the borrower's business and hence assess the credit risk.
The fact that the proportion of bond financing in Asia was lower than in other emerging

 markets appeared, on the surface, to be more noteworthy, though an important

 part of the difference was due to the fact that Asian governments had much

 less debt on issue than governments in other emerging markets.
The points I have just made describe the situation in non-Japan Asia as a whole,

 but there was in fact quite a variation among countries in the Asian region.

 South Korea, Malaysia and the Philippines, for example, had quite high bond

 financing ratios even in the pre-crisis period. (Graph 2)
Graph 2
Read description
The onset of the crisis in 1997 quickly exposed the risks that an economy faces by

 having the bulk of its financing eggs in the banking basket. If something goes

 wrong in the banking sector, the overall flow of financing to the economy becomes

 restricted as there are no alternative financing avenues. The problem is made

 particularly acute by the fact that bank finance can be relatively short term,

 so not only is the flow of new loans reduced, but existing loans can also be

 cut back quickly.
Graph 3 shows how quickly and sharply growth in bank lending slowed following the

 crisis. Many Asian economies experienced falls for a number of years in the

 amount of bank loans outstanding, and in some cases growth in bank credit has

 yet to recover fully.
Graph 3
Read description
Bank lending is particularly vulnerable to cutbacks where foreign banks are involved,

 since international bank lending appears to be especially subject to fads.

 In the case of Asia, for example, foreign banks committed vast amounts of money

 to the region in the lead up to the crisis – more than the region could

 usefully employ – but withdrew it quickly once the crisis hit. (Graph 4)

 Such large fluctuations in the availability of finance are, of course, highly

 disruptive to the economy.
Graph 4
Read description
It is not surprising, in view of the events that unfolded, that there emerged strong

 support throughout the region for the development of financing through alternative

 channels to the banking system. This policy direction was also strongly supported

 by the international institutions such as the IMF and the World Bank, as well

 as a range of analysts and commentators around the world.
Bond Market Developments since the Crisis
Asian bond markets have come a long way since the crisis. I should clarify at this

 point that I am focussing on the market for local currency bonds issued by

 governments or corporations as opposed to bonds issued in foreign currencies.

 The amount of such bonds on issue has more than doubled in size since 1997.

 The increase has been particularly apparent for government bonds, as governments

 in many Asian countries have run significant budget deficits since the crisis,

 but issues of private sector bonds have also increased notably. Total local

 currency bonds on issue in non-Japan Asia currently stand at about US$1,400

 billion, or about 50 per cent of the relevant countries' GDP. (Graph 5)

 Growth in bond markets has been widespread across the region. (Graph 6)
Graph 5
Read description
Graph 6
Read description
As a result of this growth in the region's local currency debt markets, they now

 account for around 3 per cent of such markets worldwide, double the share of

 Latin America and almost six times as large as that of Eastern Europe. (Graph 7)

 While impressive, this figure needs to be qualified to some extent as it overstates

 the universe of Asian bonds available to investors because it includes some

 illiquid bonds issued for bank recapitalisation purposes and held in special

 purpose vehicles. Also access to bonds by foreigners, particularly in China,

 though in some other countries also, is limited by exchange controls.
Graph 7
Read description
Despite the growth that has taken place, Asian bond markets are still largely over-looked

 by international investors. Foreigners own less than 5 per cent of Asian bonds

 on issue, quite low by the standards of many other countries. The corresponding

 figures for Australia and the US, for example, are roughly 25 per cent.
Part of the problem may well be that Asian bond markets are still perceived to be

 relatively illiquid. Annual turnover of bonds is quite low, typically in the

 order of one or two times the amount of bonds on issue, though Hong Kong, Singapore

 and Korea have turnover ratios that are closer to those in mature economies.

 (Graph 8)
Graph 8
Read description
Various factors may be contributing to this lack of liquidity. One is that a large

 proportion of bonds is held by banks, often under regulatory arrangements.

 Across the region, banks hold over half of government bonds on issue, which

 contrasts with a figure of less than 5 per cent in the US and Australia. In

 some Asian countries, the central provident fund also tends to be a large holder

 of bonds, particularly government bonds. These types of institutions tend to

 ‘buy and hold’ and therefore do not promote market turnover. Compounding the

 problem is that holders may not be required to mark their bonds to market,

 which substantially reduces the incentive to turn the bonds over.
Regional Initiatives
Even though Asian bond markets have developed rapidly since the late 1990s, it is

 widely recognised within the region that there are still shortcomings and more

 work needs to be done. The authorities are pursuing this both at the national

 and regional levels. A high priority for many national authorities has been

 to put in place arrangements for the issue of government debt which reflect

 best practice from around the world. For example:
all major countries in the region have moved to tender based systems for issuing

 government debt and have established a yield curve, in some cases out to 20

 years;
many now have pre-announced issuance calendars, and tend to issue into a few benchmark

 lines, with various bonds being reopened in successive tenders in order to

 build depth in individual issues;
five countries have established futures markets for government debt; and
three countries have repo markets.
At the regional level there are three main government-sponsored initiatives underway,

 aimed at promoting the development of local currency bond markets. The benefit

 of this regional approach is that it allows individual economies to leverage

 off each other in implementing reforms, creating momentum. It also contributes

 towards harmonising regulatory and legal structures and market practices.
One set of initiatives is under the APEC banner. The main focus of these is to promote

 securitisation and credit guarantee markets. A particular issue this work is

 trying to address is the fact that the credit standing of borrowers in the

 region is often lower than the requirements of investors, especially some institutional

 investors.
A second initiative is being progressed through ASEAN+3. This work is also focused

 on identifying impediments to market development, but across a broader range

 of issues than the APEC initiative. Six working groups, each with a focus on

 a specific aspect of the market (e.g. credit rating agencies, settlement procedures

 and credit guarantee arrangements) have been established to develop strategies

 to remove impediments.
The third initiative is the work being undertaken by EMEAP. EMEAP is a grouping of

 eleven central banks in East Asia and the Pacific, comprising Australia, China,

 Hong Kong SAR, Indonesia, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, New Zealand, the Philippines,

 Singapore and Thailand.
This initiative differs from others in that it has sought to take a practical approach,

 through direct participation in markets, to identifying obstacles to bond market

 development and to building an infrastructure capable of supporting bond markets.

 Specifically, the central banks felt that a good way to expose any problems

 to market development would be to work together to set up, and invest in, a

 bond fund. It was also felt that some of the work in setting up such a fund

 would help to create an infrastructure which may have a more general application

 in bond markets.
The first phase of this initiative involved the setting up of the Asian Bond Fund,

 known now as ABF1. This was launched in the middle of 2003.
ABF1 is a fund which pooled US$1 billion in US dollar reserves from the EMEAP member

 central banks for investment in
US dollar-denominated
bonds issued by eight of EMEAP's governments – China, Hong Kong, Indonesia,

 Korea, Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, and Thailand. The fund does not

 include bonds issued by Australia, Japan and New Zealand, as these economies

 already have relatively deep and broad markets.
ABF1 has been operating successfully now for about 18 months. It was never seen as

 an end in itself, since its potential contribution to market development was

 always going to be limited given that it was confined to US dollar securities

 and that the participating investors were limited to the eleven central banks.

 Rather, it was seen as a trial run for a more complex fund based on local currency

 bonds and involving a wider range of investors, including central banks from

 outside the region as well as private sector investors.
Work on this second fund, known as ABF2, commenced soon after the completion of ABF1

 was announced. Because of its more complex and technically demanding nature,

 it has required a larger commitment of resources by the participating central

 banks than was the case for ABF1. Details of the fund are to be announced soon,

 but already it can claim success at one very important level, in that it has

 highlighted how effectively central banks in the region can work together to

 achieve a common goal.
The framework for ABF2 consists of two components:
a single Pan-Asian Bond Index Fund (PAIF); and
a Fund of Bond Funds (FoBF) which consists of investments in eight separate country

 sub funds.
Each of these funds will be managed by private sector funds managers and benchmarked

 against a new Asian government bond index.
Unlike ABF1, which is confined to central banks, investment in ABF2 will in due course

 be open to private sector investors, providing them with low-cost vehicles

 to invest in Asian bond markets of their choice. The PAIF will cater to investors

 who wish to have a well-diversified exposure to bond markets across the eight

 East Asian markets in a single investment, while the individual country sub

 funds will allow investors to tailor the composition of their investments across

 the region.
Criticisms
The work that is being undertaken on bond markets in the region has attracted a lot

 of international attention. This is overwhelmingly a good thing as it has resulted

 in a lively interchange of ideas as well as the compilation of a large amount

 of data on regional markets. Anyone conducting an internet search on Asian

 bond markets will now be confronted with over 500,000 papers and notes on the

 topic. Among the official sector, comprehensive studies of Asian bond markets

 have been published by the Asian Development Bank and the Bank for International

 Settlements. We at the Reserve Bank of Australia have also contributed with

 an article in the December 2003 edition of our
Bulletin
.
Not all of the commentary that one hears about Asian bond markets has been positive.

 Criticisms are still made, for example, about the small size and lack of liquidity

 of the markets. Often, however, the basis of such criticisms is comparisons

 with highly developed markets elsewhere, particularly the US, and as such is

 probably unfair. It is unrealistic to expect that Asian markets would measure

 up well against the US, since few markets do, even among the mature economies.
It also needs to be kept in mind that the push in Asia to develop bond markets and

 undertake other financial reforms is relatively new and there is a limit as

 to how quickly things can change. The relevant comparison therefore is not

 with markets in mature economies today, but with the situation when those markets

 were at a similar stage of development as Asian markets are today. Take, for

 example, the question of market turnover. While the turnover ratio in many

 Asian bond markets is well below that in Australia today, it is very similar

 to that in Australia in the years that followed the introduction of bond tenders

 in 1982. I therefore do not think that there is any reason to believe that

 Asian bond markets are intrinsically less liquid than those elsewhere; it is

 simply a question of their having sufficient time to develop.
Aside from criticisms about the markets themselves, some commentators have also questioned

 the effectiveness of some of the initiatives that are being pursued, particularly

 the Asian Bond Fund. I have seen three types of criticisms:
The first is a general concern about ‘moral hazard’ from public sector involvement

 in setting up and investing in local bond funds. The particular concern seems

 to be that there may be a temptation to use these funds to bail out individual

 issuers or to manipulate market prices.
I do not attach a lot of significance to this criticism. The funds have been set

 up in a way that limits the power of any individual country authority to

 interfere in the running of the fund with a view to advantaging its own issuers.

 The criteria for selecting bonds to be included in the benchmarks against

 which the funds are managed need to have the support of all the countries

 involved, and the people at the individual central banks who are accountable

 to their own authorities for the funds invested would strongly resist any

 actions which would increase their risk of financial loss.
A further safeguard is that the funds themselves are managed by independent managers

 – the BIS in the case of ABF1 and private sector managers in the case

 of ABF2.
A second criticism is that the setting up of these funds will do little to improve

 local bond markets, and could in fact damage them. There are various arguments

 here:
the amount of money invested is very small relative to the size of the markets and

 therefore will not have much impact;
central banks are largely ‘buy and hold’ investors who will not add much liquidity

 to the market; and
that by focusing mainly on the highly rated segment of bond markets, where there

 is already plenty of demand, these funds could crowd out private sector

 investors.
I think we can all readily accept that investing $1 billion or even several billion

 dollars in a market that is capitalised at around $1,400 billion is not,

 in itself, going to have a lot of impact on market development. By the same

 token, of course, it is not going to have any crowding out effects.
I would also readily accept that these funds are not going to add significantly to

 market turnover. They are simply too small to do so, and are being managed

 relatively passively against a defined benchmark.
Nonetheless, I think these criticisms miss the point. In setting up these funds,

 the aim of the participating central banks was not to promote bond market

 development by adding directly to demand or turnover; rather, it was to help

 identify, through their direct involvement in markets, the barriers that

 exist to market development. The benefit to markets was intended to come

 not from the investment itself but from policy reforms that individual national

 authorities might take. Doing this on a collective basis has had the added

 advantage of information sharing and creating peer pressure to maintain the

 momentum of the reform process.
The third type of criticism leveled at the ABF initiatives is that the efforts to

 integrate the various national bond markets in Asia, or harmonise regulations

 and taxation, will encourage more cross-border capital flows and are thus

 the equivalent of capital account liberalisation. It is argued that liberalising

 the capital account in the absence of strong and well-developed markets may

 entail ‘sequencing risks’, in that regional financial markets may not yet

 be in a position to handle increased volumes of cross-border flows.
It may well be the case that the integration of bond markets amounts to capital account

 liberalisation, but I don't think this should stand in the way of market development.

 Whatever the theory might say about sequencing of reforms, in practice the

 reform process must take opportunities as they arise and often has to proceed

 on many fronts at once as reforms in one area rapidly result in pressures for

 change in other areas.
In any event, the argument that bond market reform could cause problems for exchange

 rate management is, I feel, overstated. It attaches too much importance to

 cross-border flows in the development of local currency bond markets. Such

 flows in relation to bonds are small relative to both the size of the bond

 market and to cross-border flows arising from other types of investment. Even

 if the various initiatives did result in a large increase in cross border flows,

 it is unlikely that such flows would become a significant force in foreign

 exchange markets in the foreseeable future.
Conclusion
In summary, I am optimistic about bond market developments in Asia. Markets have

 already come a long way since the Asian crisis. I accept that, on many measures,

 Asian markets still lag behind those of the mature economies but such comparisons

 should be seen as highlighting the potential that exists, not as a criticism

 of the current state of markets. It would be unrealistic to expect that Asian

 markets could have made up, in just a few years, the ground that markets in

 mature economies took decades to cover. The co-operative approach being taken

 in the region, by allowing countries to benchmark off each other, will ensure

 that a rapid pace of reform will continue. In turn, if I may end by relating

 this back to the theme of this morning's session, I think this will create

 a great deal of opportunities for financial service providers in the region.
