BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Notes for a Talk to AIG Economy 2005 – Sydney
DATE: 03/03/2005
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2005/sp-ag-030305.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Notes for a Talk to AIG Economy 2005
Malcolm Edey
[
*
]
Assistant Governor (Economic)
Notes for a Talk to AIG Economy 2005
Sydney
–
3 March 2005
Good morning and thank you to AIG for the invitation to speak today.
At the Reserve Bank we do take very seriously the importance of talking to businesses

 and getting their perspective on economic conditions. It's something we've

 put a lot of effort into over the last few years, as we've built up our liaison

 group within the Bank, and developed our regional offices in the mainland state

 capitals. And we very much appreciate the cooperation we receive from groups

 like the Australian Industry Group in this process.
The Bank has had quite a lot to say about the economy over the last two or three

 weeks – first with our quarterly
Statement on Monetary Policy
, then with the Governor's parliamentary

 testimony, and then yesterday's policy announcement. It's not my intention

 to modify any of that material on the economy, other than to update it for

 newly released information. But what I'll be doing is to make some general

 observations about the economic situation, drawing on the various statements

 we've already made. In doing that, I'll start with a brief overview of the

 international scene, and then move onto the situation in Australia.
My first observation is that the international environment in which Australia finds

 itself at the moment is quite a favourable one (Graph 1). Growth of the

 world economy last year was 4.9 per cent, which is around the strongest figure

 for the last 30 years. Most expectations at this stage are that 2005 will

 be another strong year. For example, the latest Consensus forecasts, taken

 as at February, imply global growth this year of 4¼ per cent. If that

 forecast is realised, it would be the third successive year of above average

 growth, albeit a bit slower than last year's result.
Graph 1
Read description
I won't have time to go into the global situation country by country, but it's worth

 taking a separate look at the US business cycle, which is still such a big

 influence on the world economy as a whole (Graph 2). The US is now in

 its fourth year of expansion after the recession at the start of the decade.

 The recovery initially got off to a fairly slow start. But the early concerns

 about lack of recovery in the business sector, and in employment, have now

 faded. Last year the US economy grew by just under 4 per cent, with the quarterly

 figures coming in at close to 1 per cent in each of the last four quarters.
Graph 2
Read description
The latest indicators are generally pointing to further momentum coming into the

 early part of this year (Graph 3). Employment is growing at a fairly solid

 pace, and weekly figures on new jobless claims are back down to around their

 levels of the late 1990s. Other figures like retail sales and manufacturing

 production have also been looking quite strong in the early part of 2005. So

 overall, the US recovery is looking well entrenched.
Graph 3
Read description
The other important driver of global growth at the moment is China (Graph 4).

 In the last couple of years the Chinese economy has been growing at rates not

 much below 10 per cent, and directly accounting for about a quarter of the

 overall growth in the world economy and in global trade. The main concern of

 the Chinese authorities last year was that the economy was overheating, and

 they have taken various measures since late 2003 to try to rein this in through

 credit controls and the like. These now seem to be having some effect, although

 any slowing to date seems quite mild.
Graph 4
Read description
The recent performance and outlook in other parts of the world is more mixed (Table 1).
Recent GDP outcomes for the euro area and Japan have been disappointing;
But growth in most of the smaller east Asian economies remains quite strong,

 even if it has slowed a bit since last year.
Table 1: World GDP Growth
This table shows GDP growth in 2004 and the Consensus forecast for growth in 2005 for the US, Euro Area, Japan, China, other east Asia and the World.
2004
2005 Consensus Forecast
United States
4.4
3.5
Euro Area
2.0
1.7
Japan
2.6
1.1
China
9.5
8.4
Other east Asia
5.8
4.4
World
4.9
4.3
Obviously all these forecasts are going to be subject to revision as the year unfolds.

 But overall, as I indicated at the outset, growth of the global economy at

 this stage is looking quite strong. One important consequence of this has been

 upward pressure on commodity prices. Internationally, the most widely publicised

 aspect of that was the run-up in oil prices. These have strengthened again

 recently, although they're still below their peak of October last year. More

 directly relevant to Australia has been the sharp rise in a range of other

 resource prices. World prices of Australia's base metals exports are now up

 by more than 40 per cent over the past two years. For iron ore and coal, substantial

 increases in contract prices are set to take effect this year, after the sharp

 rises already negotiated in 2004.
A useful summary statistic for these effects is the movement in Australia's terms

 of trade (the ratio of export to import prices, Graph 5). Essentially

 this summarises the purchasing power generated by a given volume of exports.

 This ratio has already increased by 10 per cent over the past year. Some rough

 figuring suggests that the price increases for coal and iron ore over coming

 months will boost our overall index of commodity prices by over 20 per cent,

 and our terms of trade by a further 10 per cent (shown by the dot on the

 chart). This represents a significant stimulus to national income and spending.

 It will be the largest cumulative run-up in Australia's terms of trade since

 the early 1970s.
Graph 5
Read description
So the international background is one of above-average economic growth, and rising

 prices of the products that Australia exports.
I'll turn now to Australia. The national accounts released yesterday showed a continuation

 of the recent pattern of slower GDP growth and continued strength in domestic

 demand (Graph 6). GDP slowed to 1½ per cent over the year, and

 grew by only 0.1 per cent in the December quarter. Domestic demand, on the

 other hand, grew by 4 per cent over the year, and continued at that rate in

 the December quarter. It is thus growing a good deal faster than GDP. What

 the figures indicate is that the growth in demand is being met not by commensurate

 growth in production, but to a large extent by growth in imports and by a run

 down in inventories.
Graph 6
Read description
In its recent statements, the Bank has made two observations about this recent performance.

 The first observation concerns the balance of supply and demand in the economy.

 Taking the GDP figures at face value, what they indicate is that growth of

 output slowed down even though domestic demand over recent years has been running

 at a pace well above its longer-run trend. So during that period we have had

 a combination of strong domestic demand and better-than-average growth in the

 world economy, as well as a boost to national income from rising commodity

 prices. This combination of circumstances makes it hard to argue that the overall

 demand conditions facing the Australian economy have been deficient. Rather,

 what the Bank has argued is that it's becoming more likely growth is being

 constrained on the supply side. I'll come back to that point in a moment.
The second observation is that the slowing in growth seems at odds with general perceptions

 that the economy is growing strongly. Measures of business and consumer sentiment,

 for example, are at levels that would normally be associated with well-above-average

 growth. In the NAB survey of the non-farm business sector, businesses reported

 that conditions at the end of last year were close to their best since the

 survey began in 1989 (Graph 7). They did show a drop in January, but that

 seems to have been mainly seasonal. Other indicators, like the growth of business

 borrowing, profits and the rising share market, also bear out that the business

 sector in aggregate is enjoying strong conditions.
Graph 7
Read description
For the household sector, the Westpac-Melbourne Institute survey similarly reports

 sentiment at close to record levels (Graph 8). In fact this strengthened

 towards the end of last year and into the early part of 2005.
Graph 8
Read description
Another area of notably strong economic data has been the labour market (Graph 9).

 In the year to January, employment grew by 3.2 per cent, which is well above

 the trend growth in the labour force. Unemployment fell to 5.1 per cent, its

 lowest level since the 1970s. Other indicators such as job vacancies and hiring

 intentions are also pointing to strong labour demand.
Graph 9
Read description
Obviously, it will never be the case that all economic data point in the same direction

 at a given time. One weaker indicator attracting comment recently was retail

 sales, though this seems to have overstated any weakness in overall consumption

 spending. Yesterday's national accounts showed consumption growth slowed down

 fairly modestly but was still running at a firm pace of just under 4 per cent

 over the latest year. Another general indicator of strong demand conditions

 is the rapid growth of imports, running at 13 per cent over the year (Graph 10).

 Overall, the sense we get from the general run of economic data is that confidence

 is high, and that demand conditions are providing plenty of encouragement to

 growth.
Graph 10
Read description
Returning to the question of pressures on the economy's supply capacity, the clearest

 indication that this has been occurring has been in the disappointing performance

 of exports over the past year or two (Graph 11). Despite the more favourable

 international situation, total exports as at the December quarter were not

 much changed from their level of four years ago. This is in contrast to the

 growth of the order of 7 per cent per annum that was sustained d uring the

 1990s. It may well be that the 1990s was itself an unusual period in this respect,

 with export growth faster than normal. It was a period when we saw a big increase

 in the export orientation of the manufacturing and services sectors, and when

 Australia became much more engaged with the rapidly growing economies of east

 Asia. But even though that experience might be hard to repeat, the current

 flatness is remarkable, given that export volumes still tended to grow at healthy

 rates in most previous decades.
Graph 11
Read description
Looking across the components we can see that the flatness in exports over the last

 few years was widely spread (Graph 12). There were some temporary special

 factors that contributed to some of this, particularly around 2003. The drought

 pulled down rural exports around that time, and services exports were held

 back by the downturn in international travel, though both of these effects

 have faded more recently. Of the other components, it's noteworthy that manufacturing

 has been the strongest component of exports for many years. This has remained

 the case in the current decade to date, with manufactured exports continuing

 to grow, though not nearly as quickly as in the 1990s.
A lot of attention recently has been focused on resources exports, which is the largest

 component, accounting in recent years for a third or more of the total. Although

 they picked up in the December quarter, resource exports at the end of 2004

 had still not shown much cumulative growth over the past four years, despite

 the recent strength in world demand and the growing appetite for resources

 from China. We devoted a special chapter to export performance in this area

 in our recent quarterly statement. Our assessment was that the reason for the

 lack of volume growth in resource exports to date is a combination of constraints,

 in extraction capacity and in transport infrastructure. The situation is quite

 a complex one, but the good news is that there are some significant capacity

 expansions now underway. So the prospects are that resource exports should

 start to do better, even though some of the capacity issues might still take

 a while to be resolved.
Graph 12
Read description
I commented at another event last week that the broader observation that supply constraints

 are becoming more important shouldn't strike people as all that surprising.

 The economy is now in its 14
th
year of expansion, and during that time substantial surplus capacity

 has been absorbed. The NAB survey, for example, reported that businesses' capacity

 utilisation at the end of last year was as high as at any time over the 15

 years of the survey (although again, there was a fall in January which appears

 to have been mainly seasonal). It's also clear the economy has been using up

 surplus labour capacity, with unemployment down from a peak of almost 11 per

 cent to just over 5 per cent now. Reports of labour shortages are becoming

 widespread. The AIG, in fact, has been active in raising public debate about

 the issue of skills shortages, and emphasised that there is both a structural

 and cyclical element to the current shortage of skilled labour. The severity

 of the current skills shortage is captured by some of the business surveys

 which report the difficulty of finding suitable labour now is as high as it's

 been in the last two decades (Graph 13). The surveys also provide evidence

 that, for many businesses, shortages of labour have become a bigger constraint

 than traditional concerns about demand and sales.
Graph 13
Read description
Against the background of capacity pressures in labour and product markets, and rising

 world commodity prices, it's not surprising to have seen broader price pressures

 emerging recently. Our quarterly statement noted that upstream price pressures

 had picked up during 2004. ABS data on producer prices showed that price increases

 at all stages of production were larger in the second half of the year than

 in the first half. These trends are consistent with business surveys, such

 as the one by the AIG, which have highlighted rising materials costs and also

 report a sharp increase in the proportion of firms raising selling prices,

 or expecting to do so (Graph 14).
Graph 14
Read description
Consumer price inflation in 2004 was consistent with the target, at 2.6 per cent,

 with underlying measures running slightly below that figure (Graph 15).

 We've made the point for a while now that underlying inflation would be held

 down for a while by some temporary dampening effects from import prices, and

 that domestically sourced inflation was running more strongly. The producer

 price data that I referred to earlier have been showing broadly the same pattern.

 In the event, the inflation outcomes during 2004 were higher than we had expected,

 and this now looks to be the trough in underlying inflation. Given the evidence

 of capacity pressures and rising upstream prices, the forecasts that we've

 published recently are for a gradual increase in underlying inflation from

 here on.
Graph 15
Read description
Before I sum up, I should reiterate that my comments today are not meant to add anything

 particularly new to the quite extensive commentary released by the Bank over

 the last two or three weeks.
To summarise the main points. The world economic situation to date has been a favourable

 one for Australia. Current expectations for the world economy are for a third

 year of above-average growth. In Australia, notwithstanding the lower-than

 expected GDP outcome, the evidence is that there has been no shortage of demand

 over recent years, and that businesses are becoming more concerned about constraints

 on supply capacity. A range of factors such as the favourable world environment,

 rising commodity prices, and high levels of confidence domestically, look like

 continuing to support spending growth in the period ahead.
Thank you very much.
Endnote
This is an expanded and updated version of a talk presented on 25 February 2005.
[*]
