BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Payments System Reform: The Australian Experience – Santa Fe
DATE: 04/05/2005
SPEAKER: Santa Fe
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2005/sp-ag-070505.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Payments System Reform: The Australian Experience
Philip Lowe
Assistant Governor (Financial System)
Ian Macfarlane
Governor
Remarks prepared for Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Conference on

 ‘Interchange Fees in Credit and Debit Card Industries:

 What Role for Public Authorities?’
Santa Fe
–
4
May 2005
–
6 May 2005
Download
54KB
Thank you for the opportunity to participate in this excellent conference. It is

 fabulous to see so many people from academia and the public and private sectors

 so interested in the economics of interchange fees. When the Reserve Bank of

 Australia started looking at these fees in 1998 we found it hard to find people

 to exchange ideas with. Fortunately, this is no longer the case, and we would

 like to thank the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City for its role in helping

 bring this about.
Given the title of this session – Central Bank Perspectives and Options –

 these remarks touch on three topics. The first is to explain how the Reserve

 Bank of Australia (RBA) found itself as a regulator of the payments system.

 The second is to outline what we have done, and why we have done it. And the

 third is to make a couple of general observations about how things have gone.
The Reserve Bank as Regulator
Most central banks have some type of broad responsibility for oversight of the payments

 system. Often this responsibility is coupled with regulatory powers relating

 to high-value payments. In Australia, however, the responsibility runs much

 broader than this, encompassing the efficiency and competitiveness of the payments

 system as a whole, including retail payments.
This responsibility was given to the RBA following a wide ranging inquiry into the

 structure of financial regulation in the mid 1990s – the so-called Wallis

 Inquiry. This Inquiry recommended that bank supervision be moved from the Reserve

 Bank to a stand-alone prudential regulator – today known as the Australian

 Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) – but also recommended that the

 RBA be given responsibility for the overall efficiency of the payments system.
This recommendation reflected, in part, recognition of the fact that the RBA was

 already highly enmeshed in the payments system and had considerable expertise

 in what are often highly technical matters. It nevertheless came as a surprise

 to us. We had not been arguing for an extension of our powers and we had not

 been seeking responsibility for payments system efficiency.
In accepting the Committee's recommendations, the Government took the rather unusual

 step of establishing a second board within the Reserve Bank – the Payments

 System Board. This Board is chaired by the Governor and has up to eight members,

 six of whom come from outside the RBA. It is charged with controlling risk

 in the payments system and promoting efficiency and competition. The Board

 has the power to formally designate payment systems, and having done so, can

 then set standards, determine an access regime and give enforceable directions

 to participants in the system. The Government envisaged, however, that these

 powers would be used only if the RBA was not able to achieve voluntary reform

 by industry participants.
So that in a nutshell is what we can do. Now to what we have actually done and why

 we have done it.
Reforms to Credit and Debit Card Systems
Soon after being given its powers, the RBA, in conjunction with the competition regulator,

 undertook a major study of interchange fees and competition in card-based payment

 systems.
[1]
This followed longstanding concerns about the degree of transparency and competition

 in these systems. Out of that study we came to the view that the efficiency

 of the overall system would be improved by cardholders facing relative prices

 for various payments methods that more closely reflected relative costs than

 was then the case. We also formed the view that existing access arrangements

 and restrictions on merchants imposed by the card schemes were stifling competition.
Our main focus has been on the relative costs and prices for transactions on credit

 and debit cards. This reflects the fact that for many people there is a high

 degree of substitutability amongst payments through the credit card, PIN-based

 debit card and the signature-based debit card systems. Our original study showed

 that the PIN-based debit card system had significantly lower operating costs

 than these other two systems. Despite this, cardholders faced much higher prices

 for using this system. At the time of the study, it was not uncommon for transactions

 using a PIN-based debit card to attract a fee of around 40 to 50 cents. In

 contrast, transactions using the signature-based system were not charged, while

 many holders of credit cards were effectively paid each time they used their

 card as a result of the combination of interest-free credit and reward points.

 Not surprisingly, consumers responded to these price signals with spending

 on credit cards growing at rates of 20 to 30 per cent over the second half

 of the 1990s, while spending on PIN-based debit cards grew at an average rate

 of around 10 per cent.
When we looked at why the relative prices were so far out of line with relative resource

 costs it was clear that interchange fees played an important role. In the credit

 card and signature-based debit card systems the average interchange fee was

 around 0.95 per cent of the transaction value, paid to the issuer. In contrast,

 in the PIN-based debit card system we had the somewhat unusual situation in

 which the interchange fee flowed in the opposite direction – that is,

 from the issuer to the acquirer – and averaged around 20 cents per transaction.
Not surprisingly, these different arrangements for interchange fees were reflected

 in pricing to cardholders. In particular, the credit card interchange fees

 were helping subsidise the use of credit cards. As usual though, the subsidy

 has to be paid for by somebody. In the first instance it is the merchants that

 pay through their merchant service fees, but ultimately merchants need to cover

 their costs. One obvious way that they could do this would be to charge customers

 using a credit card a higher price than those using lower-cost forms of payment.

 But, of course, the credit card schemes' so-called
no-surcharge 

 rule
prohibited them from doing this. The end result was that merchants

 had little option other than to charge higher prices to
all
their customers to pay for the relatively large subsidies to credit card users.
In thinking about appropriate regulatory responses to these distorted price signals

 the RBA considered simply requiring that the no-surcharge rule be removed,

 thus allowing merchants to charge customers using a credit card a higher price.

 To the extent that merchants did so, the subsidy that credit card users received

 from their bank could, in principle, have been unwound, at least in part, through

 a higher price at the point of sale.
We saw considerable merit in this approach, and have in fact required that the no-surcharge

 rule be removed from merchant contracts. However, our view has been that removing

 this rule was not enough, by itself, to establish more appropriate price signals

 to cardholders. This largely reflects the considerable customer resistance

 to charging for credit cards. This resistance is hardly surprising given the

 long history over which cardholders have not had to pay higher prices for using

 a credit card. Many merchants fear that the imposition of even a small charge

 would put them at a significant competitive disadvantage. Having removed the

 rule in Australia, we have seen a number of businesses charge for credit cards,

 including some in very competitive industries, but the vast majority of merchants

 have so far chosen not to do so. Over time we expect to see more charging as

 attitudes change, but it is unlikely to happen quickly.
Given this assessment, we felt it necessary to also address interchange fees. These

 fees are not subject to the normal forces of competition and in the RBA's view

 were distorting the use of payment methods in Australia.
Where interchange fees are set by the card schemes – as is the case with credit

 cards – competition between schemes can perversely push interchange fees

 up, not down. The higher is the interchange fee set by the scheme, the higher

 is the subsidy that issuers are able to offer the cardholders to use the scheme's

 cards. Merchants are forced to pay for these subsidies as most are unwilling,

 except in extreme circumstances, to refuse acceptance of credit cards. As the

 US experience demonstrates, the result can be a series of competitive increases

 in fees, with the higher-cost system tending to drive out the lower-cost

 system.
[2]
Where fees are set bilaterally, as in the Australian PIN-based debit card system,

 normal competitive forces also appear to be weak, with fees in this system

 typically having remained unchanged for many years despite significant changes

 in costs and revenues on both the issuing and acquiring sides of the market.
In pursuing reform of interchange fees we initially sought a voluntary reduction

 in these fees in both the credit and debit card systems. It quickly became

 apparent though that MasterCard and Visa would not agree to do so, nor would

 they remove the no-surcharge rule or liberalise access arrangements. This led

 us to first designate the credit card systems and then set two standards: one

 that abolished the no-surcharge rule and one that set a standard for the calculation

 of interchange

 fees.
[3]
The interchange standard has had the effect of reducing the average credit

 card interchange fee from about 0.95 per cent of the transaction value to around

 0.55 per cent. Our understanding is that this is one of the lowest interchange

 fees for these schemes in the world, although given the secrecy still surrounding

 these fees in many countries, it is difficult to be sure!
The standard requires Visa and MasterCard to calculate a benchmark fee, with the

 weighted average of the fees in each scheme to be below the respective benchmarks.

 These benchmarks are based on eligible issuers' costs as set out in the standard.

 We adopted this cost-based approach not because we believed it had particular

 theoretical merit, but rather because it was a pragmatic and transparent way

 of moving to a regime with less distortionary interchange fees. The alternative

 was simply to specify a specific per cent cap on interchange fees. We elected

 not to do this partly because, while we have strong powers, there is some doubt

 as to whether these powers extend to fixing a price – in this case an

 interchange fee.
The lower interchange fees came into effect on 1 November 2003, and almost immediately

 merchant service fees fell by a similar amount as acquirers passed on their

 lower costs; the average merchant service fee on credit cards in Australia

 is now almost exactly 1 per cent. We are confident that these lower costs will

 flow through into lower prices for goods and services, with our calculations

 suggesting that the Consumer Price Index will be 0.1 to 0.2 of a percentage

 point lower than would have otherwise have been the case.
For the domestic PIN-based debit card system the reform process has been more protracted.

 Following discussions with the RBA, the banks took a proposal to the competition

 authority to abolish interchange fees. At the time, we saw this industry-led

 approach as preferable to one in which the RBA used its regulatory powers to

 impose an outcome. The competition authority eventually approved the proposal,

 but it was then successfully challenged in a review tribunal by a group of

 merchants, arguing that there were no net benefits from what was ostensibly

 an illegal collective price fix (that is, a fix at zero). Following the review

 tribunal's decision we came to the view that if progress was to be made then

 it would need to be done by the RBA using its regulatory powers. As a result,

 we designated the system in September 2004 and have recently released proposals,

 which if implemented would likely see the average interchange fee fall from

 around 20 cents to around 5 cents. The fee would remain payable by issuers

 to acquirers.
We have also recently released for consultation proposals to reduce the interchange

 fee in the smaller signature-based debit card system operated by Visa. If implemented

 these proposals would see the interchange fee in that system fall from a percentage-based

 fee averaging around 40 cents currently to a flat fee of around 15 cents.

 We have also proposed requiring that Visa remove the rule that requires a merchant

 to accept Visa debit cards as a condition of accepting Visa credit cards. Similar

 arrangements would apply to other scheme-based debit cards introduced into

 Australia.
In proposing these reforms to the two debit card systems we have been mindful not

 only of the substitution possibilities between credit and debit cards as well

 as other means of payment, but also between different debit card systems. One

 concern has been that if the current interchange fees were to remain in place

 then, over time, issuers of debit cards would find it more attractive to issue

 and promote the signature-based system – in which they
receive
an average interchange fee of 40 cents – at

 the expense of the lower-cost PIN-based system – in which they have to
pay
an interchange fee of 20 cents.
A central issue right through the reform process has been the fact that, by its very

 nature, a credit card offers many cardholders a subsidised method of payment.

 If the balance is paid off by the due date, the cardholder receives a per-transaction

 subsidy equal to the value of the interest-free period, to say nothing of reward

 schemes. The issuers' costs of offering this subsidy are paid for by a combination

 of annual fees on cardholders, interchange fees, and the interest margin on

 those who do not pay their balance off by the due date. While ever the credit

 card product exists as it currently does, this subsidy will remain for a large

 group of cardholders.
At issue is how competing payment methods should be priced in an efficient system

 given the existence of this subsidy. Resolving this issue is far from straightforward.

 Given the complexities involved, our approach has been to move interchange

 fees in what we see as the right direction, rather than to seek the perfect

 solution, whatever that might be, in one step. This gradualist approach however

 has meant that if the current proposals are implemented we will have three

 different interchange standards, each based on different eligible costs. We

 have indicated that, to the extent possible, we would like to move to a more

 consistent approach to the setting of these fees over time and will undertake

 another major review in 2007.
A Couple of General Observations
Finally, a couple of observations about the reform process and the involvement of

 the central bank.
The first observation is that the process has been more difficult and more protracted

 than we initially thought. In a number of cases, achieving voluntary reform

 has proved to be all but impossible. Perhaps this is not surprising because

 there are strong commercial interests at stake and those who see themselves

 as losers from any particular reform typically strenuously oppose that reform.
The reform process has also been subject to legal challenges. In the case of the

 credit card reforms, both MasterCard and Visa took the RBA to court, arguing

 that it had overreached its powers. After a six week hearing, preceded by more

 than eight months of intensive preparation, the challenges were comprehensively

 rejected and MasterCard and Visa were ordered to pay the RBA's costs. The

 real winners from the case were undoubtedly the lawyers and consultants.
Now again we are due in court in three weeks time to defend another challenge. This

 time it is by a group of merchants. While these merchants strongly supported

 the credit card reforms they are opposed to the proposed reforms of the PIN-based

 debit system, given that these reforms are likely to lead to higher merchant

 fees on transactions using this system. We have argued that their objections

 are short-sighted, for as mentioned earlier, if the current arrangements remain

 in place, use of the PIN-based debit system is likely to decline in relative

 terms, with its place being taken by signature-based debit and credit cards,

 both of which are more expensive for the merchants to accept.
The reform process has also been made more difficult by the relatively underdeveloped

 nature of economic theory in the area of interchange fees. In particular, there

 is little guidance as to what constitutes an optimal set of fees in a world

 where there are multiple competing payments systems each with different costs

 at the issuing and acquiring ends and where, in at least one payment system,

 there is an inherent subsidy to cardholders. In addition, at the empirical

 level, there is a dearth of comprehensive studies on the degree of substitutability

 between various payment methods. This has meant that we have had to proceed

 carefully, collecting evidence where it exists and making informed judgements

 where the evidence is incomplete.
The second general observation relates to the role of a central bank in all of this.

 It is fair to say that having specific payment system legislation with responsibility

 assigned to the central bank has led to greater scrutiny than might otherwise

 have been the case. Given our experience and the difficulties of unravelling

 and understanding the details of the payments system there would appear to

 be merit in having an institution with on-going responsibility for efficiency,

 with that institution being able to act proactively, rather than just reactively

 in response to breaches of competition law.
Another positive aspect of our arrangements has been the Board process. Not only

 do the external members bring considerable expertise, but the fact that decisions

 are taken by a Board gives those decisions some extra credibility in the eyes

 of the public. The formal processes associated with the Board have also provided

 a useful internal discipline.
One concern sometimes expressed about central bank involvement in reform of retail

 payments systems is that controversy surrounding the process has the potential

 to damage the bank's reputation, harming its ability to successfully pursue

 its other responsibilities. This has not been an issue in Australia, although

 there certainly has been plenty of controversy!
None of this though means that the case for giving the central bank, rather than

 another institution, responsibility for the efficiency of the payments system

 is compelling one way or the other. What is compelling is that someone has

 this responsibility and that it be taken seriously.
Thank you.
Endnotes
See Australian Competition and Consumer Commission and Reserve Bank of Australia

 (2000). The RBA has subsequently published a large number of documents dealing

 with various aspects of the payments system (see references for details).
[1]
For further details see Macfarlane (2005).
[2]
The RBA also established an access regime under which the card schemes are not permitted

 to discriminate against potential new entrants based on whether or not they

 are a traditional deposit-taking institution or whether or not they will

 be only an issuer (or acquirer) of credit cards.
[3]
References
[
*
]
Australian Competition and Consumer Commission and Reserve Bank of Australia (2000),

 ‘
Debit and Credit Card Schemes in Australia: A Study of Interchange Fees and Access
’.
Lowe, PW (2005), ‘
Reform of the Payments System
’,

 address to Visa International Australia and New Zealand Member Forum, Werribee,

 Reserve Bank of Australia
Bulletin
, March, pp 9–18.
Macfarlane, IJ (2005), ‘
Gresham's Law of Payments
’,

 address to AIBF Industry Forum, Sydney, Reserve Bank of Australia
Bulletin
,

 April, pp 8–13.
Reserve Bank of Australia (1999-2004), Payments System Board Annual Reports.
Reserve Bank of Australia (2001),
Reform of Credit Card Schemes in Australia, I: A Consultation Document
.
Reserve Bank of Australia (2001),
Reform of Credit Card Schemes in Australia, II: Commissioned Report
.
Reserve Bank of Australia (2001),
Reform of Credit Card Schemes in Australia, III: Submissions Received

 (
Volumes I
and
II
)
Reserve Bank of Australia (2002),
Reform of Credit Card Schemes in Australia, IV:

 Final Reforms and Regulation Impact Statement
.
Reserve Bank of Australia (2004),
Reasons for the Decision to Designate the EFTPOS Payment System
,

 Media Release No:
2004–13
.
Reserve Bank of Australia (2004),
‘Submission by the Reserve Bank of Australia to the Australian Competition Tribunal’
(on the Collective Setting of EFTPOS Interchange Fees)
.
Reserve Bank of Australia (2004), ‘
Merchant Service Fees for Credit Cards
’,

 Reserve Bank of Australia
Bulletin,
July, pp 10–13.
Reserve Bank of Australia (2005), ‘
Payments System Reform
’,

 Media Release No: 2005-02.
Reserve Bank of Australia (2005),
Reform of the EFTPOS and Visa Debit Systems in Australia,

 A Consultation Document
.
[*]
All references are available on the Reserve Bank of Australia's website <https://www.rba.gov.au>.
