BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Innovation and Governance of Payment Systems – Sydney
DATE: 16/09/2005
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2005/sp-ag-160905.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Innovation and Governance of Payment Systems
Philip Lowe
Assistant Governor (Financial System)
Address to Banktech.05 Conference
Sydney
–
16 September 2005
Download
72KB
It is a pleasure to be here this morning to talk about reform of the Australian payments

 system. Throughout the reform process, the Reserve Bank has been keen to keep

 an open dialogue with all interested parties, and I would like to thank the

 organisers of the Banktech conference for giving me the opportunity to continue

 that dialogue today.
The Reform Process to Date
At its heart, the reform process has been about delivering a more efficient and competitive

 payments system for all users of the system.
An important element of this process has been removing restrictions that limit the

 behaviour of various users of the payments system, and thus distort competition.

 Here the Bank has addressed restrictions on entry to the credit card schemes,

 restrictions imposed by the card schemes that limited the choices available

 to merchants, and restrictions on information. The result is that we now have

 more competition in the system, more appropriate price signals to cardholders,

 and better information for all users of the payments system.
A second element of the reform process has addressed interchange fees – the

 fees paid between a cardholder's bank and a merchant's bank whenever a credit

 or debit card is used to make a payment. There are limited competitive forces

 acting on these fees, and in the Bank's view, there are few prospects of such

 forces emerging within the foreseeable future. At the same time, the way these

 fees have been historically configured has had the effect of artificially encouraging

 the use of credit cards, at the expense of debit cards. Given the higher costs

 associated with credit card payments, the result has been that we have paid

 higher prices for goods and services than we needed to. By requiring that interchange

 fees be reduced in the Bankcard, MasterCard and Visa schemes, the Bank's reforms

 have reduced merchant costs by around $580 million over the past year,

 and this cost saving is now flowing through into lower goods and services prices.
As many of you may be aware, the Reserve Bank's decision to designate the EFTPOS

 system, and thus open the door to potential regulation of interchange fees

 in that system, has been challenged by a group of merchants in the Federal

 Court. The case was heard in May and June this year, and the Bank has indicated

 that it will not take any final decisions about the regulation of interchange

 fees in either the EFTPOS or Visa Debit systems until after the outcome of

 the court case is known.
So today, instead of talking about interchange fees in the credit and debit card

 systems, I would like to address an issue that so far has received relatively

 little attention in debates about payments system reform. And this is the issue

 of governance and innovation in the payments system.
This issue is important, for if our payments system is to deliver efficient outcomes

 over time, innovation and technical change are inevitably required. And because

 with existing technologies and practices so many elements of the payments system

 require collective action, the way the system is governed, and the way collective

 decisions are made, can have an important influence on how the system evolves.

 In the remainder of my talk, therefore, I would like to make some general observations

 about the incentives to invest in payment systems, the way those incentives

 can be affected by the architecture of the system, and the importance of appropriate

 procedures for making decisions.
The Incentive to Invest
In most industries, firms make investment decisions without co-ordinating with competing

 firms, and in most cases one can be reasonably confident that the outcomes

 are in the public interest. Unfortunately, in payment systems things are not

 always so straightforward, as some decisions about investment and the architecture

 of the system need to be made collectively. This can pose at least three inter-related

 difficulties. These difficulties arise not just in Australia, but in payment

 systems around the world.
The first is that an existing participant in the system may be able to effectively

 block or delay an investment decision, or a change to processes, that needs

 collective approval. It may choose to do this for a variety of reasons, including

 being at a different point in its capital expenditure cycle to other participants,

 or having different strategic interests. There seems to have been some element

 of this in the decision a year or so ago to abandon plans to introduce PIN

 authorisation of credit card transactions.
The second potential difficulty is that the collective incentive to invest or innovate

 may be dulled because such investment sometimes offers little competitive advantage.

 One reason for this is that if all institutions are required to adopt the new

 technology or process simultaneously, there may be little competitive advantage

 generated for any one institution in doing so. While the investment may allow

 all institutions to offer payment services to their customers at lower prices,

 the benefit of this to any individual institution is diminished if all competing

 institutions do likewise at the same time. Another reason is that a technical

 change can, under some circumstances, make it easier for new firms to enter.

 In this case, an investment could be doubly unattractive – offering no

 competitive advantage against existing institutions, and increasing competition

 through allowing new entrants! The same issues, obviously, do not typically

 arise in other markets where competitors do not need to co-operate.
A third potential difficulty with decision making in payment systems arises if institutions

 are concerned that during the process of discussing the various options they

 might reveal critical information about their own business strategies. As a

 result, there may be a reluctance to have meaningful dialogue among competitors.

 This reluctance will be compounded if participants are concerned that such

 dialogue might be viewed unfavourably by competition authorities.
An illustration of the types of issues that can arise when collective decision-making

 is necessary is provided by the process of reforming cheque clearing times

 in Australia. In the early 1990s, the public became increasingly frustrated

 with the five business days that it typically took before the proceeds of a

 deposited cheque were available. Financial institutions responded to this pressure,

 but struggled to reach an agreement about what should be done. While adopting

 new processes that would allow funds to be made available earlier represented

 a significant benefit to businesses and consumers, doing so gave no individual

 bank a competitive advantage if all banks could do the same. Further, given

 the co-operative nature of cheque clearing, no bank could unilaterally offer

 to make funds available earlier to its customers without taking on additional

 risk. All up, it took six years and considerable prompting by the Reserve Bank

 to put the new arrangements in place!
I would like to make it clear that none of these difficulties necessarily mean that

 there will generally be too little innovation in payment systems, or that investment

 will be misdirected. Clearly, in many situations if institutions perceive a

 commercial benefit from an investment, they will undertake that investment.

 A good example of this is the resources that banks have spent on internet banking

 packages that have made it much easier, and in many cases, cheaper, for customers

 to make payments. However, the very real potential for the difficulties I have

 just discussed to affect outcomes means that it is reasonable to ask whether

 the processes that we currently have for making decisions are always working

 in the best interests of consumers of financial services.
Overall, I think it is fair to say that Australia has a reasonable record in terms

 of payments system innovation, although clearly some of our systems are no

 longer at the cutting edge. Notwithstanding this generally positive record,

 over recent years a number of parties have indicated to the Bank that they

 have considerable difficulty in gaining access to the system, and that, in

 some cases, the existing architecture and decision-making processes are inhibiting

 further innovation. Given this, I would like to make a few remarks about that

 architecture and the decision-making processes.
Architecture
In terms of architecture, payment systems can be classified into two broad groups

 – those that are built around
bilateral
contracts and technical links between financial institutions and those that are more

 centralised, typically with a business entity at the core of a
hub-and-spoke
system. In bilateral systems, each of the main participants will typically

 have a contract with each of the other main participants, and will exchange

 messages with each other through direct technical links. In the more centralised

 systems, messages pass through a central point and there is no need for each

 participant to negotiate contracts and establish physical connections with

 other participants.
In Australia, the EFTPOS system, the cheque system, the ATM system and the direct

 credit and debit systems all operate on a bilateral basis, while the credit

 card and BPay systems operate under the hub-and-spoke model. This heavy reliance

 on bilateral arrangements in Australia is somewhat unusual compared to the

 arrangements in many other countries, where systems with more centralisation

 are common.
Bilateral arrangements clearly offer some advantages. In some cases, they may be

 cheaper to operate and offer an extra degree of resilience, and they may also

 help in the development phase of a system. If, for instance, it is difficult

 to get multiple institutions to agree to develop a comprehensive system, an

 alternative is for two institutions to agree to exchange payments with one

 another and thus provide services to those who have accounts with either of

 them. Over time, if the arrangement is successful, other institutions may seek

 to establish similar bilateral connections, and in this way a network of bilateral

 connections can develop. In a sense, both the ATM and EFTPOS systems developed

 in this way.
Bilateral systems, however, also pose some particular challenges.
The first of these is that gaining access to these systems can be more problematic

 than gaining access to centralised systems. In a bilateral system, a new participant

 can be faced with the difficulty of negotiating bilateral arrangements with

 all existing participants. These existing participants often have little incentive

 to establish new connections with outsiders within a reasonable time frame,

 or at a reasonable cost, particularly if the new entrant is a competitor. The

 alternative for a new entrant is to use the ‘gateway’ service of a single existing

 participant, but this too can create difficulties, including additional costs.

 Among these difficulties is that the institution providing the gateway service

 may have little incentive to offer competitive pricing if it is in competition

 with the new entrant in parts of the payments system. In contrast, gaining

 access to a centralised system is often more straightforward. In particular,

 a new participant needs only to connect to the central hub, and does not need

 to negotiate bilaterally with its competitors.
A second challenge is that there is often no single entity responsible for bilateral

 systems and, as a result, there is very little system-wide promotion of these

 systems; where promotion does occur, it is usually done so by a single financial

 institution.
A third is that bilateral arrangements may not be particularly conducive to technological

 innovation, although they may work very well in terms of the day-to-day operation

 of the system once it is established. This is not simply a result of the different

 access and promotion arrangements, but also reflects the decision-making process

 among existing participants. If there is not a strong central co-ordinator

 of the system, with an incentive to promote the system and the ability to influence

 collective technology decisions, innovation in the system can be delayed, partly

 for the reasons that I discussed earlier.
Of course, none of these challenges mean that bilateral systems are necessarily inferior

 to more centralised systems. They do, however, mean that careful thought needs

 to be given to the issues of access and innovation, and particularly the governance

 arrangements in these systems. It is to this issue that I would now like to

 turn.
Governance
Some time ago, the various participants in Australia's bilateral payment systems

 recognised that there were advantages in establishing a common set of basic

 rules and procedures that applied to bilateral arrangements. These rules and

 procedures are now overseen by the various management committees of the Australian

 Payments Clearing Association – or APCA. They cover such things as message

 formats, exchange times, security arrangements, cheque formats, and rules that

 apply if an institution fails to settle. These rules and procedures have contributed

 to the efficiency and safety of the system, and have been recognised as doing

 so by the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission (ACCC), which has

 judged that the rules provide a net public benefit.
APCA itself, as an organisation, has relatively little authority, with the decision-making

 powers resting in the hands of the member institutions that make up the Board

 and the various management committees. Membership of the committees and voting

 rights are largely determined by market shares and are essentially limited

 to individuals directly employed by one of the existing participants. There

 is considerable overlap in the institutional membership of the various committees

 and, partly as consequence, there is little collective promotion of one system

 over another. In addition, a major change to the rules and procedures can only

 occur if the vast bulk of institutions agree to make the change, with the largest

 institutions effectively able to block some outcomes. Finally, APCA has little

 power to enforce decisions.
It is easy to see how this structure evolved. The various committees were designed

 to introduce more consistent standards and procedures into payments clearing

 and thus ensure that the existing bilateral clearing arrangements work effectively.

 Given this role, one can see how it might make sense to restrict membership

 to those who are party to the arrangements, link voting rights to market shares,

 give significant power to the largest institutions, and to give the APCA management

 relatively little power compared to its members.
While these arrangements have many useful features and have worked reasonably well

 over a number of years, I would like to pose the question of whether some alternative

 set of arrangements may better serve the long-run interests of users of the

 payments system. In particular, is there a case for a private-sector central

 body that has a broader mandate than simply being the keeper of the rules?

 This mandate could include promotion of various payment systems, the facilitation

 of access, and provision of leadership on some technology issues.
Over the past year or so, there has been a modest step in this direction with some

 of APCA's members developing an access code for the EFTPOS system. Under the

 code, a new participant will have the right to connect to existing participants

 within a specified time, and at a specified maximum cost, provided they meet

 certain technical requirements. This code was developed following pressure

 from both the ACCC and the Reserve Bank, and will represent a significant improvement

 over current arrangements. I might add that there may be a case for similar

 codes to be developed for the other bilateral systems, and in particular the

 ATM system and the direct entry system.
While the Bank has indicated its in-principle agreement to the EFTPOS access code,

 and is working with APCA on its implementation, the process has not been an

 easy or straightforward one. Some of the existing institutions sought to impose

 more stringent conditions than the Bank felt appropriate, with a satisfactory

 outcome only being reached after the Bank indicated it would consider imposing

 an access regime. While it is encouraging to see that the industry finally

 developed an acceptable proposal, the process illustrates some of the potential

 problems in a regime in which access arrangements are heavily influenced by

 existing participants.
Conclusion
I would like to conclude by making two points.
The first is that ongoing improvement in the technology used in Australia's payments

 system is imperative to improving the efficiency of the system over time. While

 the payments system serves most of its users well, there is the scope for providers

 of payment services to offer users of those services more flexibility and more

 choice, and to do so at lower cost.
The second is that I would encourage those in the industry to think seriously about

 how the current architecture and decision-making arrangements might evolve

 over time. Over the coming year, the Reserve Bank will be looking at these

 issues more closely. As we do so, I hope that we can continue the dialogue

 with both users and providers of payment services, and we look forward to hearing

 from all interested parties on these important issues.
Thank you.
