BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Risk Measurement – A Central Bank Perspective – Melbourne
DATE: 05/09/2006
SPEAKER: Melbourne
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2006/sp-ag-050906.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Risk Measurement – A Central Bank Perspective
Philip Lowe
Assistant Governor (Financial System)
Talk to 59
th
International Banking Summer School
Melbourne
–
5 September 2006
Download
70KB
banking, debt, households, risk and uncertainty
Thank you very much for the invitation to speak tonight. The International Banking

 Summer School has a long and proud tradition, and I am delighted to be part

 of that tradition tonight.
It was with some trepidation though that I accepted the invitation, given that you

 have already had almost two weeks of discussion covering almost every area

 of modern banking. But when I looked at the program, I thought I saw a gap

 that I could usefully fill – and that was to provide a central banker's

 perspective on at least one of the important issues that you have been discussing.

 And that issue is risk measurement.
Now on many issues, the perspectives of central bankers and bankers in the private

 sector are likely to be very similar. We both want a strong and stable economy;

 we both want deep and liquid capital markets; we both want healthy financial

 institutions; and we both want a robust payments system. But, of course,

 there are also areas where our perspectives are likely to differ, at least

 at the margin. One of these is how we think about risk.
No doubt, many of you spend much of your time measuring and managing risks in your

 own institutions. I hope though it comes as no surprise to you that central

 banks also spend a lot of time thinking about risk, and how to measure it.

 For central banks – like the Reserve Bank of Australia – that

 do not have supervisory responsibilities, the focus is on trying to assess

 risk in the financial system as a whole rather than measuring risk in individual

 institutions.
The central theme of my talk tonight is that this whole-of-system focus – with

 its emphasis on structural change and with its emphasis on common exposures

 across the system – can be just as relevant for managers in individual

 institutions as it is for central banks.
I would like to make it clear though that in raising this issue of risk measurement,

 and highlighting possible differences in perspective, it is not my intention

 to argue that one particular perspective is right, and another is wrong. Rather,

 I raise the issue with the more modest goal of simply sharing perspectives,

 in the hope that the better we understand one another, the better will be

 the dialogue between us.
Risk Measurement
As you are no doubt aware, most central banks have some type of broad responsibility

 for stability of the financial system. As part of fulfilling this responsibility,

 many – including the Reserve Bank of Australia – publish a
Financial

 Stability Review
on a regular basis. Having read a number of these

 reviews over recent months, many seem to be struggling with the same underlying

 issue – how to measure risk in a financial system that is undergoing

 rapid structural change.
Structural Change
While there are many aspects to this structural change, I would like to draw your

 attention to just two.
The first is the rapid transformation of household balance sheets. This transformation

 has a number of important dimensions, of which perhaps the most significant

 is the ‘grossing-up’ of balance sheets. Many of your banks have

 no doubt benefited significantly from this process, with very strong demand

 for housing finance right across the world. Debt levels have risen considerably

 in many countries, and so too has the asset side of the balance sheet, with

 house prices and households’ holdings of financial assets increasing

 sharply. To give you one example of this transformation, in 1995, the

 Australian household sector held debt equivalent to 66 per cent of its

 annual disposable income. Today, the figure is 153 per cent. The changes on

 the asset side of the balance sheet have been larger still, with the net worth

 of the household sector now equivalent to over six times annual income, up

 from four times annual income a decade ago.
Another dimension of this transformation of balance sheets is the significant increase

 in households’ holdings of market-linked financial assets. As I am sure

 many of you are acutely aware, gone are the days when bank deposits were seen

 as the logical place for household savings. Today, households hold a much

 more diverse array of financial assets, including equities, corporate bonds

 and market-linked pension funds. In Australia, CDOs have even been marketed

 directly to the household sector. This general trend has no doubt created

 a range of opportunities for many of your banks, as you compete to offer customers

 innovative investment products.
The second structural change that I would like to draw your attention to is the ever-increasing

 role of wholesale financial markets – both domestically and internationally.

 These markets have become important to how many of you fund the growth in

 your balance sheets, and they play a central role in how you manage the risk

 on those balance sheets. Gone are the days when credit risk, for example,

 was held permanently on the balance sheets of your banks. Now it is actively

 traded in a range of markets; the growth of asset securitisation and credit

 derivatives are perhaps the best examples of this change. As I will discuss

 in a moment, an important consequence of this structural change is an increase

 in the interdependencies within the financial system – in a sense we

 have all become jointly dependent upon the smooth operation of these markets

 for the smooth operation of our own institutions.
These two structural changes – to household balance sheets and the increased

 reliance on markets – pose challenging questions to anyone trying to

 measure and understand risk: How are households with large holdings of market-linked

 assets going to behave during a period of market turbulence? How has the sensitivity

 of the household sector to bad economic news changed as a result of higher

 debt levels? Are markets pricing credit risk appropriately? Do those investors

 who now hold the credit risk understand exactly what they are holding?
It will not surprise you to hear that central banks spend a lot of time thinking

 about these and related questions. And, I hope that you do as well.
These questions are, however, fundamentally difficult to answer.
One reason for this is that structural change often means that the past is not a

 good guide to the future.
The history of monetary policy provides a good example of this general point. In

 the 1970s and 1980s, central banks believed that if they controlled the money

 supply then they would control inflation and output growth. This belief was

 bolstered by many studies that demonstrated a strong link between the money

 supply on the one hand, and inflation and output on the other. But structural

 change in the financial system meant that this relationship inevitably broke

 down. As new financial institutions emerged and new products were developed,

 the relationships of the past simply did not stand up. The result, as we all

 know, was a period of unexpectedly high inflation and disappointing economic

 outcomes.
So to repeat the key point here: relying on past relationships – no matter

 how well they are estimated – is problematic in a period of rapid structural

 change. Similarly, relying upon past returns as a good guide to future returns

 also poses problems. The difficulties are compounded if the period over which

 relationships are estimated, or returns calculated, does not contain an economic

 downturn. In Australia, this is increasingly becoming an issue, with the Australian

 economy now in its fifteenth year of uninterrupted expansion.
This observation about structural change and the stability of relationships is highly

 relevant to current discussions about the relationship between loan arrears,

 interest rates and unemployment in a number of countries. It is not unreasonable

 to conjecture that the general easing of credit standards has significantly

 changed the relationship between these variables. At any given level of unemployment

 and interest rates, the arrears rate is likely to be higher than it has been

 in the past. Indeed, we are currently seeing some evidence of this in Australia,

 with mortgage arrears rising in a strong economy. A lender that ignored this

 change, and relied heavily on historical data to assess risk in its mortgage

 portfolio is likely to find that in the next economic downturn, default rates

 are much higher than was predicted. This is especially likely to be so if

 the lender is relying on data primarily from the long expansion starting in

 the early 1990s.
Scenario analysis and common exposures
So how should one go about measuring risk in a world of structural change?
Again, this is a difficult question, and there are no simple answers. One possibility

 is to undertake wide-ranging scenario analysis. In particular, there are likely

 to be benefits in financial institutions spending more resources on analysing

 how they would perform under a range of adverse economic scenarios.
One advantage of conducting such analysis is that it can prompt you to think more

 concretely about the implications of structural changes in the financial system.

 I know from my own experience that when you are designing scenarios you are

 often forced to reflect upon the broad developments in both the financial

 system and the economy, and to ask what could plausibly go wrong. In

 the context of a private bank, this approach would naturally draw those responsible

 for managing risk into thinking about not just the structure of the institution's

 own balance sheet, but also the structure of the other balance sheets in the

 economy.
This need to look beyond one's own balance sheet is perhaps an obvious point

 but it is an important one. The credit quality of an individual bank's

 own loan portfolio is dependent upon what is going on elsewhere in the system.

 If other institutions are lowering credit standards and rapidly expanding

 credit to a particular sector, then everyone's loans become more risky,

 even those loans made by institutions that have not lowered their credit standards.

 This is especially so if the rapid credit growth has led to the balance sheets

 of a large number of borrowers to become more vulnerable to a change in economic

 conditions. If such a change did occur, and high debt levels created strong

 financial headwinds, the credit quality of all lenders would no doubt be affected.
There are, of course, other examples of this idea that the risk in one's own

 balance sheet depends upon the behaviour of other balance sheets in the financial

 system. The ability of a bank to trade credit risk, for example, could

 be adversely affected by poor decisions by another institution, particularly

 if those poor decisions led to a period of market turbulence. Similarly,

 the ability of a bank to fund itself in a particular market could be adversely

 affected if another bank in the same market experienced difficulties.
The point here is that in measuring risk, one needs to be aware of what is going

 on in the financial system as a whole. It is not enough to look at what is

 going on in one's own balance sheet. Common exposures across the financial

 system matter.
As I mentioned, institutions have come to rely increasingly on markets to manage

 their portfolios, and as a result, the interdependencies in the system have

 increased. The global nature of many of these markets adds to these interdependencies.

 If something goes wrong in one important market, everyone can be affected,

 even those who are innocent bystanders. This means that we all need to be

 aware of potential imbalances building in markets, and the possibility that

 over‑exuberance can lead to a day of reckoning.
I would like to make a couple more remarks about the benefits of scenario analysis,

 but before I do so I would like to give you one concrete example of the importance

 of thinking about both structural change and common exposures. This

 example draws upon the recent experience in Australia where we have had an

 unprecedented boom in house prices and household credit.
An Example
First some basic facts. Between 1996 and 2003, house prices in Australia increased

 by 150 per cent, and household debt by 195 per cent. By 2003, both house

 prices and housing debt were increasing at annual rates of around 20 per cent. 

 The boom was characterised by a strong speculative element, with households

 buying rental properties accounting for almost half of all housing loan approvals

 in 2003. This strong investor appetite was despite the average gross

 rental yield – annual rent divided by the value of the property –

 falling to around 3 per cent for houses.
Many lenders judged these developments to be highly favourable – credit growth

 was strong, collateral values were rising and the rates of mortgage arrears

 were at historical lows.
The RBA viewed the situation a little differently. It was concerned that if

 the rapid increases in credit and house prices continued, there was the potential

 for quite large corrections in house prices and household behaviour at some

 point in the future. The issue was not so much that these adjustments would

 imperil the health of financial institutions, but rather that they would lead

 to a period of protracted economic weakness, as households collectively restructured

 their balance sheets.
In effect, the millions of individual borrowing decisions by households and the millions

 of lending decisions by banks and other lenders had pushed the economy to

 the point where a combination of further rapid increase in house prices and

 debt posed considerable macroeconomic risks. Given this assessment,

 the RBA made its concerns widely known. It drew lenders’ attention

 to the change in the structure of the household sector's balance sheet,

 and the risks that this posed. And it also drew households’ attention

 to the likelihood that the then current trends in house prices were not sustainable.
As I said, the primary concern was not that these developments posed a threat to

 the health of individual financial institutions. It is fair to say that changes

 to the structure of banks’ portfolios and the improvements in credit

 risk management over the past decade have fundamentally improved the resilience

 of the banking sector. It is, however, at the same time important to recognise

 that this increased resilience does not mean that the economy has become immune

 to financial shocks.
In the 1980s and 1990s, the stereotypical financial shock worked through financial

 institutions – banks incurred losses, they restricted the supply of

 credit and this created financial headwinds that retarded economic growth.

 In today's world the same process
could
conceivably occur, but the changes in the structure of the

 financial system make it much less likely. Instead the process is more likely

 to work through balance sheets of the non-financial sector. A deterioration

 in economic climate is more likely to be amplified by households (and to a

 lesser extent businesses) moving to less risky assets and restructuring their

 balance sheets, rather than by major problems in financial institutions. The

 result, nonetheless, could still be strong financial headwinds, causing a

 protracted period of sub-par economic growth.
In summary, the structural changes in the housing market and household balance sheets

 between 1996 and 2003 had greatly increased the economy's exposure to

 a common factor – that is, to the health of household finances. In the

 RBA's view, these developments were central to any assessment of financial

 risks to the Australian economy.
A few moments ago I talked briefly about the usefulness of scenario analysis in assessing

 risks in a world of structural change. The same applies to assessing

 risks where there are significant common exposures in the financial system.

 Where significant common exposures exist, we need to be conscious not only

 of our own decisions, but also of the decisions of all those around us. Scenario

 analysis can provide a framework for this to be done. Another advantage of

 this approach is that it allows all those who might have insights into the

 measurement and management of risk – the senior management, the dealing

 staff, the economists and the quantitative risk managers – to be

 part of this process.
Inevitably, using scenario analysis requires more expert judgment on behalf of those

 charged with managing risk than is sometimes the case with more conventional

 approaches. Some of you may see this as a downside of this approach, although

 I see it as a strength. In a world subject to structural change and increasing

 interdependencies, there seems to be no substitute for expert judgment in

 the risk assessment and management process. Conducting scenario analysis is

 one way of providing the right framework within which this judgment is exercised.
In some countries, steps have already been taken down this path. This has been partly

 prompted by the stress tests conducted as part of the IMF's Financial

 Sector Assessment Program. In my view there is merit in making such stress

 tests a permanent part of the risk measurement process.
Australia is one of those countries that has recently undertaken a major stress test

 exercise. This exercise was a valuable learning experience for all those involved

 and provided an important vehicle for a dialogue between the banking industry

 and the authorities about the nature of risks in both individual institutions’

 balance sheets and the system as a whole. It is an exercise that we are keen

 to repeat in the future.
Conclusion
So let me try to bring this discussion to a close.
I would like to leave you with three key interrelated points.
The first is that changes to the structure of the financial system and balance sheets

 can fundamentally change historical relationships. We ignore these changes

 at our peril.
The second is that common exposures across financial institutions matter a lot, not

 only to the riskiness of an individual institution, but also to the economy

 as a whole. The increased reliance on markets increases these common

 exposures, as does the sustained increase in borrowing by the household sector. 

 Again, we ignore these common exposures at our peril.
And third, scenario analysis may have an important role to play in assessing risks

 in a world of structural change and significant common exposures. This type

 of analysis encourages one to focus on the broad structural forces within

 the financial system. Ultimately, understanding these forces is as important

 to the successful management of a financial institution, as it is to a central

 bank in pursuing its responsibilities for monetary and financial stability.
Thank you for your time this evening.
