BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Talk to AIG ‘Economy 2006’ – Sydney
DATE: 02/03/2006
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2006/sp-so-020306.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Talk to AIG ‘Economy 2006’
Tony Richards
Head of Economic Analysis Department
Address to Australian Industry Group

 Economy 2006

 Forecasting Industry Prospects Forum
Sydney
–
2 March 2006
Good morning and thank you for the invitation to participate in this conference.
As you may know, the Reserve Bank has an extensive liaison program which operates

 in all states and territories. Each month, we meet with around 100 firms and

 organisations to learn about developments in different regions and industries.

 We combine this with information from a wide range of statistics to gain a

 deeper understanding of trends in the economy. We are also fortunate to be

 able to rely on a range of business surveys, including some from AIG, in this

 process.
Over the past three weeks, the Bank has provided several assessments of recent economic

 developments and the policy outlook, in particular in our quarterly
Statement on Monetary Policy
and the Governor's parliamentary testimony. Our assessment of the economy remains

 little changed from those two earlier assessments, so my talk today is not

 intended to modify them. However, some important data have become available

 since then, and I will touch on these as I discuss some aspects of recent developments

 and the economic outlook. But nothing I say should be interpreted as altering

 the policy outlook provided by the Bank during February.
Let me begin with the world economy. The world economy is now in its fifth year of

 recovery from the 2001 recession. We can illustrate this with a graph for the

 average GDP growth rates in Australia's major export destinations.
Graph 1
Based on the experience of earlier recoveries, there is every reason to think that

 this global recovery still has further to run. Most importantly, the world

 economy still appears to have a fair bit of spare capacity, in terms of both

 labour and capital. So it is not surprising that global growth forecasts for

 2006 and 2007 suggest a continuation of above-average growth.
Graph 2
It is noteworthy that the higher level of oil prices relative to a few years ago

 does not appear to have had much impact on growth outcomes or forecasts. One

 reason is that the strength in oil prices is not the result of a cut in global

 supply, as occurred in the two episodes in the 1970s. That is, it is not a

 negative supply shock for the world economy. Instead, the increases in prices

 have been, in large part, a reflection of the growth in demand for oil, which

 is driven by the strength of the world economy.
Another relevant fact is that oil is a smaller component of total spending than it

 was at earlier times. This is true for many countries, but we can illustrate

 it for Australia with a graph that shows spending on oil as a proportion of

 total spending in the economy. The reduced importance of oil relative to the

 late 1970s and early 1980s reflects two facts. First, the economy uses less

 oil to produce each unit of output than previously: that is, we have become

 more efficient users of energy. Second, despite the price increases over the

 past few years that have taken prices to around US$60 per barrel, oil is not

 as expensive in
real
terms (that is, relative to other goods and services), as it

 was 25 years ago when oil was trading at around US$35 per barrel.
Graph 3
The higher level of oil prices has not resulted in any substantial pick-up in global

 inflation. Headline CPI inflation in the major economies has only picked

 up a little, and core inflation rates have been fairly stable. The maintenance

 of low inflation is quite different to the experience of the 1970s.
But there has been significant inflation in global commodity prices, which is a positive

 development for an economy like Australia. You will all be familiar with the

 large increases in coal and iron ore prices that have occurred over the past

 couple of years. But the strength in commodity prices is much broader than

 this. Base metals prices have nearly doubled over the past three years. And

 rural commodity prices have risen by 17 per cent over the past year. Reflecting

 these increases, the Reserve Bank's index of commodity prices is now at the

 highest level in the 24 years for which we have data.
Graph 4
This strength in the prices of commodities has occurred at the same time as global

 prices for many manufactured goods have actually fallen. The result is that

 the terms of trade, which are the ratio of our export prices to our import

 prices, have strengthened very markedly in recent years. The rise in this ratio

 is equivalent to an increase in Australia's real income. As a nation, we can

 buy more goods and services than previously.
Graph 5
The expansionary impact of higher commodity prices and the stronger terms of trade

 occurs through several channels. Higher prices flow through into higher profits

 for resources companies, which accrue to both domestic and foreign shareholders.

 They also boost tax and royalty revenues to federal and state governments.

 And they lead to higher investment in new resource projects which have multiplier

 effects on the domestic economy.
The benefits accrue all through the economy. Most obviously they have resulted in

 boom conditions in parts of Western Australia, Queensland and the Northern

 Territory where resources are located. But people in other regions benefit

 too. People in Sydney or Melbourne or Adelaide hold shares in resources companies,

 either directly or through their superannuation funds. Firms providing manufactured

 goods or professional services to the resources companies may be located in

 these cities rather than in the resource rich areas. And even if the increase

 in the terms of trade results in an appreciation of the exchange rate, which

 may hurt import-competing firms, it results in lower import prices which benefit

 people all over the country.
Now let me turn to some recent data on the domestic economy. The broadest measures

 of production and spending in the economy come from the national accounts,

 which were released yesterday for the December quarter. GDP increased by 0.5 per

 cent in last quarter of 2005, and year-ended growth was 2.7 per cent.

 Domestic spending rose solidly in the quarter, reflecting strong growth in

 business investment and public demand, and moderate growth in household consumption,

 which more than offset a further decline in dwelling investment. Although exports

 picked up in the quarter, the growth was again outpaced by solid growth in

 imports. As a result, growth in real spending in the Australian economy has

 continued to run ahead of growth in production. This partly reflects the expansionary

 effects of the increases in the terms of trade.
Graph 6
The national accounts and the broader flow of recent economic data present a picture

 of strong growth in spending by businesses, and relatively subdued growth in

 spending by households. Investment spending by businesses has historically

 been quite volatile, but by any measure the recent growth is rapid. In contrast,

 spending by households (which is represented here as the sum of household consumption

 spending and spending on dwelling investment) is traditionally much more stable

 (though this is partly due to the way that implicit rent from the housing stock

 is treated). There was a long period of fairly strong growth in household spending

 (in both real and nominal terms) over most of 1997–2003. However, there

 has been a fairly notable slowing more recently. This reflects both the fall

 in investment in housing and a slowing in the growth of consumption spending.
Graph 7
The recent divergences in the two sectors are also apparent in data for household

 and business borrowings from banks and other lenders. These show that growth

 in credit to households was well above growth in credit to businesses for the

 period from 1998 to 2004. However, the growth of lending to households has

 recently slowed significantly, and lending to businesses has picked up.
Graph 8
The slowdown in the growth of household spending and borrowing corresponds to the

 period of the sharp slowing in growth of house prices. There was a long boom

 in house prices over 1996–2003, with average nationwide house prices

 growing at an annual rate of nearly 20 per cent in the last two years

 to the end of 2003. Since then, nationwide prices have been essentially flat.
Graph 9
As is shown in this table, there has been a sharp slowing in the rate of price growth

 in all capitals except Perth. And as you will be aware, there has been some

 divergence in the experiences of Sydney and most other capitals over the past

 two years. Average prices have fallen in Sydney, but this has been offset in

 the nationwide aggregate by rises in some of the other capitals. But Sydney's

 recent relative weakness followed an earlier period when prices grew much faster

 than in the other capitals. We showed a graph in our recent
Statement
that price relativities between Sydney and the other capitals

 have now returned to the pre-boom levels of the early to mid 1990s.
Table 1: House Price Growth
*
Percentage change over two years to:
December 2003
December 2005
Sydney
41
−8
Melbourne
30
2
Brisbane
76
7
Adelaide
50
10
Perth
42
35
Canberra
52
1
Australia
42
2
*
APM composition-adjusted measure
The earlier strong growth in house prices was obviously related to the rapid growth

 in household borrowing, with the causality running in both directions. With

 house prices rising, households were comfortable in increasing their indebtedness.

 And banks were happy to lend. But much of the credit was used to further bid

 up the prices of houses.
What we have seen more recently is that households are not incurring new debt at

 the rate that they were, and there has probably been some tendency for some

 households to step up the rate at which they are paying off their debt. Although

 income growth has held up reasonably well, households have reduced the rate

 at which their spending is increasing. The result has been a stabilisation,

 and even a modest increase, in the household saving rate. It is worth noting

 that data for the saving rate are notoriously noisy and can get revised substantially.

 However, it would not be surprising if there was some tendency for it to rise

 a bit further: that is, for spending growth to run below income growth for

 a while longer. But household spending is likely to be supported by reasonably

 positive consumer sentiment. For example, the responses to the survey from

 Westpac and the Melbourne Institute show sentiment above long-run averages,

 although down somewhat from the very high levels seen until around a year ago.
Graph 10
However, any tendency for continued moderation in the growth of household spending

 could be offset to a large extent by strength in business spending. The business

 surveys generally point to overall business conditions being well above average

 levels, although firms in the manufacturing sector have tended to report less

 favourable conditions than those in the broader economy. This graph shows an

 average of responses from several different surveys, including the AIG's Performance

 of Manufacturing Index.
Graph 11
Consistent with these surveys, both the reported earnings of listed companies and

 the profits data from the national accounts give a picture of strong aggregate

 profitability. Not surprisingly, profitability is especially strong in the

 resources sector. But there has also been some growth in the aggregate profits

 of non-mining companies.
So it is not surprising that data on business investment show that investment is

 growing particularly strongly in the mining sector. However, as with profits,

 the strength is not confined to the mining sector. The ABS capital expenditure

 survey suggests that a fairly wide range of industries are also increasing

 their investment.
Graph 12
Furthermore, a range of indicators suggest that investment should remain strong for

 some time. We can see this in the Access Economics survey on major projects

 that have been committed to, or that are under consideration. We can also see

 it in the high levels of work yet to be done in building and engineering construction

 projects that have already been commenced. And our liaison program has highlighted

 that large resource projects typically have long lead times for planning, and

 that the timing of projects is sometimes dependent on the timing of projects

 being undertaken by other firms. This reflects constraints on the availability

 of resources, particularly in terms of the supply of complex machinery and

 equipment, and of skilled labour. All this points to the likelihood of ongoing

 strength in investment in the resources area, which will result in welcome

 additions to export capacity.
Graph 13
The strength in investment is not surprising given that survey responses suggest

 that capacity utilisation in the non-farm economy is at very high levels. Another

 area where there are capacity concerns is the labour market. Historically,

 when firms have been asked what is the major factor constraining their output,

 they have responded that it is a lack of orders or demand. However, since the

 late 1990s there has been a gradual decline in the importance of this constraint.

 Indeed, for the past year and a half, firms have reported that a lack of suitable

 labour has actually been a more binding constraint than their order book.
Graph 14
These survey responses are not that surprising given that the unemployment rate,

 which is around 5¼ per cent, is near its lowest levels since the 1970s.

 Admittedly, there is some evidence of a recent easing in conditions in the

 labour market. The unemployment rate is no longer falling, and indeed has ticked

 up in recent months. However, this is probably best regarded as a pause in

 growth following a period when some of the indicators suggested very strong

 growth. Overall, with the unemployment rate low and the vacancy rate high,

 the labour market remains tight.
Graph 15
Given conditions in the labour market, we would expect wage outcomes to remain firm.

 There are several different indicators of growth in wages, and we noted in

 a Box in our recent
Statement
that they tended to suggest that wage growth over the year

 to the September quarter was running somewhat above the average rates seen

 in recent years. This would suggest that labour costs may be adding to inflation

 pressures. Since the
Statement
, the major indicators of wages growth have become available

 for the December quarter. They suggest that wages growth has remained firm,

 although there is little evidence that it is accelerating.
Graph 16
So the inflation outlook is as spelled out in the recent
Statement on Monetary Policy
, with underlying inflation expected to

 increase modestly to around 2¾ per cent by the end of this year. This

 forecast is based on the expectation of continuing cost pressures from firm

 growth in wages and in raw materials prices. It also takes into account the

 offsetting influences from global disinflationary pressures on the prices of

 manufactures and some tradable services. This reflects the higher degree of

 international competition, most notably from China and other emerging economies.

 As the Bank said in the
Statement
, the integration of low-cost producers

 into the world economy seems to have a long way to run. Indeed, it is likely

 that this is one of the reasons why underlying inflation has remained relatively

 contained in recent quarters. One possible manifestation of this impact is

 in the AIG survey of the manufacturing sector which suggests the absence of

 any substantial inflation pressures in manufacturing.
Graph 17
In summary, the world economy is growing strongly, presenting a benign backdrop for

 the Australian economy. With strong investment growth and a forecast improvement

 in exports, we expect overall GDP growth of 3 per cent or a little

 more over the next year or so. Furthermore, we should see more balanced growth,

 with growth of domestic spending expected to be more in line with that of production,

 which should assist prospects for sustainable expansion.
