BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: The Central Bank and the Payment System – Sydney
DATE: 12/10/2006
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2006/sp-ag-121006.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
The Central Bank and the Payment System
Philip Lowe
Assistant Governor (Financial System)
Remarks at Panel Session

 ‘Central Banks Initiating Change – Different Means for Different Ends?’

 SIBOS 2006
Sydney
–
12 October 2006
Thank you very much for the invitation to be part of this panel. It is a pleasure

 to be here this morning.
I do, however, owe an apology to the organisers. They emailed me a number of times

 over recent months asking what music I would like played as I approached the

 podium. Lacking inspiration, I finally replied, no doubt to the organisers'

 disappointment, that I was happy not to have any music. But on the day that

 I gave this reply, my young children gave me the inspiration that I was lacking,

 but by then it was too late. When I went home that evening, the children were

 watching one of their favourite DVDs – Bob the Builder. Apparently, Bob

 is quite an international figure, but for those who don't know him, he

 is – as his name suggests – a builder, and he has a very sunny

 disposition, as do the many friends who help him. Each episode of the show

 starts and ends with the same tune. I will spare you my rendition of it, but

 each verse ends with the line: ‘Working Together They Get the Job Done’.

 And in the chorus, Bob and his friends loudly ask the questions ‘Can

 We Build It’ or ‘Can We Fix It’, and they always confidently

 and proudly proclaim ‘Yes We Can’.
Bob's little ditty is an appropriate theme to my remarks today. Working together

 the central bank and industry can get the job done. And where things need fixing,

 we can fix them!
So what I would like to do this morning is to reflect on the various ways that central

 banks, often together with industry, can work to improve the stability and

 efficiency of the payments system. In doing so, I will draw on the experience

 that we have had here in Australia.
Broadly speaking, there are at least three ways in which a central bank can influence

 payment system outcomes. The first is in its role as an operator of individual

 payment systems. The second is in its role as a regulator. And the third is

 by prompting industry and public discussion of payment system issues. The Reserve

 Bank of Australia (RBA) has used all three of these methods recently, and I

 would like to talk briefly about each of them.
The Central Bank as Operator
Firstly, the central bank as an operator of payment systems. In many countries, including

 Australia, the central bank operates the interbank real time gross settlement

 system (RTGS), and in some countries, it also operates a variety of other payments

 systems. As the operator of the system, the central bank can obviously influence

 its design and evolution.
A good example is the development of the RTGS system in Australia. By the early 1990s,

 there was a general consensus in Australia, as in many other countries, that

 settlement risk needed to be addressed. We set off on a path that would have

 provided a protected netting system, but after some time it became clear to

 the RBA and some others that the tide was clearly shifting towards RTGS systems.

 The RBA actively encouraged this shift, and then once it was accepted, the

 Bank worked very closely with industry on the technical design and implementation

 of the system.
I think it is fair to say that the process was aided by the various participants

 sharing a common objective – that of reducing settlement risk. At times,

 there were heated debates about how the system should be designed, but these

 debates were generally carried out in a spirit of goodwill. At the end of the

 day, the design incorporated the best of the ideas of the central bank and

 of industry. Working together the job got done!
The Central Bank as Regulator
A second way of influencing outcomes is through regulation. Here, the RBA's

 experience is a little different to that of many other central banks. In the

 late 1990s, the Australian Parliament amended the
Reserve Bank Act
to give the RBA responsibility not only for the stability

 of the payments system, but also for efficiency and competition. A separate

 Board was established to carry out this responsibility, with the staff responsible

 for supporting the Board being clearly separate from those operating the RTGS

 system.
In carrying out its responsibilities for efficiency and stability the RBA has sought

 to: improve access arrangements; ensure that restrictions imposed by various

 participants in the system do not distort competition; and improve publicly

 available information. Controversially, the Bank has also regulated interchange

 fees in the credit and the debit card systems. These fees are not subject

 to the normal forces of competition and were set at levels that were distorting

 payment patterns in Australia.
At the risk of over simplifying things, I think it is fair to say that it has been

 more difficult to obtain industry support for reforms designed to improve competition

 and efficiency than it has for reforms designed to promote stability. The main

 reason for this is that reforms that enhance competition and efficiency of

 the overall system – and thus promote the public interest – are

 not always seen by all existing participants to be in their own commercial

 interests. This same tension between public and private interests is not as

 evident in reforms that promote stability. Often, these reforms are seen to

 be in everybody's interests.
Notwithstanding this tension, the RBA has always encouraged industry-based reforms,

 although in a number of cases – particularly relating to interchange

 fees – voluntary reform has not proved possible. As a result, regulation

 has been used. In other cases, a more co-operative approach has been

 possible. In particular, the Bank and industry have worked together to clarify

 access arrangements to Australia's EFTPOS system. The Bank has also worked

 with the card schemes to liberalise access to the schemes. This co-operative

 approach has much to commend itself.
Promoting Discussion
The third way of influencing outcomes is through promoting public discussion of payments

 system issues. As I mentioned a moment ago, the central bank's perspective

 on issues can differ from that of other participants. Given this, the central

 bank can play an important role in stimulating analysis and discussion.
Recently, the RBA has used this approach in raising the question of whether the current

 architecture and governance arrangements in a number of payments systems are

 conducive to the efficient evolution of the overall system. A central issue

 here is the arrangements through which the industry makes decisions about standards

 and the common architecture of the system. Often, co-ordination amongst competitors

 is difficult, but it may sometimes be necessary for the ongoing development

 of the system.
The decision to raise these issues was not – as some have feared – the

 first step in further regulatory intervention by the Bank. Rather, it was taken

 in the hope that doing so might prompt greater industry and public scrutiny

 of existing practices. Recently, we have been encouraged by a number of steps

 in this direction, and I hope and expect that there will be further steps in

 the months ahead.
We have a strong view that the issues of architecture and governance are best dealt

 with by industry, rather than through regulation. After all, it is industry

 that, at least in the first instance, must pay for any investment in the system,

 and it is industry that must operate the system. At the same time, given the

 RBA's responsibilities, we have a strong interest in seeing arrangements

 that promote the development of a robust, vibrant, and efficient payment system

 that serves both consumers and businesses well. If this is to be done,

 existing practices do need to be periodically reviewed and analysed. Again,

 this is an area where working together, the central bank and industry can get

 the job done.
Thank you for your time this morning.
