BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Non-Banks in the Payments System: A Central Bank Perspective – Santa Fe
DATE: 04/05/2007
SPEAKER: Santa Fe
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2007/sp-ag-050507.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Non-Banks in the Payments System: A Central Bank Perspective
Philip Lowe
Assistant Governor (Financial System)
Remarks prepared for Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Conference on

 ‘Nonbanks in the Payments System: Innovation, Competition and Risk’
Santa Fe
–
4 May 2007
Download
50KB
Introduction
I would like to begin by thanking Tom Hoenig and his team for once again putting

 together a fabulous conference. The Kansas City Fed continues to set the high-water

 benchmark for payments system conferences and I am delighted to have been invited

 to participate again.
As with the other panellists I have been asked to talk about the challenges that

 non-banks pose for central bank oversight of payment systems. This is an issue

 that the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) has spent quite a lot of time thinking

 about recently. As you might be aware, in the late 1990s, the RBA was given

 specific powers by the Australian Parliament to promote the efficiency and

 stability of the Australian payments system. In this respect we are a little

 different to many other central banks in that we have explicit legislated objectives

 not just in terms of stability, but also in terms of efficiency and competition.

 We have also been given formal powers in these areas and a separate board has

 been created in the RBA to exercise these powers. These arrangements grew out

 of recommendations of a wide-ranging inquiry into financial regulation in the

 mid 1990s. Amongst other things, this inquiry drew attention to difficulties

 facing non-banks in participating in the payments system.
To date, the part of the RBA's work that has attracted the lion's share

 of attention is the regulation of interchange fees. However, we have also introduced

 reforms to enhance the competitive environment, including by allowing non-banks

 to more easily provide payments-related services. In my remarks this morning

 I would like to share some of this work with you.
Given that I am the last speaker on what has been a long agenda, it seems sensible

 to begin by summarising my two key themes.
The first is that our general policy approach to oversight/regulation is best thought

 of as functional, rather than institutional.
This approach reflects the fact that many types of payment can be broken down into

 a number of separate functions. Each of these functions is potentially contestable,

 including by non-banks. What we have been trying to do is to obtain the benefits

 of this contestability, without unnecessarily adding to the risks in the system.

 Where non-banks do bring extra risks – as they sometimes do – we

 have asked how the risks can best be managed, rather than simply excluding

 non-banks from the system.
I might add that one argument in favour of a central bank having the type of broad

 payments system responsibilities given to the RBA – rather than just

 a focus on stability – is that it more easily allows potential trade-offs

 between stability and competition to be recognised and analysed. This was certainly

 an important factor in the government's decision to give the RBA –

 rather than the competition regulator – responsibility for efficiency

 and competition in the payments system.
The second theme is that establishing a regime in which non-banks are able to play

 an active role is increasingly important.
As we have seen in other areas of banking – particularly lending – the

 entry of non-banks has provided an important source of competition, promoting

 substantial efficiency gains. The same is likely to be true in the world of

 payments and obtaining these efficiency gains is increasingly important. This

 reflects the fact that transactional banking services are now a key element

 in the relationship between many banks and their customers. If these efficiency

 gains are to be realised, the policy framework needs to be one that facilitates

 entry by ensuring that unnecessary barriers to the entry of non-banks do not

 exist. This is particularly important given the network characteristics of

 many payment systems.
The Payments Process
I said a moment ago that the payments process can be broken into its various pieces.

 I would now like to talk about those pieces and our approach to oversight/regulation.
At the risk of oversimplifying things, for most payments to occur three elements

 must exist.
The first is that there must be a store of value that can be accessed. The second

 is that there needs to be a system for exchanging payment instructions between

 institutions, sometimes loosely referred to as clearing arrangements. And third,

 there needs to be a settlement system, whereby value is moved from one account

 to another.
In the world of a few decades ago, all three functions – maintaining the store

 of value, developing and running messaging and processing systems, and having

 access to settlement systems – were almost always the exclusive preserve

 of banks. The world of payments was the world of banks and that was that. This

 was reflected in the view that it was only banks that could be allowed into

 the inner sanctum of the payments process – the settlement accounts at

 the central bank. In some countries, including my own, this idea led to legislative

 restrictions on the type of institutions that could issue cheques and other

 payment instruments.
The world of today is a lot different. Value does not need to be stored in bank accounts.

 Messaging and processing systems do not need to be run by banks. And in some

 countries, non-bank providers of payment services are able to have accounts

 at the central bank. As we have been discussing over the past couple of days,

 this new world opens up a whole range of possibilities. From my perspective,

 the central issue seems to be how you can best take advantage of these possibilities,

 without adding unnecessarily to the risk in the system.
Store of Value
In terms of the store of value used for transaction purposes, banks have long had

 a significant advantage. While I expect this advantage will continue, it is

 not unassailable. Indeed, non-banks may be able to develop new methods of payment

 that work best if value is held outside the banking system. From the point

 of encouraging competition and innovation, we need a regulatory regime that

 allows this to happen. But any regulatory arrangements also need to address

 the risks that can arise if significant stores of value usable for transaction

 purposes are held outside the banking system.
The main such risks seem to relate to consumer protection and the possibility of

 a loss of confidence in the store of value. From a central bank's perspective,

 the second of these is of more concern. If a loss of confidence did occur,

 it could cause problems for the particular payment method concerned, but it

 could also cause problems for other stores of value, raising broader financial

 stability issues.
In Australia, we have established a regime that deals with these risks, but in a

 way that does not stifle innovation. Under the regime, non-banks are able to

 hold a store of value for the purpose of offering transaction services to consumers.

 However, reflecting our functional approach to regulation, if the store of

 value has the general characteristics of a bank deposit – that is, if

 it is redeemable on demand in Australian dollars, and if the payment product

 can be used for purchases in a wide variety of situations – it is subject

 to prudential regulation by the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority

 (APRA), which is also the prudential regulator for banks and insurance companies.
As with other institutions that offer deposit-like accounts, institutions that offer

 this type of stored value need to obtain authorisation from APRA, which a few

 years ago created a new specialist class of regulated institution known as

 a Purchased Payment Provider. These institutions are subject to capital, liquidity

 and operational requirements, although they differ from those on banks reflecting

 the different nature of the risks. Purchased Payment Providers are not permitted

 to make loans and their operations are restricted to providing payment services.
Arrangements that do not have deposit-like characteristics are also potentially subject

 to regulation, but by the RBA, not APRA. We would, however, only consider using

 our regulatory powers in this area if payment schemes developed that held significant

 value and that could be widely used. We have made it clear that facilities

 such as gift card schemes, electronic toll schemes and pre-paid mobile phone

 accounts are not subject to regulation.
At the time this regime was put in place, there was considerable market speculation

 that certain types of non-bank payments, including electronic cash and smart

 cards, were about to take off in Australia. So far, this has not happened.

 The only scheme that has been authorised as a Purchased Payment Provider is

 PayPal, and the RBA has not used its powers to regulate any stored-value arrangements.
The generally slow development of new forms of stored value demonstrates just how

 difficult it is for both regulators and industry participants to predict exactly

 which types of payment methods we will be using in the future. While many payment

 schemes look appealing from a technology perspective, they have had trouble

 developing business models that are attractive to both consumers and merchants.

 Perhaps one day such models will emerge; in the meantime, the regulatory environment

 needs to remain light-handed and focused on the key risks.
Messaging and Authorising Systems
The second element of the payments process is the systems that are used to pass instructions

 between institutions. There are two aspects of these systems that I would like

 to talk about. The first is access and the second is the technology.
Access is clearly important, for if an institution is unable to participate in the

 core messaging and authorisation systems on fair and reasonable terms, its

 ability to compete is likely to be significantly constrained. This has been

 a significant issue in Australia, with a number of non-banks complaining to

 the RBA that they have found it very difficult to gain direct access to some

 payment systems. This has left them with little choice but to work through

 existing participants, which are sometimes their direct competitors.
The main argument for restricting access seems to be that participants in a payment

 system can have actual or potential credit exposures to other participants.

 In the credit card system, for example, both acquirers and issuers can be called

 upon to contribute to a rescue package if one of the members of the scheme

 is unable to fulfil its obligations. In some other systems, the settlement

 arrangements can also expose participants to significant financial losses if

 the obligations of a member of the system are not met.
One way of controlling these financial risks is to restrict participation to banks.

 In my view, this approach is too narrow. It risks limiting competition and

 innovation, and is not always necessary to preserve the financial integrity

 of the system. Where non-banks do bring financial risks, these risks need to

 be managed, not avoided altogether by preventing access.
In Australia, we have confronted this issue and the RBA has used its powers to establish

 more liberal access arrangements for both the credit and debit card systems.

 We are also currently having discussions with the ATM industry about access

 reform.
In the case of credit cards, the schemes long had rules in Australia that effectively

 limited participation to banks. They also had rules that prevented a member

 from acting just as an acquirer, and imposed penalties on members whose acquiring

 business was much larger than their issuing business (the ‘net acquirer’

 rules). These rules made it impossible for specialist acquirers to participate

 in the system.
Our view was that these rules were overly restrictive and limited competition and

 innovation. After it became clear that the schemes would not make changes voluntarily,

 the RBA used its regulatory powers to impose an Access Regime. This regime

 required the removal of net acquirer rules and made the schemes open up access

 to a new class of prudentially regulated entities known as Specialist Credit

 Card Institutions. These entities – like the Purchased Payment Providers

 discussed a few minutes ago – are supervised by APRA, with the supervisory

 requirements being tailored to the risks incurred. To date, two institutions

 have taken advantage of this regime: one on the issuing side and one on the

 acquiring side.
Significant access issues have also arisen in the domestic PIN-based debit card system

 which, unlike the credit card system, is based on bilateral agreements between

 the main participants. For many years, new entrants complained about the difficulties

 of establishing the necessary bilateral agreements and technical connections

 with each of the existing participants. This was perhaps not surprising,

 given that the existing institutions had little incentive to negotiate arrangements

 that facilitated the entry of competitors.
Over a number of years the RBA worked with industry to establish better access arrangements

 and this work was completed in 2006. Under the new arrangements, existing participants

 must establish connections with access seekers that satisfy the relevant technical

 requirements. They must do so within a specified period and the amount they

 can charge to establish the connection is capped. Arrangements were also put

 in place to constrain the bilaterally negotiated interchange fees, so that

 negotiations over these fees could not be used in a way that frustrated access.
Under these access arrangements, any company that is licensed as a Specialist Credit

 Card Institution (SCCI) is able to establish the necessary links to provide

 PIN-based debit payment services to third parties. In addition, the access

 arrangements allow merchants to self-acquire PIN-based debit card transactions

 without being licensed as an SCCI, although if they wish to self-acquire credit

 card transactions they do need to be licensed. This difference reflects the

 additional financial obligations that acquirers in the credit card system take

 on. We have seen no public-policy grounds for limiting merchants' involvement

 in acquiring, provided that the risks are appropriately managed.
I said a moment ago, that there were two aspects of the messaging and authorisation

 system I wanted to focus on. The first was access. The second is the specific

 technology and processes used in a given payment system.
One could make the argument that central banks should pay very close attention to

 this technology and these processes as part of their oversight, given that

 problems in these areas could have system-wide and, possibly, systemic consequences.

 One could also argue that the social benefits of implementing appropriate arrangements

 for security and resilience are greater than the private benefits, and thus

 without public-sector intervention, private institutions will be prone to under-invest

 in these areas.
While one cannot completely rule out this line of argument, our view has been that

 in most payment systems, the users and the providers of the system have strong

 incentives to make sure that the system is robust and operates with a high

 level of security. We have not felt the need to become involved in these general

 areas. We have also been agnostic as to whether the various systems are best

 provided by banks or non-banks. Provided an institution is able to meet the

 relevant technical and security requirements, and the financial risks are managed,

 there seems little reason to distinguish between banks and non-banks.
Another aspect of payments system technology has, however, attracted our attention

 – that is, the arrangements by which participants make decisions about

 how the system and its technology are upgraded over time. As part of our oversight

 function we have focused on the potential difficulties of renovating payment

 systems, particularly where they are built around bilateral linkages. This

 has reflected concerns that the architecture upon which a number of Australia's

 payment systems is built is starting to slip behind best practice. Our approach

 has been to draw attention to the difficulties associated with industry-wide

 decision-making processes and the governance arrangements in these systems.

 In response, industry is examining the RBA's concerns and we are hopeful

 that, in time, this will lead to some improvements in current arrangements.
Settlement
The third element of the payments process is settlement.
For many years, the RBA's policy was that only banks were permitted to have

 a settlement account with us. This was on the grounds that allowing non-banks

 to participate in the final settlement process could expose the system to unacceptable

 risk.
In the mid 1990s, however, we began a process of liberalisation. This reflected two

 developments. The first was the introduction of Real-Time Gross Settlement

 for the settlement of high-value transactions, which significantly reduced

 the risks in the deferred net settlement system. The second was complaints

 from some new participants that their ability to compete was constrained by

 not having access to a settlement account. They argued that having to settle

 through banks – which in many cases were their competitors – added

 to the complexity and cost of settlement and could give their competitors valuable

 insights into their business.
Under the current arrangements, which came into effect in 1999, an institution is

 able to have a settlement account with the RBA if it is:
an actual or prospective provider of third-party (customer) payment services with

 a need to settle obligations with other participants; and
able to demonstrate that it can meet liquidity demands, including during times of

 stress.
If the institution is not supervised by APRA and it participates in the deferred

 net settlement process it is required to lodge collateral with the RBA, except

 if it is always a net receiver of funds.
Again, our approach here has been to address the risks that can arise from non-banks

 having settlement accounts, rather than simply preventing them from having

 such an account. It is important to emphasise though, the settlement accounts

 are still restricted to
providers
of third-party payment services – they are not available

 to
users
of payment services.
Concluding Remarks
As I said at the outset, our approach to oversight has focused on the various functions

 involved in making a payment from one person to another. We have endeavoured

 to ensure that wherever possible, the provision of these services is contestable,

 and that the risks are adequately managed.
This approach – which reflects our responsibility for both efficiency and stability –

 has involved close co-operation between the central bank and the prudential

 supervisor, with the creation of new classes of regulated institutions. This

 has helped allow non-banks to compete with banks in various parts of the payments

 system, and for similar risks to be regulated in similar ways.
Looking forward, I suspect that banks will continue to be the main providers of payment

 services to businesses and individuals. Indeed, as we have all come to rely

 more on electronic methods of payment, many banks have come to see the provision

 of transaction services as a source of strategic advantage. This is partly

 because once a web of electronic connections has been established between a

 bank and its customers, it can be difficult for that web to be disentangled,

 increasing the difficulty that a customer has of switching banks. In this environment,

 it is important that the regulatory arrangements applying to all parts of the

 payments process promote competition and innovation as well as address the

 relevant risks.
Thank you.
