BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Australia in the Global Economy – Sydney
DATE: 16/03/2007
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2007/sp-ag-160307.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Australia in the Global Economy
Malcolm Edey
Assistant Governor (Economic)
Address to the Australia & Japan Economic Outlook Conference 2007
Sydney
–
16 March 2007
I thank AJEI and the Japanese Consulate-General for the invitation to speak today.

 This is the third time I have spoken at this conference, and I've found

 it an informative event for learning about developments in Japan and in our

 region.
In my remarks today I'll first review the world economic scene; I'll

 then make some observations of a longer-run nature about the Australian business

 cycle, and then look at some more recent developments.
Short-term global outlook
For the world economy as a whole, 2006 was another strong year. Growth for the year

 is estimated at 5¼ per cent, which is the highest rate in more than

 three decades. The latest set of Consensus forecasts indicate that growth rates

 are generally expected to remain high, though not as strong as last year (Graph 1).
Graph 1
In thinking about short-term prospects, a good deal of attention in the past few

 months has been focused on the United States (Graph 2).
Graph 2
The US economy has been growing strongly for some years. Unemployment has fallen,

 and there has been some upward pressure on core inflation. Most observers now

 see growth slowing back to a more sustainable pace. This is generally seen

 as a desirable adjustment, and one that should help to alleviate inflationary

 pressures. The issue at the moment is whether the downturn in the US housing

 sector might have a larger than expected impact on the wider economy. Forward

 indicators of construction activity, like starts and permits, are down by about

 30 per cent from their cyclical peaks, and the market for established

 houses has cooled (Graph 3). There has also been some well-publicised

 distress in the ‘sub-prime’ mortgage market in recent weeks.
Graph 3
How far these things might dampen activity is still unclear, and recent indicators

 have been ambiguous. But at this stage, the overall slowing in the US has been

 mild, and the housing downturn so far has not caused any major disruption to

 output and employment in the rest of the economy.
In other parts of the world the recent flow of new information has tended to be on

 the strong side of expectations. In Japan, GDP posted a surprisingly strong

 increase of 1.3 per cent in the December quarter, and other short-term

 indicators like employment and business sentiment point to continued momentum

 (Graph 4).
Graph 4
It is also encouraging that the longer-term problems of balance-sheet stress in Japan

 have been wound back, and there are signs of a return to more normal financial

 conditions. Profits are now rising rapidly, corporate debt has been reduced,

 and banks are again starting to expand their lending (Graph 5).
Graph 5
Although the rate of growth in bank lending is still low by comparison with most

 other countries, the fact that it has turned positive is one of a number of

 signs that the prolonged period of balance-sheet adjustment and financial consolidation

 is coming to an end. Another sign of return to normality is that land prices

 in some areas, notably in Tokyo, have stopped falling (Graph 6). These

 things, while obviously not guaranteeing economic success, do bode well for

 further growth over the years ahead.
Graph 6
China's economy is continuing to grow at a 10 per-cent-plus pace. I note that

 there has been some significant volatility in China's financial markets

 in the past couple of weeks, but it is too early to say whether that is likely

 to be disruptive to the economy's immediate prospects. But I will have

 more to say about China in a moment.
The other encouraging development for the world economy has been a pick-up in growth

 in the euro area (Graph 7).
Graph 7
Europe was slow to recover from the downturn at the beginning of the decade, and

 for some years lagged behind the US. It was commonly said that the world economy

 was flying on only two of its four engines, namely the US and China. But with

 the euro area now growing slightly faster than the US, and Japan also doing

 better, that claim is no longer true. Overall, then, the growth in the world

 economy looks to be more evenly balanced geographically than it has been for

 quite a while, and the prospects for global growth in the short-term seem to

 be good.
Longer term, of course, it is to be expected that the world economy will continue

 to have a cycle, and I see little value in trying to predict when the next

 turning point might be. Instead I want to focus on some important longer-term

 forces, and particularly the emergence of China and India as major economies.
The rise of China and India
On almost any measure, the Chinese and Indian economies have advanced rapidly in

 their importance both to the world economy and to Australia (Table 1).
Table 1: China and India
China
India
1995
2005
1995
2005
Share of world GDP (PPP weights)
9.5
15.4
4.8
6.0
Share of world GDP (mkt weights)
2.5
5.0
1.2
1.7
Share of world trade
2.3
6.1
0.5
0.9
Share of Australian exports
4.4
11.6
1.5
5.0
Sources: ABS; CEIC; IMF
A few summary figures can illustrate this. Their combined share of world GDP (measured

 on a PPP basis) has gone up from 14 to 21 per cent in the past ten years. Their

 combined share of world trade has more than doubled, and their importance as

 export markets for Australia has gone up even more, so that together they now

 absorb about one-sixth of Australia's total exports.
In essence, what is happening is a process of catch-up similar to the ones seen in

 Japan and South Korea in earlier decades. Both of those countries experienced

 extended periods of rapid growth and then began to slow down as they got closer

 to the per capita income levels of the most advanced countries, approximated

 here by the US (Graph 8).
Graph 8
I've made the point on a previous occasion that this process of catch-up in

 China and India may well have quite a way to run. Both Japan and Korea were

 able to sustain growth rates in the vicinity of 10 per cent per annum for around

 three decades. But China took off from a much lower base than either Japan

 or Korea. This means that today, even after three decades of high growth, it

 is still well behind the relative income levels of those countries when they

 started to slow down. And India is a lot further behind still.
These developments are having some important effects, including on the volume and

 direction of trade in the Asian region. Industrialisation in east Asia has

 been associated with strong flows of Japanese direct investment into the region,

 and with rapid growth in intra-regional trade. Around 15 per cent of Japan's

 exports now go to China, compared with only 5 per cent a decade ago. A decade

 earlier, there was a similarly large increase in the share going to other east

 Asian destinations. The counterpart to those increases is that, over the past

 twenty years, the share of Japan's exports going to the US has fallen

 from a peak of 40 per cent to a bit over 20 per cent today.
In part this trend towards increasing intra-regional trade represents production

 ultimately destined to meet demand from outside the region. But a significant

 part of the growth is also directed at domestic demand, and may mean that the

 region becomes less sensitive to the business cycles of the US and Europe (Graph 9).
Graph 9
Another important set of effects flowing from this process of industrialisation is

 on the demand for resources. Clearly the Chinese and Indian economies are going

 to be increasingly important buyers of raw materials. To take the example of

 China, we can see that this is already happening for a range of resource commodities

 (Graph 10).
Graph 10
The clearest example of this is in iron ore, where Chinese demand has increased from

 11 per cent to 37 per cent of global imports in less than a decade.

 Some of that, no doubt, will have replaced demand from other countries, but

 a big part represents a net increase in global resources demand. So China is

 already a large presence in world commodities demand, and it has the potential

 to become much larger, as does India in its turn.
From a global perspective, this process can be thought of as being driven by an increase

 in the supply of unskilled labour – that is, the release over a period

 of time of large numbers of unskilled workers into the industrial sectors of

 previously underdeveloped economies. For the world as a whole, this kind of

 shock can be expected to have some significant effects on relative prices,

 at least during the period of transition when the additional labour is being

 absorbed. Other things equal, it reduces the relative prices of labour intensive

 industrial outputs, and raises the relative prices of scarce inputs, notably

 raw materials. This seems to have been what happened in the last few years,

 and Australia, as a resource exporter, has been one of the beneficiaries.
At the same time, we should recognise that there are other forces that could limit

 this relative price shift over time. Economic convergence should eventually

 mean rising real wages and rising output prices in today's low-cost producers.

 In addition we should recognise that the extent of the real increase in resource

 prices will ultimately depend on the supply response of resource producers.

 What we can say with confidence is that the world is experiencing a very large

 increase in resources demand which is likely to go on for some time.
Australia: the longer-term context
Turning now to Australia, I'll begin with a few remarks about the longer-term

 context. The Australian economy was last in recession in 1991, so the current

 period of expansion is now in its sixteenth year (Graph 11).
Graph 11
The overall performance in that period has clearly been good, both by the standards

 of our own earlier history and in comparison with other advanced countries.
A few observations will help to make that claim a bit more concrete:
Australia's growth rate since 1990 has averaged 3¼ per cent. That compares

 favourably against most (though not all) of the advanced OECD countries that

 we would normally take as a benchmark. One important aspect of that result

 is that, unlike a number of the other advanced countries, Australia avoided

 recession in 2001 (Table 2).
Table 2: Economic Growth
Annual rate, per cent, 1990-current
GDP
GDP per capita
Ireland
6.4
5.3
Australia
3.3
2.1
United States
3.0
1.9
Norway
3.0
2.6
New Zealand
3.0
1.8
Spain
2.9
2.5
Canada
2.8
1.7
United Kingdom
2.5
2.1
Netherlands
2.3
1.6
Sweden
2.2
1.8
France
1.8
1.4
Germany
1.7
1.3
Italy
1.3
1.1
Japan
1.3
1.1
Sources: ABS; CEIC; Consensus; IMF; Thomson Financial
Australia's inflation performance has also been good. Since the inflation target

 was first formulated in 1993, CPI inflation in Australia has averaged 2½ per cent

 – in the middle of the target zone.
It is also noteworthy that both growth and inflation have on average become more

 stable over time. One way to summarise that is to look at the standard deviations

 of these variables over successive decades. Economic performance deteriorated

 markedly in the 1970s, but volatility has been reduced in each decade since

 then. In the current decade, the outcomes for GDP growth, and for inflation,

 have been only about half as variable as they were in the 1980s (Table 3).

 Notwithstanding this general trend, however, CPI inflation has been quite

 volatile in the latest year, for reasons I will come back to in a moment.
Table 3: Output and Inflation Volatility
*
1970s
1980s
1990s
2000s
Output
1.5
1.0
0.8
0.5
Inflation
^
1.3
0.8
0.5
0.3
*
Standard deviations of quarterly percentage changes
^
CPI inflation excluding interest charges prior to the September

 quarter 1998 and adjusted for the tax changes of 1999–2000
Sources: ABS; RBA
I have a couple of brief comments to make on the consequences of this general period

 of stable growth. The first is that economic slack has been substantially wound

 back. Unemployment has come down to a 30-year low, and direct measures of business

 capacity usage, such as this one from the NAB survey, are close to cyclical

 highs (Graph 12).
Graph 12
This means that the problems facing businesses and economic managers are very different

 from those of a few years ago. For example, businesses are commonly reporting

 that labour shortages are the main constraint on their activities, whereas

 previously they would have cited concerns about lack of sales or orders. It

 also means, as the RBA has been pointing out for some time now, that we should

 not expect the economy to grow as quickly as it did a few years ago, when there

 was still a lot of surplus labour and capital to be re-employed. These points,

 by the way, should not be seen as negatives. Rather, they are a consequence

 of economic success as the economy moves back closer to full employment.
My second comment concerns regional differences. In any given year, it is not uncommon

 to see significant differences in growth rates across the States, and the current

 period is no exception to that. At the moment, it is well known that the south-eastern

 states are growing more slowly than the resource-rich states of Western Australia

 and Queensland. At other stages of the cycle the positions have been reversed.

 Nonetheless, all the states have benefited from the extended nature of the

 current expansion. A useful summary indicator of that is the movement in unemployment

 rates (Graph 13).
Graph 13
Clearly, on this measure, Western Australia and Queensland are performing the most

 strongly at the moment. But viewed over a longer period, all the States have

 seen their unemployment rates decline to their lowest for many years.
Recent developments
Turning to more recent developments, last week's set of national accounts figures

 showed, as expected, that the expansion continued in the December quarter.

 They indicated that the economy's annual growth rate picked up to 2.8

 per cent, with non-farm output growing by 3½ per cent over the latest

 year (Graph 14). It remains the case that domestic demand is growing faster

 than GDP, although it has eased from the very high rates seen a few years ago.
Graph 14
We should of course be wary of reading too much into any single set of quarterly

 figures. Nonetheless, these latest accounts bring the estimates of growth more

 into line with other indicators which suggested the non-farm economy was strengthening

 in the second half of last year. In particular, they go some way towards resolving

 the apparent conflict between earlier soft GDP outcomes and the increase in

 employment growth in the second half of the year. A corollary of that is that

 the figures show a pick-up in estimated productivity growth. The Statistician's

 measure of market-sector GDP per hour worked rose by 1½ per cent over

 the latest year. This is reasonably close to its longer-run average, though

 it is still the case that average productivity growth over the past two to

 three years has been lower than it was earlier in the current expansion.
Australia's inflation rate has fluctuated quite sharply in headline terms during

 the past year, and it will continue to do so for a while yet, as the effects

 of movements in fuel and banana prices work their way through the annual calculation

 (Graph 15). As you know, the Bank does a lot of careful analysis of measures

 of underlying inflation designed to abstract from this kind of volatility.

 We estimate that underlying inflation picked up last year from around 2½

 per cent to around 3 per cent. It was still around 3 per cent in

 annual terms at the end of the year, though the quarterly rate of increase

 eased in the December quarter.
Graph 15
The Bank's inflation forecast, as presented in the
Statement on

 Monetary Policy
in early February, was that underlying inflation would

 decline slightly over the next two years to around 2¾ per cent. This

 outlook is still higher than ideal: it implies that inflation is more likely

 to be too high than too low in the period we can foresee.
Information that has become available since that forecast was made suggests that

 some of the factors pushing up underlying inflation last year remain in place.

 The December quarter national accounts recorded relatively strong growth in

 demand and output. We also have some additional data on wages, which showed

 that growth in the Wage Price Index remained around 4 per cent in annual terms

 at the end of last year (Graph 16). This needs to be interpreted carefully,

 because the September quarter outcome, and hence also the annual figure, were

 artificially held down by a change to the timing of last year's minimum

 wage decision. The outcome for the December quarter, which was unaffected by

 that, was a quarterly increase of 1.1 per cent, which was at the top end of

 its historical range.
Graph 16
In summary then, the recent round of data has pointed to relatively strong outcomes

 for demand, output and wages growth in the December quarter. As always, the

 Bank will be giving careful consideration to these developments, along with

 other incoming data, as it continues to review inflation prospects month by

 month.
Let me finish by summing up the main points.
The short-term outlook for the world economy looks like it will be favourable to

 further growth in Australia.
Longer term forces associated with the emergence of China and India are boosting

 trade within the Asian region, and are having significant effects on global

 relative prices. The resultant rise in Australia's terms of trade has

 provided a substantial boost to aggregate incomes and spending.
Overall, the Australian economy has had a lengthy period of expansion. The economy

 has moved closer to full capacity, with recent indicators pointing to stronger

 conditions in the second half of last year.
Thank you.
