BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Australia's Experience with Financial Deregulation – Melbourne
DATE: 16/07/2007
SPEAKER: Melbourne
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2007/sp-dg-160707.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Australia's Experience with Financial Deregulation
Ric Battellino
[1]
Deputy Governor
Address to China Australia Governance Program
Melbourne
–
16 July 2007
Download
109KB
Introduction
It is a great pleasure to be able to share with you some of Australia's experiences

 with financial deregulation. Even though the process of financial deregulation

 in Australia was largely completed 20 years ago, many of the lessons learnt

 from that experience remain relevant today. I think they are particularly relevant

 for today's seminar because Australia's financial controls prior

 to deregulation had much in common with the financial controls we see in China

 today.
I should also mention that while financial deregulation in Australia was largely

 completed 20 years ago, the reform process did not end there. In the period

 since, there have continued to be changes to the laws under which the financial

 sector operates, to ensure that the sector remains dynamic and competitive.
The Australian System Pre-deregulation
Financial deregulation in Australia began in the early 1970s. At that time, there

 were wide-ranging controls on the financial system. The aims of those controls

 were to:
provide the authorities with the mechanism to manage the monetary side of the economy;
create a captive market for government securities, so as to allow the Government

 to fund itself;
limit the risks that banks could take – i.e. they were a de facto form of prudential

 supervision;
allocate credit to areas of the economy that authorities thought should get priority.

 Housing and farming were particularly favoured; and
maintain a stable exchange rate and prevent the flow of domestic savings offshore.
The controls that were put in place to further these objectives were extensive. Listing

 them all could easily fill up the whole time allocated to me, so let me cut

 them down to their essential elements.
The interest rates that banks could charge on loans and pay on deposits were controlled,

 and generally did not vary much. This effectively prevented banks from managing

 or, more specifically, expanding their balance sheets.
Banks were subject to reserve ratios and liquidity ratios. These ratios were used

 by the authorities to control the second-round effects on bank balance

 sheets of exogenous flows of liquidity from either the balance of payments

 or fiscal policy.
Banks were subject to directives on the overall quantity of loans and at times there

 was moral suasion in relation to the industries to which loans should or should

 not be made.
Institutions were specialised: trading banks lent to businesses; savings banks lent

 to households, almost entirely for housing; and finance companies lent for

 more risky property loans and consumer credit.
All transactions in foreign exchange were closely controlled, particularly capital

 transactions, which were individually approved. Australians by and large were

 not allowed to make portfolio investments offshore, mainly because the authorities

 wanted to preserve domestic savings for domestic investment.
The exchange rate was managed very tightly. Australia did not join the many other

 developed economies that moved to a floating exchange rate after the breakdown

 of the Bretton Woods arrangements in the early 1970s.
Reasons for Change
Why did Australia move away from this system? I think there are four broad reasons.
First, being heavily focused on banks, the controls were weakening the position of

 banks and hampering their ability to respond to customer needs. Banks were

 rapidly losing market share in the financial system; by the early 1980s their

 share had fallen to 40 per cent, compared with 70 per cent in the early 1950s.
Second, the controls were becoming ineffective, as new, unregulated, intermediaries

 sprung up to provide finance.
Third, the increase in international capital flows following the breakdown of the

 Bretton Woods arrangements began to put pressure on the Australian dollar

 exchange rate. The authorities could stabilise the exchange rate only by engaging

 in large foreign exchange transactions, which in turn made it difficult to

 manage domestic liquidity and domestic financial conditions more generally.
Fourth, the financial system was quite inefficient, with wide interest spreads, little

 innovation and many creditworthy potential borrowers unable to get access

 to credit.
The Start of the Deregulation Process
By the time I joined the Reserve Bank in the early 1970s, there was already an active

 internal debate about the need for change. But there was also a fear that change

 could lead to a loss of control over the financial system. In any event, the

 power to make changes did not rest solely with the Bank; many of the financial

 controls were embedded in legislation and therefore the Treasury and the Government

 needed to be convinced before any changes could be made.
The early moves towards deregulation were tentative. There was an alternative school

 of thought that the problems with the controls in place could be overcome simply

 by extending their range and reach. For example, legislation was prepared to

 extend controls to the new non-bank intermediaries which were springing

 up because of the controls on banks. This legislation was never proclaimed,

 however, as the intellectual drive towards deregulation eventually dominated.
One of the first major steps in the deregulation process was the removal in 1973

 of controls over the interest rates that trading banks could pay on some wholesale

 deposits. This was seen as a modest, cautious step to allow banks a degree

 of freedom to compete.
This ended up having far-reaching consequences. It led to a sequence of changes,

 each one begetting the next, until 13 years later virtually all controls on

 banks had been removed, foreign banks had been allowed to enter the market

 and the exchange rate had been floated.
The key changes in this sequence were as follows:
The removal of interest rate controls on banks. As noted, this began in 1973 and

 was designed to allow banks to compete more effectively for deposits and loans.

 It did this, but it also had the unintended consequence of reducing the effectiveness

 of the reserve and liquidity ratios on banks. This was because banks could

 now counter a change in the reserve ratio by adjusting their deposit interest

 rates to compete more aggressively for funds. These funds often came from

 foreign capital inflows, as the relatively fixed exchange rate necessitated

 intervention by the Reserve Bank, which added to bank liquidity. The Reserve

 Bank then had to rely on market operations in government securities to control

 liquidity, but the effectiveness of these was limited because interest rates

 on government securities were generally set too low by the authorities, making

 it difficult to sell the required amount of securities.
To address this latter problem, further reforms were introduced to free up interest

 rates on government securities. Instead of the authorities setting these interest

 rates, securities were issued at tender, and the market set the interest rate.

 Tenders were adopted for Treasury notes in 1979 and Treasury bonds in 1982.

 This had the desired effect of allowing both the Government, through primary

 issue, and the Reserve Bank, through operations in the secondary market, to

 sell the required amount of bonds. But this still did not give the authorities

 effective monetary control, as evidenced by the limited success in achieving

 the monetary targets that were in place at that time. The relatively fixed

 exchange rate remained a weak point in the monetary control process, as attempts

 by the Reserve Bank to change monetary conditions were significantly offset

 by private capital flows.
This weakness was not overcome until the exchange rate was floated in 1983. The authorities

 had been gradually moving to introduce greater flexibility in the exchange

 rate since 1971, but none of the exchange rate regimes introduced over the

 ensuing decade or so provided sufficient flexibility to ensure that domestic

 monetary policy was not overwhelmed by foreign capital flows. The float changed

 this. It allowed the exchange rate to vary with the forces of supply and demand

 and eliminated the need for the Reserve Bank to clear the foreign exchange

 market. This severed the influence of foreign capital flows on domestic liquidity

 and gave the central bank the power to control domestic financial conditions.

 It allowed the implementation of monetary policy to move away from the use

 of reserve and liquidity ratios on banks to the use of market operations to

 influence short-term market interest rates and, through that channel,

 the interest rates that all lenders charged on loans. This resulted in monetary

 policy working more broadly through the financial system, rather than being

 focused only on banks, making it more effective and also less distorting.
The final set of measures aimed to increase competition in the financial sector.

 The main reform was to allow foreign banks to enter the Australian financial

 system, but processes for establishing new domestic banks were also eased.
What Lessons Can Be Drawn?
Let me end by drawing together some of the key points that we learnt from the process

 of deregulation in Australia.
The first point is that it is very important to harness public and community support

 for change. Even though the intellectual climate within the Reserve Bank and

 other economic policy agencies was already moving in favour of deregulation

 in the early 1970s, wider community acceptance of the case for change did

 not come until after the Government set up a broad-ranging inquiry, conducted

 by a group of independent experts.
Second, the reform process can take a long time to implement because controls are

 typically removed sequentially. While it is possible to take a ‘big

 bang’ approach and remove many regulations simultaneously, such a process

 can be difficult to manage. In Australia's case, it was not regarded

 as feasible to remove regulations simultaneously, mainly because of uncertainty

 about the consequences. While public inquiries had mapped out a range of reforms

 that needed to be introduced, the sequencing of these reforms was determined

 in a pragmatic way, in response to unfolding events and the consequences of

 previous reforms.
Third, the consequences of reforms are not always entirely predictable. Our experience

 was that the removal of one set of controls often put pressure on other controls.

 This meant that the reform process, once it had begun, developed its own momentum.
Fourth, some of the effects of reforms may take longer than expected to emerge. For

 example, one of the predicted consequences of deregulation was an increase

 in the competitiveness and efficiency of the banking sector. Yet, in the retail

 lending market in Australia, interest margins remained high for about a decade

 after the reforms. Part of the problem was that new banks found it difficult

 to enter the retail market as they lacked the widespread branch network of

 established major banks. These branch networks not only supplied low-cost

 retail deposits but also provided the distribution outlet for loan products.

 It was not until further financial innovation – such as the development

 of securitisation markets, mortgage brokers and electronic banking –

 took place that these barriers to competition were broken down.
Fifth, removing controls on banks will almost certainly result in a surge in credit

 growth. This reflects both demand and supply influences. A regulated financial

 system often tends to result in credit rationing, so there is unsatisfied

 demand for credit in the community; this is able to be met once the controls

 are removed. Also, the removal of controls can result in an increase in competitive

 behaviour by intermediaries as they try to increase, or even protect, market

 share; the end result is an increase in the willingness to supply credit.
Sixth, it is important to ensure that a sound prudential supervision framework is

 developed as regulatory controls on banks are removed. Under a regulated financial

 system, banks have little incentive or need to develop their risk management

 skills, as interest rates and exchange rates are relatively steady and credit

 rationing limits the extent to which risky borrowers can access loans. Once

 regulations are removed, competition can result in a surge in risk-taking.

 Domestic banks may be particularly vulnerable as their risk management systems

 may be less developed than those of foreign banks. Supervisors need to be

 prepared for this and need to monitor developments in the banking system closely.
The final point I would make is that the benefits of deregulation are broad-ranging

 and powerful. I would categorise these benefits into two types. The first relate

 to improvements in the operation of the financial system. Once regulations

 are removed, the financial sector becomes not only more efficient but also

 more responsive to the financial needs of the economy. New financing techniques

 and markets develop, resulting in a more diversified and resilient financial

 sector.
The second set of benefits relate to improvements in monetary control. In the Australian

 experience, notwithstanding some significant transitional difficulties, the

 move away from using direct controls to implement monetary policy to a system

 based on market operations ultimately gave the authorities greater scope to

 manage the economy, and helped pave the way for a return to economic stability.
Endnote
This talk draws heavily on a number of studies that the Bank has undertaken of Australia's

 financial deregulation. Some of the key ones relating to the early phase

 of deregulation are: I Macfarlane (ed) (1991), The Deregulation of Financial

 Intermediaries, Proceedings of a Conference, Reserve Bank of Australia, Sydney,

 20–21 June; M Edey (ed) (1996), The Future of the Financial System,

 Proceedings of a Conference, Reserve Bank of Australia, Sydney, 8–9

 July; Gizycki M and P Lowe (2000), ‘The Australian Financial System

 in the 1990s’, in D Gruen and S Shrestha (eds), The Australian Economy

 in the 1990s, Proceedings of a Conference, Reserve Bank of Australia, Sydney,

 24–25 July, pp 180–215; Edey M and B Gray (1996), ‘The

 Evolving Structure of the Australian Financial System’, RBA Research

 Discussion Paper No 9605; Battellino R and N McMillan (1989), ‘Changes

 in the Behaviour of Banks and their Implications for Financial Aggregates’,

 RBA Research Discussion Paper No 8904.
[1]
