BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Recent Developments in the Australian Bond Market – Sydney
DATE: 05/03/2008
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2008/sp-ag-fm-050308.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Recent Developments in the Australian Bond Market
Guy Debelle
Assistant Governor (Financial Markets)
Address to the Westpac/KangaNews Speed-meeting Summit:

 Kangaroos & Kauris
Sydney
–
5 March 2008
Download
76KB
It is certainly an interesting time for bond markets, perhaps too interesting. Today

 I would like to discuss what has been happening and, to some extent, what hasn't

 been happening in the Australian bond market since the onset of the credit

 turmoil last August. Along the way I will summarise developments in the Kangaroo

 market and compare it to the other areas of the local bond market.
Structure of the Australian Bond Market
But first, it is useful to provide some context by examining the structure of the

 bond market (Table 1, Graph 1). The Australian bond market can usefully

 be divided into five categories:
bonds issued by the Australian Government (CGS) and state borrowing authorities (semis);
bonds issued by Australian financial institutions;
bonds issued by Australian corporates;
asset-backed bonds issued by Australian-domiciled vehicles; and
Australian dollar bonds issued in Australia by non-residents – Kangaroo bonds.
Since 2003, the stock of CGS and semis outstanding in Australia has been relatively

 stable. Although the Australian Government has been running budget surpluses

 over this time, it has elected to maintain the stock of CGS on issue at around

 $50 billion. The state governments too have, on average, run budget surpluses,

 although some increase in issuance is in prospect as they raise funds for a

 number of infrastructure projects.
Table 1: Domestic Bonds Outstanding
Outstanding
($ billion)
Share
(per cent)
Average annual
growth
1998
2008
1998
2008
1998–2008
CGS
86.6
54.3
52.6
11.3
-4.6
Semi-government
44.9
66.0
27.2
13.8
3.9
Financials
7.2
89.3
4.4
18.6
28.7
Corporate
7.2
44.8
4.4
9.3
20.0
ABS
16.2
116.0
9.9
24.2
21.7
Kangaroos
2.6
108.7
1.6
22.7
45.3
Total
164.7
479.2
100.0
100.0
11.3
Sources: ABS; RBA
Graph 1
While the stock of public debt has been fairly static, the stock of bonds issued

 by non-government entities in Australia has grown rapidly, and now is around

 three times larger than the value of public sector debt outstanding. This growth

 has been relatively broad-based across the four segments of the non-government

 market, though Kangaroo bonds have grown particularly strongly with average

 annual growth of 45 per cent over the past five years.
Reflecting the strong growth in Kangaroo bonds, their share of the domestic market

 (including CGS and semis) has increased from less than 5 per cent

 during the 1990s to above 20 per cent (Graph 2). Some of the

 factors that have contributed to the strong growth were discussed in a speech

 by one of my colleagues, Chris Ryan, at this forum last year and include the

 relative decline in CGS outstanding and, more importantly, diversification

 and cross-border portfolio investment as well as the development of the cross-currency

 basis swap market which has enabled Kangaroo issuers to hedge their exchange

 rate

 exposures.
[1]
Graph 2
The bonds outstanding shown in Table 1 relate to domestic issuance only. For

 a number of years, Australian entities have also been active in the offshore

 bond market. In fact, the stock of Australian non-government entities'

 bonds issued offshore stands at around $400 billion compared to $250 billion

 onshore (Graph 3). This largely reflects the tendency of financial institutions,

 through both direct bond issuance (on-balance sheet funding) and securitisation

 (off-balance sheet funding), to access a diverse range of funding sources available

 offshore.
Graph 3
The banks' decision to fund themselves in this way has reflected the relative

 cost of issuing onshore and offshore. Research at the

 RBA
[2]
has shown that the average issuance costs domestically and offshore were very

 similar, suggesting, not surprisingly, that the banks had effectively arbitraged

 the differences in funding costs in domestic and offshore markets. They have

 raised funds where it was most cost effective to do so, just as Kangaroo bond

 issuers do in determining which market to raise their funds. This research

 also compared Australian banks with similar institutions in the US and showed

 that there was no evidence of any premium paid by Australian banks in raising

 funds in offshore markets.
Recent Developments in the Domestic Bond Market
As you are all aware, the period since July 2007 has been one of considerable

 turbulence in financial markets. For a number of years, central banks and a

 number of commentators had frequently expressed their concerns about the under-pricing

 of risk and the general compression of spreads. There were fears about the

 damage to financial markets and the economy that could result when risk was

 repriced. Now we have some idea about the nature of that unravelling.
As is generally the case when markets adjust to a new equilibrium, the transition

 is not smooth and the possibility of overshooting is always present. The reappraisal

 of risk has had a significant impact on global credit markets, particularly

 structured credit. Counterparty risk has increased substantially which has

 led to dislocations in a number of markets, including at times, the short-term

 money market. Central banks, including the RBA, have responded to the latter

 development by injecting substantial cash balances into the banking system,

 as needed, in order to ease the strain on liquidity, and in some cases –

 again, including the RBA – have extended the range of collateral against

 which they would

 lend.
[3]
The Australian bond market has obviously been affected by these global developments.

 The major effect has been to engender a substantial degree of reintermediation.

 Corporate bond issuance has been almost non-existent. But corporate debt has

 continued to grow strongly, with businesses turning to the banking sector for

 funds (Graph 4).
Graph 4
The major Australian banks – who are among the largest resident-entity bond

 issuers – have continued to directly access wholesale funding throughout

 the recent turmoil. Issuance so far in 2008 has been particularly strong (Graph 5).

 In part this reflects the fact that Australian banks have sound balance sheets,

 which has made them attractive to investors, relative to other global financial

 institutions and structured credit instruments.
However, the banks' access to funding has not been unaffected by the turmoil.

 Spreads at issuance have widened in the past six months and are well above

 the levels they issued at prior to July 2007. So far this year, the major

 banks have issued three-year bonds at an average of 47 basis points above

 the swap rate in comparison to average spreads of around 10 basis points

 prior to the disruption in markets. At the same time, the average maturity

 of financials' bonds at issuance has also shortened, to around two years

 compared to 4½ years previously. In part, the reported maturity

 is less because of the high share of extendible bonds in recent issues. (If

 one assumes that these bonds will all be extended to their legal maturity,

 then there has been little change in the maturity profile.) Nevertheless, the

 shorter tenors reflect a combination of investor preference in the current

 climate, together with the desire of issuers to avoid locking in high spreads

 for a long period. The rise in spreads and funding costs more generally has

 been passed on to business borrowers in the form of higher interest rates.
Because the banks have been able to maintain their pre-crisis pace of issuance, they

 have not curtailed their provision of credit, beyond charging a higher price.

 However, were the banks to experience difficulties in continuing to access

 funding, one might see a quantitative constraint placed on credit provision

 in addition to that provided by the price.
Graph 5
Although on-balance sheet funding by the banks through the issuance of bank bills

 and bonds has been large, securitised funding (i.e. off-balance sheet funding)

 has been very small. The securitisation market has been among the most affected

 by the strains in financial

 markets.
[4]
At the short-end, investors have been reluctant to rollover asset-backed commercial

 paper (ABCP) – spreads have increased sharply, maturities have shortened

 and investors are demanding greater transparency about the underlying collateral.
Issuance in the longer-term securitisation market has been particularly low. In the

 second half of 2007, $8 billion of asset-backed securities were issued

 compared to $48 billion in the first half. Since the beginning of 2008,

 there has only been one RMBS issue. In combination with only a small number

 of RMBS deals taking place, average deal size has also been small: deal size

 has averaged around $370 million since September 2007 compared to

 around $1.6 billion prior to August 2007. The RMBS that were issued

 last year were at very elevated spreads to the bank bill swap rate, with spreads

 on AAA-rated tranches of around 60 basis points compared to 18 basis

 points prior to August. With almost no issuance this year, it is unclear where

 spreads are now, although almost certainly even higher.
Recent Developments in the Kangaroo Bond Market
As most people in this audience are aware, Kangaroo bond issuance dropped off in

 the second half of 2007, in line with the decline in activity in the rest of

 the domestic bond market. Issuance in the second half of 2007 was $1½ billion

 per quarter, whereas prior to July 2007, quarterly issuance averaged $8 billion.

 Most of these deals were taps of existing lines. Issuance was at shorter than

 usual tenors and the average deal size was lower than usual. Possibly reflecting

 investors' reassessment of risk, the average credit rating of issuance

 was AAA compared to the average credit rating of Kangaroo issuance 18 months

 earlier of AA. Issuance was entirely by supranationals and government-related

 or guaranteed entities, whereas historically, the Kangaroo market has comprised

 roughly half US and European banks (some of whom have suffered losses associated

 with US sub-prime securities), with the other half being supranationals and

 government-related entities.
However, Kangaroo bond issuance has rebounded markedly this year. There has been

 $1.3 billion in new issuance and $3.5 billion in taps of existing

 lines. Deal sizes have increased, but all issues have still been AAA. This

 strength reflects a number of factors including investors' appetite for

 high quality A$ securities and relatively cheap funding costs as the Kangaroo

 issuers are able to potentially swap the A$ into foreign currencies with Australian

 banks seeking to do the reverse.
Graph 6 compares the cost, for a sample of AAA-rated Kangaroo issuers, of issuing

 in Australia and swapping the proceeds back into US dollars (the blue dots)

 rather than raising US dollars directly (the red dots). For our sample of issuers,

 Kangaroo issuance has been a slightly lower cost funding source, on average

 over the past few years, compared with raising US dollars (excluding deal costs).
Graph 6
The yield paid by this sample of Kangaroo issuers has tended to be below Libor, reflecting

 the high credit rating of these supranationals and government-related entities

 (i.e. the spread to Libor is negative). In recent months, the margin below

 Libor at issuance for the supranationals and government-related entities that

 have undertaken deals has actually increased, although borrowing costs have

 risen. This reflects the fact that the entities in our sample are high credit

 quality and can be considered a close substitute for government securities,

 combined with the widening spread between Libor and government bond yields.
Conclusions
It has been a tough time in global credit markets since August. Investor confidence

 has declined substantially and a significant repricing of risk has occurred.

 Bid/ask spreads have widened significantly, in the sense that the price investors

 are willing to buy exposure to credit is often substantially above what the

 issuer is willing to sell it at. The reappraisal of risk that occurred in August

 was triggered by credit write-offs by a number of institutions. Lower spreads

 are unlikely to return to markets before investors are confident that the bulk

 of these losses have been disclosed.
The Australian bond market has been affected by the global developments, although

 not in a uniform way. Issuance by financials has continued at pre-crisis rates,

 while corporate and asset-backed issuance has dried up. The issuance that has

 occurred has been at substantially wider spreads. A significant degree of reintermediation

 has taken place.
Kangaroo issuance has been similarly affected – average deal size and tenors

 decreased in the second half of 2007. However, the Kangaroo market has rebounded

 strongly so far this year. Kangaroo bonds continue to account for a large share

 of the domestic bond market – over 20 per cent – and

 this market continues to be supported by the fundamental factors that supported

 its robust growth over the past five years.
Endnotes
Ryan C (2007), ‘
Some General Observations on the Kangaroo Bond Market
’,

 address to the ‘Kangaroos: Positioned for Growth’ Conference,

 29 March.
[1]
‘
Australian Banks' Global Bond Funding
’,

 RBA
Bulletin
, August 2006 pp 1–6.
[2]
In early September, the RBA broadened the range of securities that could be

 used for repo. This represented the latest stage in the progressive broadening

 of the range of securities accepted for repos that has occurred over the

 past decade but its timing also provided an avenue for the Bank to assist

 the functioning of a broader range of markets. See <
https://www.rba.gov.au/media-releases/2007/mr-07-14.html
>

 and my speech to the Securitisation Forum last November, ‘
Open Market Operations and Domestic Securities
’.
[3]
Debelle G (2007), ‘
Open Market Operations and Domestic Securities
’,

 address to Australian Securitisation Forum, Sydney, 29 November.
[4]
