BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Talk to CEDA Economic and Political Overview 2008 – Sydney
DATE: 19/02/2008
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2008/sp-ag-190208.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Talk to CEDA Economic and Political Overview 2008
Malcolm Edey
Assistant Governor (Economic)
Committee for Economic Development of Australia (CEDA)

 Economic and Political Overview 2008
Sydney
–
19 February 2008
Download
96KB
Thanks to CEDA for the invitation to speak here today.
Since the last time I spoke at this event, the RBA has taken a number of steps to

 increase the amount of information it makes available to the public, both about

 its policy processes, and its thinking about the economy. We now issue a monthly

 statement after each Board meeting, setting out the reasons for the latest

 decision, whether or not the interest rate is being changed. Minutes of the

 Board meetings are now also published, and they give additional detail on the

 matters that were considered and the reasoning behind the decision. And those

 of you who follow these things closely would know that we've increased

 the level of detail in the economic forecasts set out in our quarterly
Statement on Monetary

 Policy
.
So there's a lot of material out there for financial markets and Reserve Bank

 watchers to get their teeth into. Today I won't be trying to add anything

 new to that, but rather, I'll base my presentation on our latest
Statement
, which was released last week.
The challenge in assessing the economic outlook at the moment is to weigh up the

 effects of contrasting domestic and international forces. Over the past few

 months the run of new information coming from abroad, at least in the major

 industrial economies, has been mostly bad. One important aspect of that is

 the deterioration in global equity markets, and the ongoing strains in credit

 markets. I'm not going to focus on those things today, but instead I'll

 focus on the evolving economic data.
Naturally, a lot of attention has focused on the United States (Graph 1). The

 fourth quarter national accounts confirmed a sharp slowdown in the US, and

 most expectations now are for a period of further weakness in the first half

 of this year. Some observers are saying the US is about to enter a recession,

 or is already in one.
Graph 1
What's driving the weakness most significantly is the downturn in the housing

 market. Housing starts are down by more than 50 per cent from their peak two

 years ago (Graph 2). Even though housing is typically only about 5 per

 cent of the economy, falls of this magnitude are a significant drag on growth.

 It's interesting to note that expenditure on US GDP excluding housing

 construction was still growing at a rate of 3½ per cent through the

 latest year (Graph 3). The problem is that a divergence of this size between

 the housing sector and the rest of the economy can't persist indefinitely,

 because the housing slowdown feeds back into employment, incomes and other

 forms of spending. Adding to the contractionary impact is a downturn in established

 house prices which, according to one major index are down about 9 per cent

 from their peak, and still falling (Graph 4). These forces, and the ongoing

 fall-out from the sub-prime crisis, could continue to dampen the US economy

 for a while yet.
Graph 2
Graph 3
Graph 4
On the other hand, it's important to note that there are some forces supporting

 growth. The US export sector is getting the benefit of a lower dollar; there's

 a significant fiscal package in the pipeline, which will add more than 1 per

 cent of GDP to private spending power; and sharp cuts have been made in US

 official interest rates, with financial markets expecting more to come. So

 the overall course of the US economy will depend on the net impact of all these

 forces. Opinions still differ as to how severe the US slowdown will be.
In varying degrees, the other major industrial economies are also experiencing a

 period of weakness. The important question is to what extent the weakness in

 the major industrial countries will affect China and the developing world.

 Up to now, the available indicators show the Chinese economy still growing

 strongly, at 11 per cent over the year to the December quarter (Graph 5).

 Chinese export growth did slow towards the end of last year, but only from

 around 30 to around 25 per cent, and, in any case, the bulk of China's

 growth is being driven by domestic demand. I note in passing that, on the latest

 data we have, the Indian economy is also growing well, though we don't

 yet have fourth quarter figures. And of course, both these strongly growing

 economies are now a bigger share of world and trading partner GDP than they

 were in previous business cycles.
Graph 5
Elsewhere in east Asia, conditions seem to have remained firm through to the end

 of last year. Growth in industrial production picked up during the course of

 last year, as did export growth, probably a result of rising Chinese demand

 (Graph 6).
Graph 6
Despite these continuing signs of strength, it's still likely that a generalised

 slowdown in the major industrial countries will have some dampening effect

 on the Asian region, and on other parts of the developing world. The most obvious

 channel for this to happen is through trade linkages, but these effects are

 probably not large enough on their own to generate a sharp slowdown in the

 developing world. Bigger effects would be seen if there were direct spillovers

 from recent events into developing-countries' financial systems. But

 while there has been some spillover of equity market weakness, the difficulties

 in credit markets at this stage have been mainly confined to the industrial

 countries.
Drawing all of this together, the RBA is forecasting that growth in Australia's

 trading partners will slow to a below-trend rate this year and next (Graph 7).

 This incorporates very weak growth in the G7 economies, comparable to the rates

 seen in the early part of this decade. Growth in our other trading partners

 is also forecast to slow down from last year, but unlike in the G7 countries,

 we expect their growth rates to stay relatively strong. Overall, trading partner

 growth is forecast at just under 4 per cent for each of the next

 two years, which is down from the 5 per cent pace seen in 2007. This

 outlook is a little softer than the outlook published by the IMF in late January.
Graph 7
The other important aspect of the international environment is the outlook for commodity

 prices and Australia's terms of trade (Graph 8). For the last four

 years, our terms of trade have risen at a rate of about 8 per cent per annum.

 This is the largest cumulative run-up since the 1950s, and a big source of

 stimulus to domestic incomes and spending. Developments over the latest year

 have been more mixed. Base metals prices have come off their peaks, by an average

 of about 30 per cent, though they're still high compared to earlier history.

 On the other hand, markets for coal and iron ore have tightened further, and

 big rises in this year's contract prices are widely expected. Rural prices

 have also been rising. Based on these developments, we expect Australia's

 terms of trade to rise by another 5 per cent or so this year, but to fall gradually

 thereafter (Graph 9).
Graph 8
Graph 9
As I said at the outset, the striking thing about the current situation is the contrast

 between domestic and international conditions. The Australian economy to date

 has stayed robust, and the main domestic challenges are those of strong demand,

 tight capacity and inflationary pressures. I'll outline some of the main

 features of all that and then finish up with the RBA's domestic forecasts.
The latest national accounts are now a bit dated, but they show a high rate of growth,

 over the year to the September quarter, of just over 4 per cent (Graph 10).

 Growth of domestic spending was even higher, at 5½ per cent. It's

 often the case in reading economic data that we get conflicting signals that

 make it hard to judge the overall pace of the economy. We had a period like

 that a year or two ago, when GDP growth was estimated to be quite low but other

 indicators, like business survey results and employment growth, were pointing

 to stronger outcomes. But in the more recent period we're getting a fairly

 consistent picture of strong growth, at least up to the September quarter.
Graph 10
More recent indicators seem to point to further growth. Retail sales posted a big

 rise in the December quarter (Graph 11). The value of sales over the latest

 year was up by 8 per cent, which was the fastest rate since 2004. Employment

 growth in the past few months has continued at an above-average rate, and the

 job vacancy rate rose further. Spending on imports has picked up, which can

 be taken as a general sign of strong demand. And most of the business surveys

 reported good trading conditions in the December quarter. An average of the

 results from the major surveys shows conditions were moderating in the second

 half of last year, after a strong first half, but they were still at a high

 level at the end of the year (Graph 12).
Graph 11
Graph 12
On the other side of the ledger, there was a sharp fall in building approvals in

 December, although the number of approvals was still up in the quarter as a

 whole. Some very recent indicators of consumer and business confidence have

 also weakened. But overall, domestic demand and labour market conditions look

 to have remained strong in the period for which reliable data are available.
These conditions have been associated with a rise in Australia's inflation

 rate. The December quarter consumer price index showed a rise of 0.9 per cent

 in the quarter, for an annual figure of 3 per cent (Graph 13). However,

 the annual rate was still being held down by a fall in fruit prices at the

 beginning of last year. As the calculation rolls forward, it's likely

 that the annual figure could spike to something close to 4 per cent next quarter.
Graph 13
Looking through the spikes (both upward and downward) our estimate of the underlying

 trend is now around 3½ per cent, after a period when it seemed to be

 fairly stable around the 3 per cent mark (Graph 14). This estimate is

 the average of the two RBA statistical measures that are designed to reduce

 the influence of volatile price movements. For those who prefer simpler methods,

 a third measure, which just takes out volatile food items and petrol, and adjusts

 for the recent change to the child care rebate, shows essentially the same

 trend over the past couple of years, though at a slightly lower rate (Graph 15).
Graph 14
Graph 15
A number of factors seem to lie behind the rise in inflation. These include the general

 background of strong demand and tight capacity, as well as rises in global

 commodity prices that have added to business input costs. There is also some

 evidence very recently of higher wages growth. Although the wage price index

 has maintained a fairly stable pace of around 4 per cent growth, the broader

 average earnings measure from the national accounts has picked up (Graph 16).

 Given its volatility, we have to be careful in giving this too much weight,

 but the trend in this measure has picked up recently from a 4½ per cent

 pace to more than 5 per cent.
Graph 16
Against this background, the RBA indicated in its latest statement that domestic

 demand would have to moderate if inflation is to be brought back to a satisfactory

 rate over time. The statement recognises that there are a number of forces

 at work that should contribute to that. As I discussed earlier, prospects for

 global growth have weakened, and this will have an impact on the domestic economy.

 Tighter financial conditions are another factor. We've already seen some

 easing off in credit growth to the household sector, and this is part of the

 mechanism by which tighter financial conditions can be expected to restrain

 demand over time.
Taking into account these factors, the RBA forecast is that non-farm growth will

 slow to a pace of around 2¾ per cent over the next two years (Table 1).

 Excluding both the farm and the mining sectors, where output is essentially

 supply determined, growth of the rest of the economy is projected to be slightly

 lower, dipping to 2½ per cent this year.
Table 1: Output and Inflation Forecasts
(a)
Percentage change over year to quarter shown
Sep 2007
Dec 2007
June 2008
Dec 2008
June 2009
Dec 2009
June 2010
GDP
4.3
3½
3¼
3¼
3
3
3
Non-farm GDP
4.5
3¾
2¾
2¾
2¾
3
3
Non-farm non-mining GDP
4.9
4¼
3¼
2½
2¼
2½
2¾
Consumer price index
1.9
3.0
3½
3½
3¼
3¼
3
Underlying inflation
3.0
3.6
3¾
3½
3¼
3¼
3
(a) Actual GDP data to September 2007 and actual inflation data to December

 2007. Underlying inflation refers to the average of trimmed mean and weighted

 median inflation. For the forecast period, technical assumptions include

 A$ at US$0.89, TWI at 69, cash rate at 7.0 per cent, and WTI crude oil

 price at US$86 per barrel and Tapis crude oil price at US$90 per barrel.
Sources: ABS; RBA
Growth at that sort of pace should allow some lessening of domestic capacity pressures,

 and thereby generate a gradual decline in inflation. As a result, inflation

 by the end of the forecast period is projected to be around 3 per cent, though

 this is still at the top end of the RBA's target.
In looking at these forecasts, we need to be aware of the significant uncertainties

 that exist, in both directions. The global economic situation is one important

 source of uncertainty, as is the situation in world and domestic financial

 markets. Another is the risk that the recent rise in inflation feeds back into

 domestic wage and price expectations. All of these will be important areas

 to watch in the period ahead.
I won't attempt to make any comment on the monetary policy significance of

 the outlook I've just described, since that has been well covered in

 our
Statement on

 Monetary Policy
last week.
Thank you.
