BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: A Comparison of the US and Australian Housing Markets – Adelaide
DATE: 16/05/2008
SPEAKER: Adelaide
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2008/sp-ag-160508.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
A Comparison of the US and Australian Housing Markets
Guy Debelle
[1]
Assistant Governor (Financial Markets)
Address to the Sub-prime Mortgage Meltdown Symposium
Adelaide
–
16 May 2008
Download
94KB
The unravelling of the sub-prime mortgage market in the United States over the past

 year has been associated with a major dislocation in financial markets that

 is still playing out. The developments in the sub-prime mortgage market should

 really be seen in the context of the broad-based repricing of risk that has

 occurred since last August. It has been the most obvious manifestation of this

 to the general public.
For a number of years, concerns had been expressed about the underpricing of risk

 in a range of financial instruments and the associated search for yield as

 investors sought higher returns in non-standard financial products as the yield

 on more standard products such as government bonds was deemed to be inadequate.

 The ‘search for yield’ and the general underpricing of risk that

 was prevalent up until last August provided an environment which facilitated

 the rapid growth of sub-prime lending.
In this paper, I will describe the characteristics of the US mortgage market, focusing

 on the sub-prime market and then compare it to the Australian mortgage market,

 where sub-prime comprises a very small share. In part, because the Australian

 financial system and economy entered the turbulence in strong shape, it has

 been considerably less affected than those in other countries, most obviously

 the United States. Nevertheless, there has been some effect domestically and

 in the final section of the paper I will discuss some of these channels.
1. Characteristics of the US Mortgage Market
[2]
It is useful to begin by defining what I mean by sub-prime, which is most easily

 done by defining prime. Prime mortgages in the US are those that meet the underwriting

 standards for entry into mortgage pools sponsored by the agencies Freddie Mac

 and Fannie Mae – so called ‘conforming’ mortgages. Non-prime

 mortgages are then those which are not prime. Generally they are to borrowers

 with a higher risk of default often related to the borrower's previously

 poor credit history. Jumbo loans, which are loans which are larger than the

 maximum set by the US agencies, are also an important component of non-conforming

 loans.
In broad terms, the non-prime mortgage market can be categorised into two segments:

 the highest credit quality segment is referred to as ‘near prime’

 or Alt-A, and the remainder is the genuine ‘sub-prime’

 category.
[3]
While Alt-A borrowers typically have only minor credit infringements in their history,

 other characteristics, such as a large loan, high loan-to-valuation ratios

 (LVR) or inadequate income documentation, mean they are unable to obtain a

 prime loan. Sub-prime borrowers typically have a blemished credit history and/or

 an appreciably impaired capacity to service the proposed loan.
There is no commonly agreed distinction between prime, Alt-A, and sub-prime borrowers

 based on the widely used Fair, Isaacs and Company (FICO) credit score. Data

 published by the New York Fed suggests a typical sub-prime FICO score of around

 620 and Alt-A score of about 700. Most lenders regard FICO scores below 620

 as sub-prime, 620 to 720 as Alt-A, and over 720 as prime. In sum, sub-prime

 and Alt-A borrowers have lower credit scores and higher LVRs, higher delinquency

 and foreclosure rates, and consequently pay higher interest rates than prime

 borrowers (Table 1).
Table 1: US Mortgage Characteristics – December 2007
Sample averages; per cent unless otherwise stated
Sub-prime
Alt-A
Prime
Interest rate
8.68
6.93
5.79
FICO Score
617
704
730
LVR
85
81
70
Balance ($US '000)
181
299
309
Low doc
30
53
0
ARM
59
40
Owner-occupied
91
72
Delinquency Rate (30 days)
24.5
4.5
3.2
*
Foreclosure Rate
8.5
2.9
1.0
*
Source: Federal Reserve Bank of New York; Loan Performance; Mortgage Bankers

 Association
*
MBA delinquency data includes Alt-A in prime.
Growth in non-prime mortgage originations first picked up in the mid 1990s. From

 2003, the non-prime segment entered a period of exceptional growth (Graph 1).

 Non-prime originations reached over 20 per cent of total US mortgage

 originations in 2006, and are now estimated to account for around 13 per cent

 of mortgage debt outstanding.
Graph 1
One noteworthy feature associated with the expansion of non-prime lending has been

 the rise in home-ownership rates, particularly amongst minorities, that it

 has facilitated. This needs to be kept in mind when thinking about the problems

 that have subsequently resulted. While delinquency rates may be currently around

 25 per cent, that does mean that 75 per cent of borrowers

 have thus far been able to purchase a house, many of whom otherwise probably

 would not have. Moreover, a number of borrowers refinance out of their sub-prime

 loans into a prime loan once they have established a suitable repayment history,

 so that over time there is a sizeable transition of sub-prime borrowers to

 prime borrowers.
As has been widely discussed, the prevalence of non-prime lending varies significantly

 across different regions of the US. One important factor driving the geographic

 distribution of non-prime lending is the fixed national loan size limit on

 conforming loans: the limit does not account for the large variation in house

 prices and earning capacity across different regions. High house price states,

 such as California and Florida, therefore tend to have a greater incidence

 of non-prime mortgages (Graph 2). This geographic concentration has become

 problematic as the house price cycle has turned (see below).
Graph 2
1.1 Why did sub-prime lending grow in the US?
The sub-prime market grew as a result of a number of developments on both the supply

 and demand side of the credit market. Greater availability of data on potential

 borrowers and new techniques to analyse that data allowed lenders to design

 products that were, in principle, better tailored to that part of the market.

 The combination of credit scoring and risk-based pricing allowed borrowers

 access to housing finance that had previously been unavailable.
As noted above, agency-backed funding is not available to the non-prime market. A

 crucial parallel development to the emergence of non-prime lending has been

 the growth in the ‘private label’ mortgage-backed securities (MBS)

 market. Private label MBS outstanding have essentially tracked the growth of

 non-prime mortgages outstanding (Graph 3) indicating securitisation has

 been the principal funding strategy for non-prime lenders.
Graph 3
In turn, there was a strong investor appetite for such securities which offered a

 high yield for a highly rated product. This appetite was particularly enhanced

 by the widespread ‘search for yield’ that was prevalent for the

 five years or so prior to last August.
There were also developments in terms of the pricing of these mortgages that facilitated

 their growth. The traditional prime mortgage product in the US is a fixed-rate

 30-year amortizing loan, which imposes minimum interest rate risk on borrowers

 who can typically refinance with little penalty if interest rates fall. One

 feature of the expansion of the non‑prime market has been the introduction

 of a wide range of non-traditional mortgage products including: interest only

 (IO), negative amortizing loans and adjustable-rate mortgages (ARMs). The latter

 became increasingly popular in the US from 2003 (Graph 4). They are often

 referred to by reference to the length of the initial fixed-rate term; for

 example 2/28 and 5/25 refer to loans that have initial two or five year periods

 before the interest rate is reset to a variable rate.
Graph 4
The popularity of ARMs during the period of monetary easing following the economic

 slowdown in 2001 was partly due to the greater responsiveness of short-term

 interest rates to the monetary stimulus, compared with rates on long-term fixed-rate

 mortgages (Graph 5). Low initial rates on ARMs also reflected aggressive

 pricing by lenders, particularly on non-prime products. The true cost of these

 products was obscured by the increasing use of larger upfront

 fees
[4]
and larger pre-payment penalties designed to prevent migration after the initial

 interest rates were reset to market benchmarks. The typical effect of these

 pricing mechanisms was to push out the real servicing burden past the initial

 few years.
Graph 5
Finally on the demand side, there was a marked change in the attitude of US households

 to property in recent years. The US has certainly experienced house price cycles

 in the past, although they tended to be more localised events such as the oil-related

 boom-bust in Texas property in the mid 1980s, New England in the late 1980s/early

 1990s and the tech-related property cycle in California around 2000 (Case,

 Quigley and Shiller 2003).
[5]
The rapid appreciation in house prices that occurred right across the country in

 the US from 2003 to 2006 (Graph 6) meant that property was now regarded

 as a very attractive investment option. A cohort of ‘property flippers’

 emerged whose aim was to buy and sell in a short period of time as property

 prices rose (and definitely sell before they fell). As Federal Reserve Bank

 of Boston President Rosengren has stated: ‘in retrospect, many borrowers

 took significant risks that would only be successful in a market with rising

 housing prices and the ability to refinance as needed’ (Rosengren 2007).

 By 2007, 17 per cent of all non-prime loans were for investment;

 the share of Alt-A loans was 28 per cent, while in sub-prime it was

 9 per cent.
[6]
Graph 6
1.2 What caused the problems?
Now I will turn to the question of why the sub-prime market has experienced such

 difficulties.
There are at least four factors that can be identified: reset shock, poor assessment

 of the risks by the lending institution, a decline in underwriting standards

 and, more recently, the decline in house prices (although this is somewhat

 endogenous). Notably, the economic slowdown in the US has, by and large, followed

 the sub-prime crisis rather than been a cause.
As noted above, a significant share of sub-prime mortgages were adjustable-rate mortgages

 which had ‘teaser’ rates. The teaser rates applied for the initial

 fixed period of the loan, typically one or two years, and were at a significant

 discount, often as much as 5 or 6 percentage points below the rate that

 would apply for the remaining life of the loan. In the case of the investment

 buyers mentioned above, they would hope to have sold the property before the

 higher interest rate applied.
The incidence of rate resets reached a peak around mid 2007, being one to two years

 after the peak in new loans. Using the LoanPerformance data published by the

 New York Fed, we estimate that the typical reset for sub-prime borrowers has

 been around 5 percentage

 points.
[7]
This reflects both the discount in the initial period of the loan as well as

 the fact that as the Fed tightened monetary policy, the rate to which the mortgage

 reset rose.
The fact that resets have been an important trigger for the sharp rise in delinquencies

 is evident in the sharper rise in delinquencies on variable-rate mortgages

 than on fixed-rate mortgages (Graph 7). The growth in delinquencies on

 prime variable loans is also noteworthy in Graph 7 but this predominantly

 reflects higher arrears on Alt-A loans, which are categorised as prime loans

 in the Mortgage Bankers Association data used here.
Graph 7
With the introduction of more sophisticated pricing techniques over the past decade

 or so, the mortgage industry recognised that efficiently pricing mortgages

 needed to account for the embedded options in mortgage products – namely

 the option to sell and close down the loan, to refinance, or, in the event

 the mortgage is not serviceable, the option to default. Adequately pricing

 these loans requires modelling how frequently borrowers will exercise these

 options – experience suggests that borrowers in the mortgage market exercise

 options much less than standard ‘rational’ option theory would

 predict.
[8]
While historical evidence provided a good guide for modelling the option behaviour

 of borrowers in the prime market, the short history of the non-prime market

 severely restricted the ability of lenders trying to model behaviour in this

 market. In addition, it is likely that lenders did not account for the risk

 of contagion in housing markets – that weak house price growth would

 significantly increase the likelihood that borrowers would default. So, while

 the ‘risk-based’ pricing systems that drove growth in the non-prime

 market may have been discriminating across borrowers appropriately, it clearly

 did not adequately price the risk of a systemic shock to the housing market.
While the above reflected a misplaced assessment by the lender of the borrower's

 ability to service the loan, the decline in underwriting standards which appeared

 to accelerate around 2006 reflected a conscious decision on the part of mortgage

 originators to lend to those who previously had been judged to be unable to

 service the loan. The decline in lending standards is most easily demonstrated

 if we look at mortgages by the year they were originated. Loans originated

 in the latter years of the sub-prime cycle, 2006 and 2007, are showing significantly

 higher impairment rates at the same stage of their life than earlier vintages

 (Graph 8).
This marked decline in underwriting standards appears to be related to the origination

 system that was prevalent in the US system. Those who originated the loan were

 paid on the volume of loans they were writing. These loans were then sold to

 another entity, generally an investment bank, who then packaged the loans into

 a residential mortgage-backed security (RMBS) which was sold to the end-investor.

 The originators had no long-term incentive, beyond reputation, to ensure that

 the underwriting standards were adequate. As the flow of new loans showed signs

 of diminishing in 2005 with the rise in US interest rates, the originators

 appear to have eased lending standards to maintain the flow.
Graph 8 indicates that the delinquency rate on sub-prime mortgages still probably

 has some way to rise given that the 2007 and many of the 2006 vintage mortgages

 have still not reached their interest rate resets.
Graph 8
Falling house prices have also played a role. While rising house prices allowed borrowers

 who were unable to service their mortgages the possibility of refinancing and

 using extracted equity to meet payments or selling without any loss to either

 them or the lender, this is not the case when house prices are falling. Indeed,

 with the extent of the falls that have been observed in parts of the

 US,
[9]
it can make sense for the borrower to walk away from the loan and the house, particularly

 if they are an investor rather than an owner-occupier. This is even more accentuated

 by the fact that in a number of US states, there is no recourse for the lender

 to other assets of the borrower in the event of default (this is not the case

 in Australia, as discussed below).
This process also becomes a vicious circle with falling house prices engendering

 more mortgage defaults and foreclosures which in turn puts further downward

 pressure on house prices. This is particularly the case given the geographic

 concentration of sub-prime mortgages in cities such as Las Vegas and Detroit,

 as well as areas of California and Florida.
2. The Australian Mortgage Market
Over the past decade, household debt in Australia has grown at an average annual

 rate of just under 15 per cent. As a result, the debt-to-disposable

 income ratio has roughly doubled from 75 per cent to 160 per cent

 over this period to be broadly the same as that in the US, and high in comparison

 to other countries (Graph 9). As I discuss in Debelle (2004), debt-to-income

 ratios are not necessarily the appropriate benchmark to assess relative debt

 levels as they deflate a stock by a flow. Debt-to-asset ratios are generally

 preferable (and are used when examining a corporate balance sheet), and on

 this metric, Australian debt levels are broadly similar to a number of other

 countries (Graph 10).
Graph 9
Graph 10
While the aggregate debt-to-income ratios are similar in Australia and the United

 States, the distribution of debt is quite different. Sub-prime lending makes

 up a very small share of the Australian mortgage market. The bulk of household

 debt in Australia tends to be owed by those with the highest incomes who are

 most able to service their loans (Graph 11). The RBA has published a number

 of articles looking at the distribution of debt that illustrate this

 point.
[10]
Graph 11
Turning to look at the small sub-prime market in Australia, non-conforming housing

 loans are the closest equivalent to sub-prime loans in the US, being provided

 to borrowers who do not satisfy the standard lending criteria of mainstream

 lenders such as those with impaired or incomplete credit histories. The loans

 are provided by a few specialist non-deposit taking lenders, with Pepper, Bluestone

 and Liberty Financial accounting for three-quarters of the market. This is

 in contrast to the US where sub-prime loans were provided by a wide range of

 financial institutions.
Non-conforming loans in Australia accounted for only about 1 per cent of

 outstanding loans in 2007, well below the 13 per cent sub-prime share

 in the US (Graph 12). The share of new loans in Australia that are non-conforming

 has also been very low over recent years, at about 1 to 2 per cent,

 significantly below the 20 per cent sub-prime share that such loans

 reached in the US in 2006 (Graph 13).
Graph 12
Graph 13
As at the end of December 2007, the arrears rate was 4.5 per cent

 of the number of outstanding non-conforming loans in Australia, above the 0.25 per cent

 arrears rate on securitised Australian prime loans, but significantly below

 the equivalent arrears rate on sub-prime loans in the US (Graph 14). Partly

 as a result of the lower arrears rate on the Australian non-conforming loans,

 ‘buy-and-hold’ investors have suffered very few losses on securities

 backed by the Australian non-conforming loans.
Graph 14
The lower arrears rate on Australian non-conforming loans compared to US sub-prime

 loans reflects differences in the loans' structural features.
Australian non-conforming loans have a less risky structure than US sub-prime loans.

 The average loan-to-valuation ratio on newly approved Australian non-conforming

 loans is around 75 per cent, which is lower than the average 85 per cent

 LVR on US sub-prime loans. There is a significant inverse relationship between

 LVRs and delinquency rates.
Australian non-conforming loans do not usually feature low introductory interest

 rate periods (teaser rates) or high-risk repayment options (such as negative

 amortization periods).
Australian lenders typically retain the lowest rated tranches of their residential

 mortgage-backed securities or place them with closely associated entities.
The Australian legal system, which gives a lender recourse to all of the borrower's

 assets in addition to the house, provides the borrower with a stronger incentive

 to repay their loan.
The lower arrears rate also reflects the strength of the Australian economy, particularly

 the low unemployment rate and the strong rate of household income growth.
3. Effects of the Recent Turmoil on the Australian Economy
The Australian mortgage market has not been subject to the same stresses as the US

 mortgage market because of both the very small size of the sub-prime market

 and the fact that the local sub-prime market has not suffered from the same

 flaws as the US equivalent.
Nevertheless, the Australian financial system has seen some fallout from the problems

 in the US. There has been very little in the form of direct exposure. The Australian

 banking system had very small holdings of instruments with exposure to the

 sub-prime market, either mortgages or collateralised debt obligations (CDOs).

 A small number of local hedge funds had some concentrated exposure, most notably

 Basis Capital and Absolute Capital. In addition, a number of local councils

 held CDOs with sub-prime exposure. But overall, the balance sheets of Australian

 financial institutions remain very strong.
As I mentioned at the beginning, however, the sub-prime crisis should really be seen

 in the context of a general repricing of risk in financial markets and this

 has had a more noticeable impact on the Australian financial system.
As risk has been repriced, the cost of borrowing has risen in intermediated markets

 so that Australian financial institutions (in line with all global institutions)

 have found it more costly to raise funds to finance their lending. However,

 Australian banks have generally not found their access to capital markets,

 both domestic and offshore, noticeably curtailed. While they have had to pay

 more for the funding, they have been able to raise the funding necessary to

 fund their targeted rate of balance sheet expansion. Moreover, this balance

 sheet expansion has mostly reflected new lending rather than the bringing onto

 the balance sheet of previously off-balance sheet exposures. This stands in

 stark contrast to some other global banks who have found it difficult to raise

 funds to meet their re-financing of off-balance sheet exposures.
Lenders have passed on their higher funding costs to borrowers, both households and

 businesses. As a result of the turmoil the average rate on a standard variable

 rate mortgage has increased by 40 basis points more than might otherwise

 have been the case, while the standard business borrowing rate has increased

 by between 30 and 60 basis points. The average rate on non-conforming

 loans in Australia has risen by around 130 basis points because of the

 turmoil to 12 per cent, to be around 320 basis points higher

 than the average rate for standard prime home loans. This increased cost of

 borrowing has been the primary channel by which the Australian economy has

 been affected by the global credit market turmoil.
The local securitisation market has also been temporarily dislocated. In part, this

 has resulted from the liquidation of a number of structured investment vehicles

 (SIVs) who had invested in fixed income products, particularly RMBS. As these

 SIVs were forced to unwind their positions, they sold their profitable Australian

 RMBS along with their loss-making US RMBS and CDOs. This resulted in an excess

 supply of RMBS in the local market at the same time as demand was reduced by

 the absence of the SIVs themselves. The resultant decline in the price has

 discouraged local buyers, despite their recognition that the price was very

 attractive and the product was very sound, because of concerns about recording

 mark-to-market losses should the price fall even further. The pricing in the

 secondary market, as well as the excess supply, effectively ruled out any new

 primary issuance.
The absence of the securitisation market has had a particularly significant effect

 on those institutions most reliant on it, which includes a number of the non-conforming

 lenders. These lenders have curtailed their flow of new lending and, in some

 cases, have temporarily suspended lending at all, but this decline has been

 met by other institutions so that the overall supply of housing credit has

 not been materially affected.
In recent weeks there are signs that this process might be drawing to a close with

 secondary market activity improving and indications that a number of primary

 issues will be coming to the market shortly.
4. Conclusion
While household debt levels in Australia and the US are broadly comparable, the composition

 and distribution of the debt is not. The sub-prime market is markedly smaller

 in Australia than it is in the US. Moreover, a number of features of the US

 sub-prime market which have contributed to its current problems are not present

 in Australia, including large teaser rates, a marked decline in lending standards,

 and an originate and distribute model where the originator has a reduced incentive

 to care about the quality of the loan written. As a result, arrears rates are

 significantly different in the two countries.
While the Australian financial system has had minimal direct exposure to the US sub-prime

 market, it has been affected by the global credit turmoil, particularly in

 the form of higher borrowing costs. However, the strength of the Australian

 banking system relative to those in a number of other countries, particularly

 the US, and the strength of the domestic economy more generally, has meant

 that the impact of the global turmoil has been relatively muted.
5. References
Ashcraft A and T Schuermann (2008), ‘
Understanding the Securitization of Subprime Mortgage Credit
’,

 Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Reports, No 318.
Battellino R (2007), ‘
Some Observations on Financial Trends
’,

 Address to Finsia-Melbourne Centre for Financial Studies, 12
th
Banking and Finance Conference, Melbourne, 25 September.
Bernanke B (2008), ‘
Mortgage Delinquencies and Foreclosures
’,

 speech at the Columbia Business School's 32nd Annual Dinner, New York, 5 May.
Case KE, JM Quigley and RJ Shiller (2003), ‘
Home-buyers, Housing and the Macroeconomy
’,

 in A Richards and T Robinson (eds),
Asset Prices and Monetary Policy
, Proceedings of a Conference, Reserve

 Bank of Australia, Sydney, pp 149–188.
Debelle G (2004), ‘
Macroeconomic Implications of Rising Household Debt
’,

 BIS Working Papers No 153.
Gerardi K, AH Shapiro and PS Willen (2007), ‘Subprime Outcomes: Risky Mortgages, Homeownership Experiences, and Foreclosures’,

 Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Working Papers No 07-15.
Green RK and SM Wachter (2007), ‘The Housing Finance Revolution’,

 paper presented at ‘Housing, Housing Finance, and Monetary Policy’,

 a symposium sponsored by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City, Jackson Hole,

 30 August–1 September.
Greenlaw D, J Hatzius, AK Kashyap and HS Shin (2008), ‘Leveraged Losses: Lessons from the Mortgage Market Meltdown’,

 paper presented at the US Monetary Policy Forum, conference is co-sponsored

 by the Initiative on Global Markets at the University of Chicago Graduate School

 of Business and the Rosenberg Institute for Global Finance at the Brandeis

 International Business School, New York, 29 February.
Rosengren ES, (2007), ‘Subprime Mortgage Problems: Research, Opportunities, and Policy Considerations’,

 speech at the Massachusetts Institute for a New Commonwealth (MassINC), Boston,

 3 December.
Endnotes
I thank Patrick D'Arcy and Arlene Wong for their help with this paper.
[1]
More detailed analyses can be found in Ashcraft and Schuermann (2008), Greenlaw,

 Hatzius, Kashyap and Shin (2008), and Geradi, Shapiro and Willen (2007),

 as well as recent speeches by Federal Reserve officials including Bernanke

 (2008).
[2]
Strictly Alt-A refers to mortgage-backed securities referencing near-prime mortgage

 pools, but it has become common practice to refer to near-prime mortgages

 as Alt-A. We follow this practice here.
[3]
Such fees are sometimes called ‘points’.
[4]
From my own experience of living in the US in the 1990s, it was clear then that house

 prices were not the topic of popular conversation that they have been in

 Australia. Certainly there was almost no discussion of buying an investment

 property. When I returned to live in the US for a period in 2003, that had

 clearly changed. Property was the topic du jour.
[5]
These data are available on the New York Federal Reserve website.
[6]
The LoanPerfomance data on the New York Fed website (based on a sample of securitised

 sub-prime loans) provide the average initial interest rate (8.02 per cent)

 and the average current interest rate (9.04 per cent), and the share of loans

 reset (20 per cent as at December 2007). From these we back-out an estimate

 of the average post-reset interest rate (13.12 per cent).
[7]
See Green and Wachter (2007) for a discussion of option pricing in mortgage markets.
[8]
A recent speech by Chairman Bernanke (2008) has a very visual summary of the extent

 of house price falls across counties in the US.
[9]
See for example, Battellino (2007), and Box B in the RBA's March 2007
Financial Stability Review
.
[10]
