BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Market Operations in the Past Year – Melbourne
DATE: 31/10/2008
SPEAKER: Melbourne
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2008/sp-ag-311008.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Market Operations in the Past Year
Guy Debelle
[1]
Assistant Governor (Financial Markets)
2008 FTA Congress
Melbourne
–
31 October 2008
Audio
11.7MB
Download
67KB
Introduction
Today I would like to talk about the Reserve Bank's operations in the domestic

 money market during the period of financial turmoil. The money market can be

 thought of as the plumbing right at the heart of the financial system. It is

 important to ensure that any blockages in the money market are addressed quickly

 to ensure that liquidity can flow through the financial system.
I have spoken on this topic twice in the past

 year,
[2]
but there have been some noteworthy developments in the few months since last

 I spoke on this which bear some examination. While we have made some changes

 to our operating procedures over the past year or so, these changes have been

 easily accommodated within our overall framework. More generally, the operating

 framework for liquidity provision to the domestic money market has proven to

 be resilient and effective throughout the period.
Before discussing some of the changes we have made in recent months, I will first

 describe the overall framework for the RBA's open market operations.

 I will then outline the changes we have made to our domestic market operations

 which can be grouped into three: widening the pool of eligible collateral,

 conducting operations at longer maturities and offering term deposits. Finally

 I will also describe the US dollar facility that we have instituted with the

 Federal Reserve over the past month.
The Australian Money

 Market
[3]
The Reserve Bank Board implements monetary policy by setting a target for the cash

 rate – the interest rate on overnight unsecured loans in the interbank

 market. This rate influences interest rates in other wholesale and retail markets,

 which in turn affect economic activity and inflation.
A key determinant of activity within the interbank market for overnight funds is

 the aggregate volume of exchange settlement (ES) balances held at the Reserve

 Bank. ES accounts are maintained by banks and a number of other institutions

 to meet their settlement obligations with each other and with the Reserve Bank.

 As such, they are the most immediate source of liquidity for banks.
In Australia, banks are not required to meet targets for holding reserves at the

 central bank. However, a bank's ES balance must always be non-negative,

 even on an intraday

 basis.
[4]
As the Reserve Bank remunerates ES balances at a rate of 25 basis points

 below the cash rate target, this creates an incentive for account holders to

 recycle excess balances within the interbank market by lending them to other

 institutions at the cash rate. That is, there is an incentive to economise

 on cash holdings which must be weighed against the cost of running short of

 cash balances at the end of the day and needing to borrow from the Reserve

 Bank at a penalty rate (see below). I will describe later how inter-bank lending

 in the cash market has fared during the period of turmoil.
The Reserve Bank controls the supply of ES balances through its transactions in financial

 markets. For example, when the Bank purchases securities from a counterparty,

 that counterparty's ES account (or the ES account of their bank) is credited

 with funds at the same time the transfer of title to the security occurs. In

 other words, the Bank injects funds into the system when it purchases a security

 (and conversely withdraws funds when it sells a security).
Each day then, the Reserve Bank must gauge the overall demand for ES balances from

 the financial system and adjust the supply of funds accordingly so as to keep

 the cash rate at the target set by the Reserve Bank Board.
Even if the Bank wishes to hold the amount of ES balances stable from one day to

 the next, the Bank will generally be required to transact with the market to

 offset the impact of its customers' payments, in particular those of

 the Australian Government, which is the Bank's largest customer. Payments

 to or from these customers can significantly alter overall balances in the

 system. Each day, the Bank will estimate the likely net impact of these payments

 and its own transactions and derive the estimated cash position. This is the

 amount by which the pool of ES balances would change if the Bank did not conduct

 any market operations. In doing so, Bank staff liaise closely with the relevant

 departments within the Australian Government and with our other clients to

 ascertain the timing and size of payments and receipts.
If, in aggregate, private financial institutions are expected to pay an amount of

 funds into the Government's account at the Reserve Bank (for example,

 in the form of tax payments) greater than the funds being received, then the

 cash position will be a deficit and, other things equal, ES balances will decline.

 Conversely, on days where payments from the Bank and its customers are estimated

 to be greater than receipts, there will be a cash surplus and ES balances will

 increase. Almost always, the Reserve Bank will act to offset the liquidity

 impact of these exogenous flows by purchasing (or selling) securities in open

 market operations.
At 9.30 am each morning, the Bank publishes the estimated cash position for

 that day and its intention to either buy or sell securities. The Bank will

 also indicate a preference for the maturities at which it wishes to conduct

 its operations. I will discuss later how we determine these preferred maturities.

 Counterparties have 15 minutes to submit approaches, from which the Bank

 will select those that best match its dealing intentions, in terms of preferred

 maturities, and are at the most attractive rates.
The Bank is usually in a position to advise market participants of the success or

 otherwise of their approaches by 10.00 am. The results of our market operations

 are published electronically by about 10.15 am. They show the amount dealt

 as well as the maturities at which the Bank dealt, the type of collateral and

 the average

 price.
[5]
The overall impact on system liquidity of the Bank's operations on any given

 day is not the amount dealt but any net injection or withdrawal of funds, that

 is, the amount dealt less the cash position. This is reflected in the net change

 in ES balances day to day.
It is worth keeping in mind two points: the Reserve Bank has control over the size

 of the ES balance pool; and, funds injected into the system through open market

 operations must end up in the ES account of a financial institution at the

 end of the day, after all interbank payments have been made. Thus an institution

 having a large balance in its account at the end of the day may reflect a desire

 to hold a large precautionary cash balance but it can also be the case that

 the institution happened to be a large net receiver of payments on that particular

 day and was unable to on-lend the funds.
To deal with institution-specific, rather than market-wide, liquidity needs, the

 Bank maintains a standing facility through which ES account holders can obtain

 funds overnight, at their discretion, at 25 basis points over the cash

 rate target. The funding is secured against collateral. Generally, banks will

 access this facility when they have miscalculated their payment flows or are

 experiencing other operational problems and would otherwise see their ES balance

 fall below zero. Because the facility is designed to deal with temporary technical

 hitches in the operation of the money market, there is no stigma associated

 with its use. Indeed, importantly, there is no stigma attached to any of the

 Bank's open market operations.
The range of institutions with which the central bank is willing to deal in its market

 operations can be relevant in determining how well cash balances are distributed

 within the system during periods of market stress. Permitting a wide range

 of institutions to bid directly for central bank funding makes it more likely

 that liquidity is directed to where it is most needed. The range of institutions

 eligible to deal with the Reserve Bank is quite broad and extends beyond banks

 and other ES account holders to include, for example, securities dealers and

 nominee companies. This wide range of counterparties participate in the Bank's

 operations on a regular basis. To be a counterparty in our open market operations,

 an institution must be a member of RITS (which covers the terms of the repo

 agreements between ourselves and the counterparty), have its treasury operations

 in Australia and be able to settle in a timely and efficient manner.
Overall, the Bank has found it advantageous to be as flexible as possible in the

 way that it manages system liquidity. We operate daily in the market with a

 relatively wide range of counterparties and over a wide range of maturities.

 This has been particularly beneficial over the past year, as it has allowed

 the Bank to respond in a timely way to emerging pressures in financial markets.
Market Operations over the Past Year
Within this overall framework, the Reserve Bank has made a number of changes over

 the past year as the financial turmoil has unfolded. These have included widening

 the pool of collateral, dealing on a regular basis at long maturities and introducing

 a term deposit facility. In addition, we have significantly increased the pool

 of ES balances, on occasion, to levels well above those that have prevailed

 in recent years.
Increasing ES balances
Beginning in August 2007, as banks became less certain of their own funding requirements

 and less confident of the credit profile of their counterparties, the inter-bank

 borrowing markets became quite tight. Banks were more inclined to hold onto

 cash, both because of an increased unwillingness to lend it, but also reflecting

 a concern about their ability to obtain funding themselves from the market

 in the future should they require it. This was most evident in term markets,

 where borrowing rates increased sharply. However, for similar reasons, there

 was an increased precautionary demand for ES balances, reinforced by the fact

 that ES balances are a risk-free asset. The effect was the demand curve for

 ES balances shifted out.
The Reserve Bank's initial response last August to this increase in demand

 was to increase the supply of ES balances, from the level of $750 million

 which had prevailed for a number of years to more than $5 billion (Graph 1).

 If the Reserve Bank had not increased the supply, the cash rate would have

 risen above the target set by the Reserve Bank Board as financial institutions

 bid harder for funds in an attempt to increase their cash balances. Because

 of the framework for monetary operations, in particular the fact that we deal

 in the market every day, the Bank was able to very quickly gauge the extent

 of the increased demand for cash and react accordingly.
Graph 1
As the demand for cash in the market has ebbed and flowed since last August, the

 Bank has continued to vary the supply of ES balances. ES balances have generally

 increased approaching the end of a quarter as institutions have sought to hold

 more cash on their balance sheets through the quarter end. This phenomenon

 had been evident prior to the credit turmoil but has been particularly accentuated

 over the past year.
At times when term markets for bank funding have become particularly stressed (Graph 2),

 the Reserve Bank has signalled that it is willing to deal for longer terms

 so as to enhance liquidity in the underlying market for bank paper. In conducting

 a repo operation at a longer term, say 80 days, the Bank is encouraging

 an institution to present eligible collateral of at least that maturity (eg,

 in this case a 90-day bank bill). The institution can purchase the bank bill

 at a high spread to the expected cash rate (OIS) and present it to us as collateral

 at a (generally) lower spread to OIS. Note that this repo transaction is profitable

 to both the institution and to the RBA as our return on the transaction is

 the spread on the repo. In this sense, the Bank can try to alleviate some of

 the pressures in term funding markets by conducting repos at longer maturities.
Graph 2
However, to expand its repo operations at these longer terms, the Bank may need to

 increase the supply of ES balances. While the repo operations are conducted

 at term, the cash provided by the Bank increases the ES pool on the date of

 the transaction. Thus the Bank needs to weigh up the benefit of providing some

 support to term funding markets against any possible cost to the cash market

 of increasing the ES pool (discussed below).
From early September, tensions in money markets increased significantly. Counterparty

 credit risk became paramount. This was primarily a global phenomenon, exacerbated

 by the failure of Lehman Brothers. Demand for exchange settlement balances

 rose rapidly and again the Bank accommodated this, which resulted in balances

 reaching $11 billion in mid October. We have subsequently reduced the

 ES pool as demand has eased.
The degree to which turnover in the cash market has been affected by the turbulence

 and by the heightened counterparty fears should not be overstated. The daily

 turnover in the cash market has been relatively constant throughout and has

 been largely unaffected by the size of exchange settlement balances (Graph 3).

 Thus a crucial part of the financial system, which lies right at its heart,

 has continued to function well.
Graph 3
Term deposits
As the pool of exchange settlement balances has increased, it has the potential to

 eventually disrupt the functioning of the cash market. At some point the supply

 may be so large as to result in downward pressure on the cash rate. Moreover,

 if the pool were large enough, each institution may have enough balances in

 its ES account to settle any payments outflows without resorting to the interbank

 market.
To relieve this tension in the overnight cash market, while continuing to allow the

 Bank to conduct more repo transactions at longer maturities to try to alleviate

 term funding pressures, the Bank announced a new term deposit facility on 24 September.

 This facility allows institutions to move some of the funds that may have otherwise

 sat in the overnight ES accounts to a longer maturity of either 7 or 14 days.

 Thus one can think of the term deposits as an ES account with a longer maturity.

 The balances are breakable at short notice with a relatively small cost, so

 institutions are still able to access this liquidity if necessary.
The rates of return on these accounts are determined by auction, with the counterparties

 indicating their desired return in their

 bid.
[6]
The return should generally be no lower than the rate of return on the overnight

 ES account (which is 25 basis points below the cash rate target). However,

 the return should generally also not be higher than the cash rate, which is

 the unsecured interbank rate, given the absence of credit risk on a deposit

 with the RBA. Indeed, in our regular auctions of term deposits, the Bank reserves

 the right to reject bids at too high a rate.
Collateral
While the Bank deals with a wide range of counterparties, the credit risk the Bank

 incurs through its counterparty exposures is mitigated by three factors: the

 quality of the collateral; the fact that in normal circumstances it accepts

 only ‘third-party’ collateral; and the margin or ‘haircut’

 taken on that collateral.
Over the past 10 years or so, the Bank has gradually expanded the range of securities

 which it is willing to accept as collateral. In general, these changes had

 been prompted by the evolving nature of the debt markets in Australia. Specifically,

 as the stock of Commonwealth Government securities (CGS) has fallen, the Bank

 has needed to accept other highly rated collateral. Securities issued by the

 borrowing authorities of State and Territory governments became eligible collateral

 in 1997, the AAA-rated Australian dollar debt of certain supranationals became

 eligible in 2000, while those of foreign governments and agencies with government

 guarantees, as well as bank bills and certificates of deposit issued by certain

 authorised deposit-taking institutions (ADIs), became eligible in 2004.
From mid September 2007, the Bank further expanded its list of eligible collateral

 by accepting ADI securities with a remaining term to maturity longer than 12 months.

 These securities are subject to minimum credit-rating requirements and margins

 as high as 9 per cent.
With the market for securitised debt becoming particularly dysfunctional, the Bank

 announced that from early October 2007, residential mortgage-backed securities

 (RMBS) and asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP) would also be eligible collateral.

 In addition to being of the highest credit quality (AAA-rated and P-1 rated,

 respectively), the Bank only lends funds against these securities to the extent

 that at least 90 per cent of the assets backing them are ‘full-doc’

 mortgages. The RMBS and ABCP can be issued by both authorised deposit-taking

 institutions (ADIs, which are banks, building societies, credit unions) as

 well as non–ADIs. The securities need to be vetted by the Bank's

 Risk Management Unit before being deemed to be eligible collateral.
The Bank also draws a distinction between securities to which its counterparty is

 related and those to which it is not. Thus, while the Bank is prepared to accept

 as collateral bills and certificates of deposit from any ADI, an ADI dealing

 in repurchase agreements with the Reserve Bank cannot offer its own securities,

 or those of a related party, as collateral.
The same condition also applied to RMBS and ABCP when these securities were initially

 added to the acceptable collateral list. That is, a financial institution was

 not able to present, as collateral, RMBS with which it was related party. The

 relatedness could reflect the fact that it was the originator of the mortgages

 or that it acted to provide credit enhancement or insurance to the security.
However, at the time of their inclusion in the pool of eligible collateral, the Bank

 stated that in certain circumstances the relatedness stipulation might be relaxed.

 With the significant worsening of term funding markets since early September,

 the Bank announced on
8 October
that ADIs could present their own RMBS and ABCP as eligible collateral. This served

 to significantly increase the pool of liquifiable assets available to financial

 institutions.
When lending cash against the receipt of collateral, the Bank always imposes a margin

 or ‘haircut’ on its counterparty. For example, on short-term bank

 paper, the margin has been

 2 per cent.
[7]
That is, for every $100 lent by the Bank, securities worth $102 need to be pledged

 as collateral. If, during the term of the repo, the security declines in value,

 the counterparty is required to post additional collateral. In the case of

 RMBS and ABCP, a margin of 10 per cent is imposed.
Maturities
The Bank's preferred maturities for dealing are derived from our projections

 for future withdrawals and additions to system balances. The preferred maturity

 is generally a day when we forecast the system to be in surplus. Thus, on the

 day that the repo transactions on this preferred maturity were to unwind, they

 would drain liquidity from the system, thereby converting the projected surplus

 to a deficit. In this way, we are able to ensure that on most days the system

 is in deficit, thereby allowing us to conduct repo operations regularly.
In the past year, the Bank has varied the maturity of its repurchase transactions

 quite significantly (Graph 4).
Graph 4
In the past, we have not offered repos at longer maturities on a pre-scheduled basis,

 although we generally offered a longer term at least once a week. However,

 with the worsening of the dislocation in term funding markets in recent weeks,

 we have decided to offer a 6 and 12 month maturity every day to provide

 some greater certainty of term funding to financial institutions. This has

 resulted in a further lengthening of the average maturity of the RBA's

 repo book so that it currently has the structure shown in Graph 5.
Graph 5
US Dollar Swaps
Thus far, I have talked about the provision of Australian dollar liquidity to the

 local market. However, the US dollar funding market has been particularly disrupted

 globally at various times since last August. The roots of this dislocation

 are related to the need for some institutions, particularly in Europe to access

 US dollar funding on a daily basis to fund their US dollar investments. This

 has caused disruption to the US dollar foreign exchange swap market, not just

 in Europe, but also in other regions and time zones, given the global nature

 of the market.
To address this problem, late last year, the Federal Reserve announced a swap facility

 with the European Central Bank and the Swiss National Bank so that the ECB

 and SNB could provide US dollars to their local market participants against

 local currency collateral.
As the dislocation became particularly acute in September, the facility was expanded

 significantly to include a number of major central banks, including the Reserve

 Bank of Australia, to allow the US dollars to be provided to more markets in

 more time zones. In a number of cases, including our own, the introduction

 of the facility does not reflect a fundamental shortage of US dollars on the

 part of local financial institutions. Rather it was to help address the problem

 in global markets of the dislocation of the US dollar swap market by increasing

 the supply of US dollars in more markets and time zones.
The swap facility involves the exchange of US dollars from the Fed for local currency

 from the counterpart central bank, Australian dollars in our case. We then

 auction the US dollars to local institutions who are eligible for our domestic

 market operations. The institutions then provide as collateral, securities

 which are acceptable in our domestic operations. Thus, one can think of this

 facility as an open market operation in US dollars, rather than in domestic

 currency.
In some regions, such as Europe and the UK, the facility has been further extended

 to provide an unlimited amount of US dollars at a pre-determined price, to

 ensure that all the demand at that price is satisfied.
Overall, it appears this has had some success with conditions in the US dollar swap

 markets improving over the last few weeks, and the cost of US dollar funding

 declining to more normal rates.
Conclusion
The framework for the Reserve Bank's market operations has been very flexible

 and has served us well. The modifications that the Bank has made in response

 to the tensions in the domestic money market resulting from the turmoil in

 global credit markets have been easily accommodated within the overall pre-existing

 framework. In particular, the fact that the Bank has for a long time, dealt

 daily with a wide range of counterparties across a wide range of maturities

 has allowed us to respond quickly and flexibly. Nevertheless, the Bank is continually

 reviewing all aspects of the operating framework to ensure that it is consistent

 with the evolving nature of the domestic financial market.
Endnotes
I thank Matt Boge for his help in writing this speech.
[1]
‘
Open Market Operations and Domestic Securities
’,

 speech given to the Australian Securitisation Forum, 29 November 2007.

 ‘
Open Market Operations
’,

 speech given to the Australian Debt Markets Conference, 27 June 2008.
[2]
This sections covers much of the material in the two earlier speeches but bears repeating.
[3]
This is in contrast to the systems in the US, Europe and the UK where there is a

 reserves target that is required to be achieved over a period of time, but

 the Australian framework is similar to that in Canada.
[4]
This information is published on the Reserve Bank's Reuters and Bloomberg pages

 and is also available on the
website
.
[5]
The rate of return is expressed as a spread to the cash rate, so there is no issue

 of monetary policy expectations affecting the bid, if the deposit were to

 span a RBA board meeting.
[6]
The full list of
eligible collateral
and details of the
margin requirements
are available on the Bank's website.
[7]
