BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: The Financial Cycle and Recent Developments in the Australian Financial System – Sydney
DATE: 13/08/2008
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2008/sp-ag-130808.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
The Financial Cycle and Recent Developments in the Australian Financial System
Philip Lowe
Assistant Governor (Financial System)
6th Annual Retail Financial Services Forum
Sydney
–
13 August 2008
Download
105KB
banking, global economy, global financial crisis
It is a pleasure to be able to address this year's Retail Financial Services
 Forum. As you know, this is the sixth year that the Forum has been held and
 I think it is fair to say that the current environment is more challenging
 than at any time over that
six-year period.
The global financial system is having to deal simultaneously
 with a very large repricing of risk, an unwinding of the leverage built up
 over recent years, shaken confidence in many financial institutions, and rising
 problem loans. As a result, many banks around the world are facing the most
 difficult operating environment for many years.
Given the scale of these adjustments in the global system, it is hardly surprising
 that the Australian system too has felt their impact. Bank equity prices are
 down, funding costs are up, the competitive dynamics in the system have changed,
 and provisioning charges have increased. The system has, however, coped much
 better than the financial systems of many other countries. The Australian
 banks continue to record healthy profits, have low loan arrears in both absolute
 terms and by international standards, and have sound capital levels. Overall,
 Australia has been well served through the recent turmoil by the fundamental
 strength of its banking sector and the financial system more generally. It
 has also been well served by its regulatory regime, which is widely recognised
 to have worked well through the recent turmoil.
In my remarks this morning, I would like to begin by discussing some of these recent
 trends in more detail. In particular, I would like to touch on the issues
 of profitability, credit quality and funding. I would then like to lift the
 gaze a little from what has been going on very recently, to focus on one of
 the many longer-term issues on which the spotlight has fallen in recent months.
 And that is the way in which financial institutions and regulators respond
 to the inevitable cycles in the financial system. This issue is important
 because the current problems did not simply arise out of thin air, but rather
 had their origins in the global boom over recent years. While the next financial
 crisis will surely look different to the current one, there is a fair chance
 that it too – like most crises in the past – will have its origins
 in a financial boom. Dealing with these booms, and the seemingly inevitable
 busts, is a major challenge for all of us involved in the financial sector.
Bank Profitability
As is well known, the profitability of many banks around the world has been severely
 dented by recent events. Nowhere is this more evident than in the United States,
 with data published by the FDIC showing that in the six months to March this
 year, the aggregate profits of FDIC-insured banks were down 70 per cent on
 the level a year ago (Graph 1). The decline has been particularly pronounced
 for the largest banks, with the six biggest commercial banks collectively
 incurring a loss over the past three quarters. In Europe, the profitability
 of many banks has also been significantly diminished, with the aggregate profits
 of the largest banks that have recently reported
half-yearly
results being down by around
70 per cent
on the level a year ago.
Graph 1
In contrast, the Australian banking system remains highly profitable by international
 standards. Over the most recent six-month reporting period, profits after
 tax (and outside equity interests) for the five largest banks were up 12½
 per cent on the level of a year earlier and were double those of five years
 ago (Graph 2). Looking forward, some decline in aggregate profits is
 expected by banking analysts, with a couple of the large banks recently announcing
 higher provisioning expenses for the second half of the current financial
 year. Despite this, their forecasts suggest that the annualised after-tax
 return on equity for the largest banks over the second half of the year will
 still be around
15 per cent,
not that far below the average of the past decade
(Graph 3).
Graph 2
Graph 3
These strong profit outcomes are reflected in the high credit ratings of the Australian
 banks, with the four largest banks all having AA ratings. Consistent with
 these high ratings, the system is soundly capitalised, with the aggregate
 regulatory capital ratio around
10.5 per cent,
similar to its average level over the past decade. It
 is notable that amongst the largest 100 banks in the world, there are less
 than a handful with higher ratings than those of the large Australian banks
(Graph 4).
And, unlike the situation in some other countries,
 the larger Australian banks have not been forced to raise significant amounts
 of new capital to cover writedowns.
Graph 4
While the recent increases in provisions came as a surprise to the market, many commentators
 have noted that a prerequisite for a return to more normal conditions in global
 markets is for financial institutions to make clear and accurate statements
 about their exposures. This is because nothing is more corrosive of confidence
 in the financial system than concerns that losses are being hidden or not
 fully disclosed. If bad investments have been made, it is better to acknowledge
 them, take the punishment, and move forward.
In the current environment, therefore, all financial institutions need to consider
 how best to strengthen the bond of trust between themselves and investors.
 Developing a reputation for full, frank and comprehensive disclosure is obviously
 important here. By and large, Australian banks have done well in this regard,
 although further steps can always be taken to provide the comprehensive information
 that investors require. Reflecting this, the Reserve Bank has strongly encouraged
 Australia's leading financial institutions to provide disclosures consistent
 with the template set out in the recent Financial Stability Forum report on
Enhancing Market and Institutional
 Resilience
[1]
.
Credit Quality
One of the long-standing positive aspects of the Australian system is the relatively
 low arrears rates on Australian residential mortgages. Currently, just over
 0.4 per cent of banks' mortgages are more than 90 days in arrears, with
 the comparable figure for loans that have been securitised being
0.55 per cent
(Graph 5).
These figures have increased from the very low levels
 seen between 2002 and 2004 – and are likely to increase further with
 the economy slowing – but remain considerably below comparable figures
 for many other countries. In the United States, for example, around
2.2 per cent
of banks' residential mortgages are non-performing
(Graph 6).
And in the United Kingdom, around 1.3 per cent of the
 number of loans is in arrears by
90 days
or more.
Graph 5
Graph 6
There are a number of reasons for this comparatively favourable experience in Australia.
 One is that the competitive excesses that saw a dramatic lowering of credit
 standards in the mortgage market in the United States did not occur here.
 While credit standards in Australia were eased considerably, increasing the
 availability of credit to many people, we have escaped the worst of the excesses
 seen in the United States.
One reason for this is that financial conditions in the United States were much more
 accommodative than they were in Australia. This made it possible for many
 US households with limited repayment ability to obtain loans, with many borrowers
 anticipating that increases in house prices would create the wherewithal to
 repay the loan. Another explanation is that APRA has pursued a relatively
 activist regulatory approach, tightening up prudential requirements on housing
 loans over recent years, and increasing the attention it has paid to banks'
 mortgage exposures. And third, the big lift in aggregate house prices in Australia
 took place between 1996 and 2003, prior to that in a number of other countries.
 Looking back, this timing can be seen as partly fortuitous. It meant that
 just at the time that financial innovation was accelerating around the world
 and investors were looking for new higher-yielding assets, Australian households
 were digesting the big run up in debt and house prices that had occurred earlier
 in the decade. While many households' finances are undoubtedly currently
 strained, the aggregate position of the household sector is in better shape
 than it would have been had the housing boom run on longer and coincided with
 these developments in the global system.
Another factor underpinning the historically positive record is the legal and regulatory
 arrangements in Australia. The Uniform Consumer Credit Code means that courts
 can set aside mortgage agreements where the lender could have reasonably known
 that the borrower could not repay the loan without substantial hardship. In
 addition, unlike in some parts of the United States, Australian mortgages
 are ‘full recourse’ so that a borrower cannot simply hand in the
 keys and extinguish the debt. These aspects of the legal framework serve a
 useful purpose, helping to focus the minds of both lenders and borrowers on
 the risks of entering into a loan contract.
Looking beyond the banks' housing portfolios, the ratio of non-performing assets
 to total assets also remains low by both historical and international standards,
 at
0.56 per cent
(Graph 7). While some banks have had to make increased provisions against loans
 to borrowers with complicated and leveraged financial structures, the banks'
 broader business loan portfolios are continuing to perform well. Reflecting
 this, the
non-performing
loans ratio remains below the average for the decade from the mid 1990s to the mid
 2000s.
Graph 7
Furthermore, the Australian banks have not been heavily involved in the
sub-prime
and related markets in the United States, and earn less of
 their revenues from trading in financial markets than many overseas banks.
 Some have, however, incurred indirect exposures to the
sub-prime
problems through a variety of channels. One of these is the
 liquidity lines that were granted to sponsored vehicles that financed themselves
 in the
short-term
commercial paper market and purchased
sub-prime-related
assets. When the commercial paper market closed to
 these vehicles, the liquidity lines were drawn, with the banks providing the
 liquidity finding themselves lending to these vehicles. Given that the price
 of the underlying assets has fallen dramatically, the ability of some of these
 vehicles to repay their loans has been compromised. To a significant extent
 the motivation for the establishment of these entities was to reduce regulatory
 capital requirements, with a number of overseas banks taking the process much
 further than we have seen in Australia. Reflecting this, regulators around
 the world, including here in Australia, are looking at how this type of activity
 can be addressed, and banks too are no doubt assessing the risks.
Despite the relatively favourable position of the Australian banking system, bank
 share prices in Australia have fallen considerably, as they have around the
 world. Since its peak in October 2007, the bank share price index is down
 by around 30 per cent, the largest cumulative decline since the early 1990s
 (Graph 8). In comparison, share prices of commercial banks in the United
 States are down by around 35 per cent over the same period, while those in
 the
United Kingdom
are down by
32 per cent.
Taking a somewhat longer perspective, the Australian banking
 sector has considerably outperformed those in many other countries, with bank
 share prices up by nearly
25 per cent
on their level at the beginning of 2004, compared with
 falls of between 20 and
25 per cent
in the
United States
and
United Kingdom
over the same period.
Graph 8
Funding
One aspect of recent events that has drawn considerable attention is the funding
 costs of banks. As is now well understood, banks around the world have faced
 significant increases in the spreads over risk-free rates that they have to
 pay for their funds. This increase reflects both a rise in the amount of compensation
 that investors require for accepting risk generally, and a rise in the perceived
 riskiness of many banks.
Not surprisingly, the Australian banks have been affected by this repricing. At the
 short end of the yield curve, the spread between the 90-day bank-bill rate
 and the OIS rate has recently averaged around 35 basis points higher than
 it was in mid 2007, while at the long end, the spread between the yield on
 bank bonds with
3–5 year
maturities and the bank bill swap rate is up by around
 90 basis points (Graph 9).
Graph 9
These higher funding costs have been passed onto borrowers, with mortgage rates increasing
 by around 55 basis points more than the increase in the Reserve Bank's
 cash rate over the past year. They have also had a considerable impact on
 the competitive dynamics in the system, with lenders financing mortgages through
 the securitisation market facing a more significant increase in their costs
 than have the banks. At current spreads, these lenders face difficulties in
 making profitable prime housing loans at the rates that the banks are charging
 for these loans. As a result, their share of approvals for new owner-occupied
 housing loans has fallen from around 13 per cent in the middle of last year
 to just over 4 per cent (Graph 10). Conversely, the share accounted for
 the banks has increased significantly.
Graph 10
These changes in the competitive position of different lenders are probably best
 thought of as cyclical, rather than structural. During a period in which risk
 is being repriced and uncertainty has increased, it is not surprising that
 those lenders relying most heavily on the capital markets have suffered a
 decline in their competitive position. When conditions improve, as they inevitably
 will, these lenders will find that their competitive position also improves.
 In the meantime, the extent to which banks are able to increase their borrowing
 rates is constrained both by competition amongst themselves, and the fact
 that higher margins make it more likely that lenders funding through the securitisation
 markets will again find it profitable to make housing loans. A widening of
 margins also risks raising the ire of the public.
Given the assessment that the recent changes in the competitive landscape are largely
 cyclical, the Reserve Bank does not see a case for permanent government intervention
 in the mortgage market. Over the past couple of decades, a lack of housing
 finance has not been a problem in Australia. We have had a very competitive
 private mortgage market which has offered a wider range of mortgage products
 to consumers than that seen in many other countries. While the availability
 of finance has tightened up recently, over the longer term we do not expect
 that a shortage of housing finance will be one of the problems that Australia
 will have to confront. Furthermore, as we have seen in other countries, the
 creation of permanent government structures in this market can have unintended
 consequences.
Another notable feature of the recent experience has been a strong increase in competition
 for deposits, with many banks lifting their interest rates on both at-call
 and term deposits. As a result, it has become common for some banks to offer
 retail customers interest rates at, or above, those available in the short-term
 money market, although people investing in high-yield term-deposit ‘specials’
 need to be aware that at maturity the funds may roll into a new deposit with
 a much lower interest rate.
This increase in competition in deposit markets has coincided with a renewed appetite
 by Australians for bank deposits. According to the Westpac and Melbourne Institute
 Survey of Consumer Sentiment, more people now say that bank deposits are a
 wiser place for their savings than real estate or shares
(Graph 11).
This is the first time that this has been the case
 for more than two decades. As a result, bank deposits are growing very quickly,
 increasing by 18 per cent over the past year, the fastest growth for many
 years
(Graph 12).
Term deposits by the household sector have grown even
 faster, up 40 per cent over the past year. Not surprisingly, many banks are
 now paying more attention to how best to attract and retain depositors.
Graph 11
Graph 12
Importantly, throughout the turmoil of the past year, the large banks have also retained
 access to both the domestic and international capital markets. While they
 have had to pay more for funds, they have been able to obtain the funds they
 need to expand their balance sheets. Earlier in the year in particular, they
 issued a significant volume of bonds in the offshore markets, and they continue
 to tap both onshore and offshore markets on a regular basis
(Graph 13).
While at times, investors do not seem to have shown
 very much discrimination amongst banks around the world in terms of market
 prices, the ability of Australian banks to continue to raise significant volumes
 of funds is a positive reflection of their underlying strength.
Graph 13
The Financial Cycle
I would now like to change gear and turn briefly to the longer-term issue that I
 raised at the outset – that is, dealing with the financial cycle. As
 I said, this is a challenging issue for us all, and one that has taken on
 more importance over time, particularly as the size of the financial sector
 has grown relative to the size of the overall economy. This growth means that
 swings in the financial sector have a greater potential to materially affect
 the economy, both in the upswing and the downswing, than was once the case.
It is all too clear that most episodes of financial disturbances have their roots
 in the build up of risk in good times. While the specifics differ from episode
 to episode, there are some obvious common elements. In the boom, when economic
 conditions are benign and asset prices are rising, many investors perceive
 risk to be low and are prepared to borrow large amounts of money to purchase
 assets, with lenders all too willing to provide the finance. This reinforces
 the general sense of well being, with asset prices rising further and many
 people being emboldened to borrow even more. Given the sense of optimism,
 many people seek new and more risky ways of maintaining inflated expectations
 of returns, including by increasing their leverage, and the whole process
 is typically given extra fuel by a spurt of innovation in the financial sector.
 Those who caution that the good times may not continue are drowned out by
 this flood of optimism.
And then something happens to put the whole process into reverse. The risk built
 up in the good times quickly crystallises. Assets prices fall, leverage needs
 to be reduced, a sense of pessimism pervades, and many people question why
 they, or at least their investment advisors, did not see the turnaround coming.
 This depiction is admittedly highly stylised, but it is not too far from the
 mark in describing events over recent years, or for that matter many other
 financial cycles.
The difficult policy question is what, if anything, should be done about this. This
 question is now moving to centre stage in discussions of the global financial
 architecture, with the Financial Stability Forum identifying it as one of
 the major issues to be addressed in the fallout from the sub-prime problems.
While there is no shortage of ideas of what could be done, there are no easy answers.
 Some people suggest that the remuneration arrangements within financial institutions
 need to be redesigned. The concern here is that current arrangements encourage
 short-termism, with the risk metrics used in the remuneration process paying
 too little attention to risks that are likely to crystallise only in the medium
 term. Another idea is that the valuation approaches for many assets need to
 be reconsidered, particularly for those which trade in very illiquid markets.
 A third idea is that monetary policy should lean against a financial boom,
 particularly if significant debt-financed imbalances are building up in the
 system. And yet a fourth idea is that financial institutions should build-up
 their capital buffers in the good times, with these buffers being available
 in more troubled conditions. This could be achieved through regulation or
 by financial institutions taking a more active approach in dealing with the
 economic cycle.
Each of these ideas has its pluses and its minuses. Rather than talk about them all
 in detail, I would like to touch just briefly on the last of these ideas –
 that is, for the banking system to build up the size of its capital buffers
 in the good times. I focus on this issue not because it is necessarily the
 most promising of these various ideas, but rather because it is currently
 under discussion in a number of international forums, and it illustrates the
 difficult trade-offs involved.
On the one hand, increasing capital buffers in the good times is likely to reduce
 the need for banks to raise capital when times are tough. This might help
 smooth out some of the swings in the lending cycle. An increase in capital
 could be achieved by banks retaining on their balance sheet a slightly higher
 share of their profits in good times where credit losses are unusually low,
 rather than paying the profits to shareholders in the form of dividends. Increasing
 capital buffers in good times might also be one way of guarding against some
 of the moral hazard concerns that can arise if the public sector is prepared
 to assist markets, and even institutions, during more troubled times.
On the other hand, higher capital ratios can increase the cost of financial intermediation
 and could distort the competitive position of different institutions in the
 financial system. Also, if institutions are forced by regulation to hold more
 capital than they think is justified, they are likely to seek ways of avoiding
 the requirements. As the recent experience with conduits, SIVs, and
364-day
credit lines cautions, the result paradoxically can be an increase
 in overall risk in the financial system. Finally, there are also considerable
 implementation challenges facing any attempt by regulators to introduce a
 regime in which minimum capital requirements change over the course of a business
 or financial cycle.
As I said these are not easy issues. The trade-offs are difficult and the implementation
 challenges are considerable. The same is true for each of the other ideas
 that I mentioned a few minutes ago. Despite this, finding ways of dealing
 with financial cycles is important if we are to maintain the broad community
 consensus that has supported financial liberalisation and globalisation over
 recent decades.
Thank you very much for your time.
Endnote
See <http://www.fsforum.org/publications/r_0804.pdf>.
[1]
