BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Remarks to Minter Ellison Financial
 Services Industry Forum – Sydney

 Services Industry Forum – Sydney

 Services Industry Forum – Sydney

 Services Industry Forum – Sydney

 Services Industry Forum – Sydney

 Services Industry Forum – Sydney

 Services Industry Forum – Sydney

 Services Industry Forum – Sydney

 Services Industry Forum – Sydney

 Services Industry Forum – Sydney
DATE: 19/11/2009
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2009/sp-ag-191109.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Remarks to Minter Ellison Financial Services Industry Forum
Guy Debelle
Assistant Governor (Financial Markets)
Remarks to Minter Ellison Financial 

 Services Industry Forum
Sydney
–
19 November 2009
Audio
10.2
MB
I will focus on two issues in my remarks today: firstly, what is the future for securitisation,

 and secondly, and relatedly, developments in the provision of credit.
I spoke at length on the first issue yesterday at the Securitisation Forum, so let

 me recap the main points I made there. In brief, the future is looking brighter

 for securitisation, but I would not expect a return to the heady days of earlier

 this decade, when securitisation accounted for around one quarter of the flow

 of housing credit.
Securitisation will be an important part of the financial landscape in the future.

 Prior to the crisis, many commentators sung the praises of securitisation as

 a useful means of dispersing risk around the financial system, and in principle

 I think they were right. There were however, some major shortcomings in the

 implementation of securitisation.
I have said before that there are a lot of similarities between securitisation and

 junk bonds. Both were important financial innovations that were well-founded.

 Both grew too rapidly and expanded into areas they shouldn't have and

 were bought by investors who shouldn't have bought them. Both played

 important roles in generating financial dislocation. Just as junk bonds are

 now a regular (but smaller) part of the financial landscape, I believe securitisation

 will be similar in the future.
However, as with junk bonds, much needs to be done to restore the brand name of securitisation.

 Some of this will only come with the passage of time. However, there are steps

 that can be taken to hasten the process.
The message that Australian RMBS has been, and continues to be, a strongly performing

 asset needs to be continually reinforced. The differentiation between Australian

 RMBS and US RMBS needs to be highlighted. This message probably doesn't

 need to be delivered to the portfolio managers. It needs to be delivered to

 the superannuation trustees who from their continual exposure in the media

 to the US experience, may believe that all securitised assets are excessively

 risky. The Australian industry needs to differentiate its product from the

 US brand.
What are some of the main differentiating factors?
Unlike in the US, the credit quality of Australian RMBS has remained at the highest

 level throughout the financial crisis. Even at its peak in February 2009,

 the Australian RMBS arrears rate, at less than 1 per cent, was extremely

 low compared to international standards. By way of comparison, the US arrears

 rate is well above 5 per cent currently, and it does not look like it has

 yet peaked. Over the past year, the arrears rate in Australia has actually

 been declining slightly.
The bulk of Australian RMBS are backed by prime full-doc loans.
Even with non-conforming loans, there is a marked difference between the standards

 in Australia and the US. We really did not and do not have a subprime issue

 here.
Despite this good performance, there are some developments on the demand side of

 the market which suggest that it is unlikely to return to its former self.

 At least one-third of the investors in Australian RMBS were offshore structured

 investment vehicles, the now notorious SIVs. These institutions just are not

 around anymore, and hence one part of the market which Australian issuers targeted

 is not there.
The liquidation of the portfolio of the SIVs has been one of the factors inhibiting

 the recovery in the Australian market. The liquidation generated an overhang

 of stock in the secondary market which saw spreads blow out to very wide levels.

 It appears now that this overhang in the secondary market has largely been

 eliminated which has seen spreads narrow significantly, and contributed to

 the revival of demand for primary issuance, which we have seen manifest in

 the recent successful issues of residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS)

 without the support of the Australian Office of Financial Management.
Reflecting the ongoing amortisation of principal (i.e. mortgage repayments), as well

 as a relatively low volume of issuance, the value of Australian RMBS outstanding

 has fallen more than 40 per cent below its peak in June 2007. This

 decline in the stock outstanding of RMBS should be starting to create some

 holes in investors' portfolios.
Hence, I think there are good reasons to believe that the signs of life that we have

 seen in the market in recent months presage more activity to come in the near

 future.
So securitisation may be coming back as a viable form of financing. However, a number

 of the larger non-bank originators are no longer around any more. So what does

 this imply about the supply of housing credit going forward?
First, it is worth stating that there has not been any material restriction in the

 supply of housing credit throughout the financial turmoil. Growth has slowed,

 but to an annual rate of 8 per cent, which in some countries is regarded as

 high!
Margins on variable rate housing lending relative to bank funding costs have actually

 declined a little over the past two years. The margin between the standard

 home loan rate and the cash rate has indeed increased, but with banks funding

 costs rising materially more than the cash rate, the overall margin has declined.
However, while margins on variable rate home loans have decreased, this has been

 more than offset by a widening in business and personal loan margins, so that

 overall bank margins have widened, as is evident in the banks' most recent

 profit statements.
While housing margins have declined, will that continue to be the case going forward,

 given that there are less competitors in the housing loan market after the

 crisis? I believe there are good reasons to think that competitive pressures

 will continue to restrain the ability for any margin-widening on the part of

 the larger banks. The housing loan market remains contestable, even if there

 are not as many competitors currently. By that I mean that any excessive widening

 in margins will attract new competitors back into the market. The return of

 securitisation, even if not to its former state, will clearly assist this.
I will now turn to the supply of credit to business. My colleague John Broadbent

 spoke about this last week. The stock of intermediated business credit, that

 is, businesses borrowing from banks and other intermediaries has been declining

 in recent months. The Bank's assessment is that this is a combination

 of both demand and supply.
A number of businesses have responded to developments in financial markets and the

 real economy by seeking to reduce the level of gearing on the balance sheet.

 As John noted last week, balance sheets which were regarded as ‘lazy’

 pre-crisis are now
de rigueur
. Corporate equity

 raising has been at very high level over the past year. Much of this equity

 has been used to pay down debt which has seen the gearing level of the Australian

 corporate sector decline from 85 per cent at the beginning of this year to

 65 per cent now.
Not all of this de-gearing however was voluntary. In some cases, there was pressure

 put on the company by its financiers to raise the equity.
In aggregate, taking into account both equity and corporate debt raisings, overall

 business funding has actually grown, albeit at a slower pace, even though intermediated

 credit has declined. This stands in marked contrast to the early 1990s episode

 where total business funding declined for a number of years through the recession.
On the supply side, there has been an overall tightening in the provision of credit,

 particularly to certain sectors of the economy. The most obvious case where

 this has occurred has been commercial property. Drawing on their experience

 from the early 1990s recession, banks were particularly concerned about their

 exposure to commercial property and hence have been very reluctant to take

 on any additional lending to this sector. However, again in light of the experience

 of early 1990s, they have not pulled the plug and rushed for the exits, but

 tried to manage their overall exposure.
More generally, we do not see much evidence of a wholesale withdrawal of credit provision

 by any particular sector of the banking industry. Some foreign-owned banks

 have curtailed their provision of credit, some others have increased it. Foreign

 banks without any on-the-ground presence in Australia have tended to pull back

 the most. Our data also indicate that credit provision to the SME sector, which

 tends to come almost entirely from the local banks, has not declined unlike

 lending to larger corporates.
So the reduction in credit that has occurred is a combination of both reduced supply

 and reduced demand. Banks and corporates had both prepared for a much worse

 cycle than has so far eventuated. As confidence returns, one would expect to

 see business credit growth pick up again.
