BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: The Development and Resilience of Financial Systems in Asia – Perth
DATE: 09/11/2009
SPEAKER: Perth
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2009/sp-ag-091109.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
The Development and Resilience of Financial Systems in Asia
Philip Lowe
[1]
Assistant Governor (Economic)
Remarks at In the Zone Conference, University of Western Australia
Perth
–
9 November 2009
Audio
8.81MB
Download
67KB
In my remarks this morning, I would like to focus on three broad issues.
The first of these is the way that the integration of Asian financial systems into

 the global financial system has taken place.
The second is the considerable resilience of Asian financial systems over the past

 18 months.
And the third is some general lessons that one might draw from the recent experience.
Financial System Integration
As is well known, the economies of Asia are highly integrated into the global trading

 system for goods and services. For many of the economies of the region, the

 ratios of exports and imports to GDP are significantly higher than for most

 of the developed economies (Graph 1). In contrast, financial systems in

 Asia are not as highly integrated into the global financial system.
Graph 1
There are two aspects of this integration that I would like to highlight.
The first relates to the scale of cross-border capital flows. In the developed economies,

 there are typically very large private gross cross-border capital flows, with

 for example, German residents investing significant amounts of money in US

 assets and US residents investing significant amounts of money in German assets.

 Over the past decade, this cross-border flow of capital has averaged around

 15 per cent of GDP a year, although it fell a lot recently as ‘home bias’

 strongly reasserted itself (Graph 2). In contrast, the two-way flow of

 capital is much smaller in Asia, with gross private capital flows averaging

 just 2 per cent of GDP over the past decade.
Graph 2
The second aspect of Asian financial integration is the role played by public-sector

 entities. For some years now, saving ratios in Asia have been considerably

 higher than investment ratios (Graph 3). This is particularly the case

 in China. These ‘excess savings’ have, by necessity, been channelled

 to the rest of the world. However, this has not occurred by the private sector

 in Asia buying foreign assets, but rather by the public sector, in the form

 of the central bank buying foreign assets. As a result, foreign exchange reserves

 held by central banks in Asia have increased markedly, from around US$½

 trillion a decade ago to around US$4 trillion today (Graph 4).
Graph 3
Graph 4
This model of financial integration – with relatively small gross capital flows

 and the central bank playing a key role – has had implications for the

 development of domestic financial markets in Asia, with these markets playing

 a less important role in the allocation of capital than in some other countries.

 Notwithstanding this, since the Asian crisis of the late 1990s, significant

 efforts have been made to deepen financial markets in the region. The share

 of Asian currencies (excluding the yen) in global foreign exchange turnover

 has doubled since 1998 – although it remains small – and liquidity

 in private and public debt markets has improved. In a number of countries there

 has also been an improvement in the infrastructure supporting financial markets.
Looking forward, the strong economic performance seen in Asia should help build the

 basis for further financial market development. Nothing hurts the growth of

 financial markets more than concerns about counterparty risk, and high country

 risk adds to these concerns. The recent relatively good performance of a number

 of countries in the region should give market participants additional confidence

 in the resilience of the Asian economies and thus confidence in the strength

 of counterparties in the region. One illustration of the general improvement

 in the fundamentals can be seen in the rise in the average quality of sovereign

 credit ratings in Asia over recent years (Graph 5).
Graph 5
Financial System Resilience
I would like to now turn to the second issue – the resilience of Asian financial

 systems.
It has become common to talk of recent events as the ‘GFC’ – the

 global financial crisis. This is really a misnomer though. It has not been

 a crisis in all financial systems around the globe. Rather, it has been a crisis

 in the financial systems of many of the advanced countries of the North Atlantic.

 To be sure, this crisis has had very large ramifications for the global economy

 – including the economies of Asia – but we have not seen a crisis

 in the financial systems of Asia.
There have not been collapses of large financial institutions in Asia and banks have

 not needed to be rescued by governments. And while the stock prices of banks

 in the region fell sharply late last year – as they did around the world

 – this relative resilience has meant that the loss of market value in

 the banking sector has been less in Asia than in most of the advanced economies

 (Graph 6).
Graph 6
An obvious question to ask is why Asian financial systems have been so resilient,

 especially given that, just like in the late 1990s – when there was a

 financial crisis in the region – there was a sharp reversal of bank capital

 flows into Asia late last year (Graph 7).
Graph 7
One clear difference between then and now is that on this occasion the sharp fall

 in bank inflows into Asia was caused by a crisis of confidence in the
lending
banks – particularly in Europe – not in the
borrowing
banks as it was during the late 1990s episode. While the

 banks in Asia had to adjust to the effective closure of international capital

 markets for a time, there was not a loss of confidence in domestic counterparties,

 and the banks of the region have been able to continue performing their critically

 important role of intermediating between borrowers and lenders. The result

 has been that credit to the private sector has continued to grow at a reasonable

 pace in most countries of the region (Graph 8).
Graph 8
Part of the explanation for this resilience can be found in the factors that I mentioned

 a few moments ago – the way that the integration into the world financial

 system has occurred and the greater reliance on banks, rather than financial

 markets.
It is possible – although certainly not inevitable – that if the private

 sector in Asia had recycled the high savings of the region to the rest of the

 world, then Asian entities would have ended up holding a significantly larger

 share of the structured securities that have caused so much trouble elsewhere.

 The Asian central banks have predominately bought assets of relatively high

 credit quality, and even if mark-to-market losses had been incurred, they would

 not have threatened the viability of these institutions.
In addition, because of the more traditional nature of the assets on the balance

 sheets of the region's private banks, most banks did not have to record

 large mark-to-market losses as risk spreads widened dramatically. Instead,

 provisioning expenses for bad and doubtful debts have continued to be the more

 important influence on profits. The recovery of many of the economies of the

 region over recent months, which has been underpinned by stimulatory settings

 of monetary and fiscal policy, has helped to contain these credit costs.
Another example where the lesser reliance on markets has helped insulate Asian financial

 systems from developments abroad can be seen in the short-term money market.

 In a number of countries in the region, turnover in these markets is relatively

 low at the best of times, and the central bank is a counterparty to many transactions.

 The fact that the central bank – with its undisputed credit rating for

 domestic currency transactions – has played this role meant that when

 risk aversion rose markedly, the same dislocations seen elsewhere did not occur

 in most countries of the region.
A further factor that has undoubtedly played a role is the large foreign reserves

 held by central banks, which were built up in response to the crisis of the

 late 1990s, with many of the countries in the region also running large current

 account surpluses. There have also been significant improvements in financial

 regulation since the late 1990s.
In short, the fact that in Asia there is less reliance on financial markets, and

 more on financial institutions and that central banks have large holdings of

 foreign reserves, have contributed to the resilience of the region's

 financial systems.
While this has proved an effective formula, it is worth noting that Australia's

 financial system – with its greater reliance on markets and its extensive

 integration into the global financial system – has also been relatively

 resilient over recent times. Financial institutions in Australia have remained

 profitable and have high credit ratings. While the Federal Government did have

 to offer a guarantee of banks' new wholesale funding when global capital

 markets closed for a time, the severe dislocations evident in the financial

 systems of North Atlantic countries have not occurred here. Like the banks

 in Asia, the Australian banks have been able to continue to effectively intermediate

 between savers and borrowers.
Some Potential Lessons
I would like to now turn briefly to some possible lessons from these experiences.
The first of these is the importance of flexibility.
As we all know, unexpected developments occur from time to time and investors'

 attitudes to risk can change quickly. Given the inevitable uncertainty in the

 world and the large swings that can occur in financial markets, having the

 flexibility to adjust to changing circumstances is critical.
In Australia's case, an important element of this flexibility is a floating

 exchange rate, which has been a key stabilising influence for almost three

 decades now. In countries with higher trade shares than Australia's,

 the benefits from a freely floating exchange rate may be considerably less.

 More generally, low levels of public debt and a credible monetary policy framework

 provide policy makers with flexibility to respond quickly and effectively to

 changing circumstances. Flexible labour and product markets are an important

 part of the equation. In a number of these dimensions, the Asian economies

 rate highly, with their flexibility being an important factor underpinning

 their dynamism of recent decades.
The second lesson is the importance of appropriate regulation.
The recent experience in the North Atlantic financial systems shows what can happen

 if regulatory arrangements and practices do not keep pace with developments

 in the financial system. It reminds us all that if countries are to live comfortably

 with extensive financial markets that are integrated into the global system,

 then appropriate regulatory arrangements are essential. These arrangements

 need to cover both banks and markets. But policy makers also need to take a

 holistic approach – being prepared to respond to growing risks in the

 system as a whole, rather than risks in just a single institution or a particular

 market. While this is easier said than done, the task here is not an impossible

 one.
The third lesson is that resilience in the financial system can be achieved in different

 ways. There is no one-size-fits-all solution.
There are clearly benefits to be gained from international trade in capital and the

 development of the financial system. Investors are able to have more diversified

 portfolios. Households are better able to smooth consumption over time. Financial

 institutions are likely to be more responsive to the needs of savers and borrowers.

 And the cost that society pays for financial intermediation is likely to be

 lower. But globalisation of financial systems and the increased reliance on

 markets also brings new risks, and these need to be managed carefully.
Countries will clearly differ as to how they view this risk-return trade off, and

 these views are likely to change over time. A country's history is an

 important influence, as is its openness to trade, the level of per capita income,

 and the overall size of the economy. In Australia's case, for example,

 few people would argue that a return to the highly regulated and less globally

 integrated financial environment of the 1970s would be the best way to manage

 these risks.
Whatever approach is chosen, no-one disputes the importance of the overall goal:

 having a strong and resilient financial system that is able to support the

 ongoing expansion of the real economy. Over recent times, both Australia and

 the countries of Asia have had more success here than have many others.
Thank you.
Endnote
I would like to thank Chris Becker, Jon Cheshire and David Orsmond for assistance

 in the preparation of these remarks.
[1]
