BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Whither Securitisation? – Sydney
DATE: 18/11/2009
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2009/sp-ag-181109.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Whither Securitisation?
Guy Debelle
[1]
Assistant Governor (Financial Markets)
Address to the Australian Securitisation Conference 2009
Sydney
–
18 November 2009
Audio
12.4MB
Download
206KB
Let me start by pointing out that there is an important ‘h’ in the title

 of my speech. Despite its current travails, I do not expect securitisation

 to wither (with only one h) and die on the vine, rather the question I am posing

 today is: what role will securitisation play in financial markets going forward?

 Hence whither (with two hs) securitisation?
My answer to the question is that the future is looking brighter for securitisation,

 but I would not expect a return to the heady days of earlier this decade. However,

 before addressing the question in more detail, it is useful to recount how

 we got to this point.
1. Development of the Australian securitisation market
In June 2007, just prior to the onset of the crisis, asset-backed securities

 (ABS) accounted for 30 per cent of the Australian bond market, with

 around $280 billion of securities on issue. The market had experienced

 rapid growth of nearly 30 per cent per annum since 2000, considerably

 faster than most other parts of the bond market.
Residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS) comprised the majority of Australian

 ABS, accounting for over 60 per cent of the stock outstanding (Table 1).

 Collateralised debt obligations (CDOs, 6 per cent) and commercial

 mortgage-backed securities (CMBS, 4 per cent) and other ABS (mostly

 backed by leases, receivables and motor vehicle loans, 3 per cent)

 made up the remainder of longer-dated securities. The asset-backed commercial

 paper (ABCP) market – which has a maturity of less than a year –

 was around $68 billion, most of which was backed by residential mortgages

 and RMBS. A sizeable share of this was mortgages sitting in warehouses waiting

 to be packaged together and sold.
Table 1: Australian ABS
By type
Outstanding
($ billion)
Share
(per cent)
Annual growth
(per cent)
Jun
2007
Oct
2009
Jun
2007
Oct
2009
Jun 2000 –
Jun 2007
Jun 2007 –
Oct 2009
RMBS
176
102
63
66
27
−21
CMBS
12
7
4
4
78
−23
CDOs
18
10
6
6
44
−22
ABCP
Of which:
Residential mortgages
**
68
30
*
24
19
91
−29
42
22
Other ABS
***
9
8
3
5
17
−3
Total
283
157
100
100
29
−22
* Latest value is for August 2009, corresponding share and growth rate

 are calculated using these data
** Includes RMBS
*** Mainly bonds backed by leases, receivables and motor vehicle

 loans
Sources: RBA, S&P
The rapid growth in securitisation reflected the strong demand for housing finance.

 However, this is not the full story, as the stock of securitised housing loans

 grew at a faster pace than aggregate housing credit. The share of housing loans

 funded through securitisation increased from less than 10 per cent

 in the late 1990s to a peak of almost 25 per cent in mid 2007 (Graph 1).
Graph 1
In large part, the growth of securitisation reflected the change in the composition

 of lenders in the mortgage market following the entry of mortgage originators,

 who relied predominantly on securitisation for funding. Mortgage originators

 came to prominence in the mid 1990s, in part because the decline in the general

 level of interest rates reduced the banks' competitive advantage of being

 able to raise low-cost retail deposits. With mortgage interest rates high relative

 to capital market interest rates, funding mortgage lending in the wholesale

 market was very profitable. Reflecting these developments, mortgage originators

 accounted for around 35 per cent of RMBS issuance prior to the recent

 turmoil in credit markets (Graph 2).
Graph 2
The banks themselves also used securitisation as a funding source whenever it was

 cost effective to do so. In the case of the smaller regional banks and some

 building societies and credit unions, securitisation was an important means

 of funding. Prior to mid 2007, regional banks securitised around one-third

 of their housing loans while the major banks securitised less than 10 per cent.

 As a result, despite their smaller size, the regional banks accounted for roughly

 40 per cent of RMBS issuance whereas the major banks accounted for

 20 per cent.
Demand from domestic and non-resident investors for RMBS was very strong in the years

 leading up to the credit market turmoil, supporting the robust growth in the

 market. This was evident in the steady decline in spreads to swap on AAA-rated

 prime RMBS at issuance from around 40 basis points in 2000 to less than

 20 basis points in mid 2007.
At least one-third of the investors in Australian RMBS were offshore structured investment

 vehicles, the now notorious SIVs. These entities funded themselves with short-dated

 paper, of less than 365 days, to purchase longer-dated assets such as

 RMBS, in large part to arbitrage capital rules. They were, in theory at least,

 off-balance sheet vehicles, back-stopped by credit lines from their parent

 financial institutions.
2. The crisis
Beginning around the middle of 2007, there was a widespread reappraisal of the risks

 associated with investing in structured credit products. Securitisation started

 to suffer severe brand damage as primarily US RMBS incurred significant credit

 problems as delinquency rates began to rise. Initially, the problems were most

 evident in the sub-prime mortgage market, but as Graph 3 shows, delinquency

 rates have risen to historically high levels on prime mortgages too. Combined

 with the decline in house prices, these delinquency rates have translated into

 sizeable losses for investors in US RMBS.
Graph 3
The damage was further exacerbated by the opaqueness of many of the complicated security

 structures. This was particularly true in the case of CDOs of various powers

 (that is squared, cubed …) which sliced and diced the underlying mortgages

 until they were often unrecognisable.
The combination of these factors has seen enormous losses incurred by US and euro

 area banks from their holdings of mortgage-backed securities (Table 2).

 These losses have occurred despite the fact that securitisation was supposed

 to get the loans off bank balance sheets. They ended up back on the books,

 in large part because the banks had to bail out their SIVs.
Table 2: Estimated Global Bank Securities' Losses
2007–2010; by asset type; US$ billion
Residential
mortgage
Consumer
Commercial
mortgage
Corporate
Foreign
US banks
189
0
63
48
71
Euro area banks
130
5
62
22
113
UK banks
27
4
12
25
39
Source: IMF
The Australian RMBS market was tarred with the same brush despite the absence of

 these issues of transparency and overly complex securities and their continued

 strong performance (see below). As Andre Agassi used to say ‘Image is

 everything’, and the image of securitisation was, and to a large extent

 still is, very much on the nose.
Issuance of RMBS in Australia dried up as it did around the world, as demand fell

 away. Investors felt they were already too full of structured products and

 had no appetite for any more. Spreads in the secondary market widened considerably.

 Indeed, at times, there was no secondary market, with plenty of sellers but

 no buyers at any price.
This oversupply in the secondary market was exacerbated by the forced liquidation

 of the portfolios of the offshore SIVs. Australian RMBS were sold, not because

 of any intrinsic problem with them, but because the SIVs were no longer able

 to fund themselves. Australian RMBS thus suffered collateral damage (so to

 speak) on a number of fronts, even though the collateral on which they were

 based remained perfectly sound.
There were some new issues during the first year of the financial crisis, but the

 market came to a complete halt late last year. Reflecting these developments,

 the Government announced a support program for the industry whereby it would

 purchase $8 billion of new issues through the Australian Office of Financial

 Management (AOFM). That program has all but been completed.
3. Australian RMBS are high quality
The lack of new issuance and elevated spreads in the secondary market did not reflect

 concerns about the credit quality of Australian RMBS. Unlike in the US, the

 credit quality of Australian RMBS has remained at the highest level throughout

 the financial crisis. An international comparison of non-performing housing

 loans, using on-balance sheet exposures, highlights the non-performing share

 in Australia, at less than 1 per cent, is extremely low (Graph 4).

 And over this year, the arrears rate for Australian RMBS has actually been

 declining slightly (Graph 5).
Graph 4
Graph 5
The continued strong performance of Australian RMBS reflects both the quality and

 the composition of the types of loans securitised, which has been underpinned

 by the strength of the Australian economy, particularly the relatively low

 unemployment rate, robust household income growth, as well as low interest

 rates. The underlying sound condition of household balance sheets in Australia

 has helped limit the incidence of household financial difficulties during the

 economic downturn.
The bulk of Australian RMBS are backed by prime loans – loans made to borrowers

 that satisfy financial institutions' standard lending criteria –

 making up 97 per cent of the market (Graph 6). Nearly all loans

 made by banks, building societies and credit unions, as well as most loans

 made by mortgage originators, fall into this category. In addition, almost

 all prime RMBS are covered by lenders' mortgage insurance (LMI). This

 provides investors in RMBS with protection against losses by making good any

 shortfall if a property sale raises insufficient funds to cover the loan in

 default.
Within the prime loan category, most are full-doc, with low-doc loans (for which

 a more relaxed standard of proof of borrowers' debt-servicing ability

 applies) accounting for around 10 per cent of prime loans. Arrears

 on prime
full-doc
loans remain very low at around ½ per cent

 of outstanding loans. While arrears on prime low-doc loans are elevated compared

 to history, they have trended down over 2009 to be less than 2 per cent.

 Despite the higher arrears rate, historically losses on low-doc loans are contained

 by the fact that these loans have lower
loan-to-valuation
ratios, meaning that the borrower has a greater incentive to avoid foreclosure

 and in the case it does eventuate, the losses to the lender are smaller.
Graph 6
Non-conforming loans are the closest equivalent to the sub-prime loans in the US,

 being provided to borrowers who do not satisfy the standard lending criteria

 of mainstream lenders such as those with impaired or incomplete credit histories.

 The loans are provided by a few specialist non-deposit-taking lenders. This

 is in contrast to the US where sub-prime loans were provided by a wide range

 of financial institutions. Non-conforming loans make up only 3 per cent

 of Australian RMBS outstanding, compared to around 10 per cent of

 US mortgages outstanding. The arrears rate on Australian non-conforming loans

 is higher than for prime loans, at around 6 per cent (though the

 margin charged on these loans is also higher, reflecting the higher risk nature

 of these loans), though it too has eased so far this year and is significantly

 below the arrears rate on sub-prime loans in the US (at over 25 per cent).

 Moreover, the spread charged on non-conforming loans is more than enough to

 compensate for the higher loss rate.
As well as the difference in current economic conditions, the lower arrears rate

 on Australian non-conforming loans compared to US sub-prime loans also reflects

 differences in the loans' structural features prior to the financial

 crisis. As I've pointed out in an earlier
speech
:
Australian non-conforming loans had a less risky structure than US sub-prime loans,

 evident in lower loan-to-valuation ratios.
Australian non-conforming loans did not usually feature low introductory interest

 rate periods
(teaser rates)
or high-risk

 repayment options (such as negative amortisation periods).
Australian lenders typically retained (and continue to retain) the lowest-rated tranches

 of their RMBS or placed them with closely associated entities. I'll

 come back to this ‘skin in the game’ later.
The Australian legal system gives a lender recourse to all of the borrower's

 assets in addition to the house in the event of default, which provides the

 borrower with a stronger incentive to repay their loan.
While losses (after the sale of property) on Australian RMBS have risen over the

 past year, they remain low as a share of loans outstanding, at less than 10 basis

 points per annum for prime loans and 125 basis points for non-conforming

 loans. The increase in losses has been confined to RMBS issued by mortgage

 originators, and even there, it is concentrated among a few issuers. Moreover,

 the losses continue to be mostly covered by credit enhancements including LMI

 and excess spread. Investors in rated tranches of Australian RMBS have never

 borne a loss of principal. In comparison, worldwide bank losses on securities'

 holdings are forecast by the IMF to amount to almost $US 1 trillion, or

 around 6 per cent of holdings.
Reflecting continued strong performance of Australian RMBS, very few structures have

 had downgrades to their AAA-rated tranches. Consequently the bulk of the Australian

 securitisation market continues to be very highly rated. While the subordinated

 tranches of many prime RMBS have been downgraded by a notch or two, this reflected

 downgrades of LMI providers whose ratings were lowered because of the large

 losses incurred by their US

 parents.
[2]
These downgrades did not result from any deterioration in the performance of

 securitised prime loans.
4. The current state of play
In recent months, conditions in Australian securitisation markets have improved markedly

 (Graph 7). For the first time in over a year, there were successful issues

 of RMBS without the support of the AOFM as well as several non-RMBS securitisations.

 Around $2.3 billion were issued through the three RMBS deals that were

 not sponsored by the AOFM, with a further $2 billion of securitisations

 of agricultural and construction equipment leases, auto loans and commercial

 property.
The increase in private investor demand is also noticeable in investor participation

 in AOFM-sponsored deals. As a cornerstone investor, the AOFM initially accounted

 for around 80 per cent of the investor base in those RMBS it supported.

 However, the AOFM's participation has decreased to around 40 per cent

 in recent issues, with private investors making up the remainder. In fact,

 of all RMBS issued in recent months (including those in which the AOFM did

 not participate), the AOFM has only purchased around 25 per cent.

 In a further sign of broadening investor demand, there was private investment

 in tranches other than the senior AAA tranche in recent
AOFM-sponsored
issues, an outcome that was not common with earlier issues. Many recent deals have

 also been oversubscribed and upsized from the initial guidance.
Graph 7
Pricing on RMBS also suggests conditions have improved. In primary markets, the AAA rated

 tranches of the prime RMBS issued over recent months that have involved the

 AOFM as a cornerstone investor have priced at
120–130 basis points
above BBSW (bank bill swap reference rate), with deals that did not involve AOFM

 support pricing a little higher, at around
140–170 basis

 points
. These latter spreads appear to be close to break-even levels.

 In Graph 8 below, I've included an estimate of the break-even spread

 based on a simple stylised scenario.
As many of you know, in a typical RMBS, a special purpose vehicle (SPV) receives

 income from the mortgage payments it receives; in this example here, I've

 used an estimate of the average mortgage rate on new loans, which is currently

 around 5½ per cent. The mortgage income is used to cover the

 SPV's funding costs
(bank bill rate plus a spread)
and other costs

 such as loan servicing (here assumed to be 50 basis points per annum).

 The higher the spread that the SPV needs to pay, the more likely it is that

 there will be a shortfall between the income it receives and the required payments.

 In the example here, the break-even spread is around 140 basis points,

 which is in the ballpark suggested by our market liaison, although different

 lenders are likely to have different cost structures. Note that the weighted-average

 interest rate on a mortgage pool varies quite a lot with the characteristics

 of the loans in the pool, with a low-doc loan having a higher lending rate

 and hence securitisation is economic at a higher spread.
Graph 8
The increase in investor demand for RMBS in recent months has also been evident in

 a decline in secondary market spreads, which have fallen to be only a little

 above primary market spreads. The narrowing suggests that the market has worked

 through much of the overhang of supply in the secondary market created by the

 deleveraging of SIVs. The narrower margin between primary and secondary markets,

 as well as the ongoing amortisation of the existing stock of RMBS, suggests

 that a more broadly based pick-up in securitised issuance may not be too far

 off.
There have also been some encouraging signs in offshore markets. In the UK, there

 are some early indications of a market-led recovery, with two large deals issued

 recently. In the US, however, nearly all the RMBS that have been issued have

 been purchased by the Fed.
Reflecting the ongoing amortisation of principal (i.e. mortgage repayments), as well

 as a relatively low volume of issuance, the value of Australian RMBS outstanding

 has continued to fall, to around $100 billion, more than 40 per cent

 below its peak in June 2007 (Graph 9). RMBS outstanding offshore

 have declined by more
(nearly

 60 per cent)
because there has been no offshore issuance,

 while paper outstanding onshore has fallen around 20 per cent. The

 AOFM's holdings amount to around 7 per cent of all Australian

 RMBS outstanding, and 13 per cent of the domestic market.
Graph 9
This decline in the stock of RMBS outstanding should be starting to create some holes

 in investors' portfolios, an issue to which I will return below.
Conditions in short-term securitisation markets have also improved. While ABCP outstanding

 has roughly halved since its peak in mid 2007 (Graph 10), the pace

 of decline has eased in recent months. Some market participants report that

 they now have little difficulty rolling over paper, including at longer maturities.

 The improving conditions in the ABCP market have been reflected in declining

 spreads. Since their peak, spreads have fallen by around 15 basis points,

 to around 50 basis points above BBSW, and are now around the same level

 as in February 2008.
Graph 10
5. RBA holdings of RMBS
In October 2007, shortly after the onset of the financial market turmoil, the

 Reserve Bank expanded the range of securities it was willing to hold under

 repurchase agreements to include both RMBS and ABCP. As with other private

 securities (such as bank bills and certificates of deposit), the Bank was initially

 only willing to accept these securities from ‘unrelated’ parties.

 However, around the peak of the financial crisis in October 2008, the

 Bank relaxed the restriction on relatedness for both RMBS and ABCP as it sought

 to expand the range of funding options for financial institutions. In the subsequent

 months, the Bank purchased significant volumes of ‘internal’ securitisations

 under repo, with holdings peaking at around $45 billion around year-end.
Twelve months after the peak of the crisis, most financial institutions in Australia

 have better access to term funding in domestic and overseas markets. Consequently,

 the need for institutions to fund themselves using internal securitisations

 of mortgages has largely passed.
The Bank intends to maintain the broader range of securities that it accepts in its

 market operations, that is, internal RMBS will remain eligible collateral.

 To repeat, we are not going to wind back the pool of eligible collateral. However,

 with the improvement in funding conditions, we generally no longer expect or

 wish to see internal securitisations offered as collateral in our market operations

 on a regular basis. Given that many of these repos backed by RMBS were initiated

 over a year ago now, the Bank's holdings of related RMBS have shrunk

 considerably in recent months as these repos have matured (Graph 11).
Graph 11
6. Policy issues
As you'd be aware, policy-makers globally are considering initiatives that

 are intended to address issues that became more evident during the financial

 crisis, such as transparency and oversight of unregulated markets. The recommendations

 of the IOSCO Task Force on Unregulated Financial Markets and Products are some

 of the more relevant initiatives for securitisation. My colleague from ASIC,

 Greg Medcraft, will probably talk on these issues further, so I will just make

 some brief comments.
There has been much discussion about requiring originators/sponsors to retain a long-term

 exposure to assets they securitise – so-called skin in the game requirements.

 As I highlighted earlier, even before the financial crisis there was a tendency

 for many Australian securitisers, or related parties, to hold skin in the game.

 In the US, and some other markets, where the originate-to-distribute model

 was prevalent, there were some problems of incentives between originators and

 investors not being aligned, though this was not really the case with Australian

 RMBS. Nonetheless, to maintain an overseas investor base going forward, the

 Australian market may need to consider global standards.
Transparency and quality of information provided to investors are also issues that

 are high on policy-makers' radars. Clearly, disclosure of information

 to investors, such as the initial and ongoing performance of the asset pool

 and the creditworthiness of the borrowers of the underlying loans, is important.

 The Australian market should look to continue to provide good quality information

 such as this, and I note the Australian Securitisation Forum (ASF) has been

 doing some work in this area.
7. Whither Securitisation?
So, now having described where we are at the moment and how we got there, I will

 finally address the question of where the market might be going.
In general, I think securitisation will be an important part of the financial landscape

 in the future. Prior to the crisis, many commentators sang the praises of securitisation

 as a useful means of dispersing risk around the financial system, and in principle

 I think they were right. There were, however, some major shortcomings in the

 implementation of securitisation.
While I expect securitisation to make a solid return, I do not expect it to be as

 large a part of the market as it was in 2007 anytime soon. This is in part

 because demand for RMBS had been artificially boosted by the use of SIVs.
I have said before that there are a lot of similarities between securitisation and

 junk bonds, despite being very different in credit quality. Both were important

 financial innovations that were well-founded. Both grew too rapidly and expanded

 into areas they shouldn't have and were bought by investors who shouldn't

 have bought them. Both played important roles in generating financial dislocation.

 Just as junk bonds are now a regular (but smaller) part of the financial landscape,

 I believe securitisation will be similar in the future.
However, as with junk bonds, much needs to be done to restore the brand name of securitisation.

 Some of this will only come with the passage of time. However, there are steps

 that can be taken to hasten the process:
Firstly, the message that Australian RMBS have been, and continue to be, a strongly

 performing asset needs to be continually reinforced. The differentiation between

 Australian RMBS and US RMBS needs to be highlighted. This message probably

 doesn't need to be delivered to the portfolio managers. It needs to be

 delivered to the superannuation trustees whose views may be affected by continual

 media exposure to the US experience that securitised assets are excessively

 risky. The Australian industry needs to differentiate its product from the

 US brand.
Secondly, securitised products should not be made out to be what they are not. I

 do not believe they should have ever been part of ‘enhanced cash’

 portfolios. These products are a long way from cash and not where I believe

 such products should be located in an investor's portfolio.
Nor should the liquidity characteristics of RMBS be oversold. By their very nature,

 RMBS are most suited to buy-and-hold investors. These investors should be relatively

 unconcerned about the need to liquefy their investment, nor be overly worried

 about a temporary widening in spreads/fall in price, so long as the underlying

 asset continues to perform.
By and large, there is only so much that can be done to standardise the product,

 although what can be done is certainly worth doing. Yes, there are a minimum

 set of characteristics that it makes sense for RMBS to possess, but there will

 remain differences depending on the originator, the exact composition of the

 mortgage portfolio that backs the security etc, that will mean that one RMBS

 is not easily interchangeable with another. Hence it is difficult to say there

 is one secondary market price for an RMBS, the way one can do for a government

 security.
As I mentioned earlier, given the speed of amortisation of RMBS, the stock outstanding

 has declined by over 40 per cent from its peak in mid 2007.

 By now this should be creating holes in investors' portfolios, notwithstanding

 the permanent absence of some of the earlier buyers of RMBS. With spreads continuing

 to narrow, some investors may also be getting concerned that they have missed

 the boat.
Hence, I think there are good reasons to believe that the signs of life that we have

 seen in the market in recent months presage more activity to come in the near

 future.
Endnotes
I thank Sue Black, Mark Hack and Josh Kirkwood for their help.
[1]
There are two main LMI providers in the Australian market, Genworth Australia and

 QBE LMI (formerly PMI Australia). Both were originally subsidiaries of US

 parents and are well capitalised in Australia, which prevented their ratings

 falling as much as their parents'.
[2]
