BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: The Global Financial Crisis: Causes, Consequences and Countermeasures – Melbourne
DATE: 15/04/2009
SPEAKER: Melbourne
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2009/sp-so-150409.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
The Global Financial Crisis: Causes, Consequences and Countermeasures
Luci Ellis
Head of Financial Stability Department
Remarks to the Centre for Strategic Economic Studies' ‘Emerging from the Global Storm:
 Growth and Climate Change Policies in Australia Conference’, Victoria University
Melbourne
–
15 April 2009
Audio
14.3MB
Download
277KB
global financial crisis
I would like to thank Victoria University of Technology and the organisers of this
 conference for the opportunity to speak to you today. The conference is concerned
 with an important and highly topical subject: what was at first called a ‘sub-prime
 crisis’, then later ‘financial turmoil’, and is now being
 called the Global Financial Crisis. Indeed, many financial systems around
 the world have been under extraordinary strain for the past year and a half.
 The macroeconomic and human consequences of that crisis are becoming all too
 clear.
These events have raised many questions for policy-makers and for market participants.
 What caused this global financial crisis? Why did it develop in the way it
 did? What have been the consequences, both for the global economy and the
 financial system itself? And are there any countermeasures that governments
 and other policy-makers can take, to reduce the costs of the present crisis,
 and to prevent a recurrence?
These are all good questions and will no doubt keep many of us busy in the period
 ahead. This morning, I would like to suggest a few answers to at least some
 of these questions.
Causes
As with any large event in any field of human endeavour, it is never about just one
 thing. There were many causes of the financial crisis, some recent and some
 longstanding. I would like to focus on three of those causes today: the misperception
 and mismanagement of risk; the level of interest rates; and the regulation
 of the financial system.
Perhaps the most basic underlying driver of the crisis was the inherent cycle of
 human psychology around risk perceptions. When times are good, perceptions
 of risk diminish. People start to convince themselves that the good times
 will go on forever. Then, when the cycle turns, risk aversion increases again,
 often far beyond normal levels, let alone those seen during the boom.
We can see in Graph 1 how investors' perception of risk changed in the years
 leading up to the crisis. Yields on emerging market bonds or US companies
 at the riskier end of the spectrum all narrowed relative to those on US government
 bonds and other securities that are seen as very safe. More recently, those
 spreads have widened out dramatically, as investors became more risk-averse,
 and the ‘search for yield’ turned into a ‘flight to safety’.
The effects of this boom-bust cycle of psychology are amplified when investors use
 leverage. Borrowing to purchase assets is lucrative when asset prices are
 rising, because all the upside beyond the interest costs goes to the investor,
 not the lender. But when times are bad and asset valuations are falling, investors'
 losses are magnified by leverage.
Graph 1
A second element that coincided with the perceptions of lower risk was the low level
 of interest rates in the early part of this decade. At the short end, policy
 interest rates in the major economies reached levels that were unusually low
 compared with history, as shown in Graph 2.
Graph 2
At the longer end, bond yields in the major economies were also unusually low over
 this period. As Graph 3 shows, this remained the case, even once policy
 rates started to rise in 2004. At the time, the low level of long rates was
 considered somewhat puzzling – a ‘conundrum’, as former
 Fed chairman Greenspan put it. Over time, though, many observers have come
 to the view that unusually strong investor demand had pushed long rates down.
 Among those investors were central banks and other government agencies in
 emerging and industrialised economies, which were accumulating foreign reserves.
Graph 3
Many observers were concerned about the way the low level of interest rates made
 higher leverage so attractive. Inflation pressures were quite subdued at that
 time, so the macroeconomic situation didn't necessarily warrant much higher
 interest rates. There has been plenty of debate, inside and outside central
 banks, on whether monetary policy should also respond to financial stability
 concerns. But there is also recognition in many quarters that low interest
 rates were not – and shouldn't be – enough to cause such a
 crisis on their own.
A lack of appropriate financial regulation in some countries is widely regarded as
 one of the important causes of the crisis. Many shortcomings have been identified
 in this area. These include: the capital requirements on complex financial
 products such as collateralised debt obligations (CDOs); the use of ratings
 provided by the private-sector rating agencies in the regulation of banks;
 the way credit rating agencies have themselves been regulated; and the structure
 of remuneration arrangements and the risk-taking incentives they create. Perhaps
 most crucially, many internationally active banks failed to perceive, or appropriately
 manage, the risks involved in certain financial products and markets, and
 regulators did not make them do better on this front.
The Build-up to the Crisis
With this background in mind, I'd like to turn to the specifics of the build-up
 of tensions that finally broke as this financial crisis. Appetite for risk
 had been strong for some years; that risk was priced cheaply; and as a result,
 credit markets were booming and some measures of leverage were rising. The
 low price of risk was in fact regularly cited in the Bank's
Financial Stability Reviews
as a potential source of vulnerability
 for the global financial system.
One sector that took particular advantage of low long-term interest rates was the
 US mortgage market. American households traditionally took out fixed-rate
 mortgages, often guaranteed by the government-sponsored enterprises Fannie
 Mae and Freddie Mac – the GSEs. As rates fell, households refinanced
 in large numbers, but this extra origination business dried up once rates
 started to rise again. Rather than shrink their business, US mortgage lenders
 pursued riskier segments of the market that the GSEs did not insure, as Graph
 4 shows. This included the sub-prime segment, but also so-called ‘Alt-A’
 and other non-standard loans involving easier lending terms. At the time,
 this was considered a positive development, because it was thought that it
 allowed more people to become home owners. Products requiring low or no deposit,
 or with a low introductory interest rate were known as ‘affordability
 products’. They allowed households to pay the very high housing prices
 that their own stronger demand was generating.
Graph 4
As the US housing boom wore on, lending standards eased further. As Graph 5 shows,
 up until 2006 the sub-prime market segment increasingly allowed mortgages
 with very high loan-to-valuation ratios: that is, borrowers did not need much
 deposit. Low-doc loans became more common across the board. Negative amortisation
 loans, sometimes called ‘Pay-option ARMs’, also became more common.
 These are mortgages where the borrower can pick a repayment level that is
 so low that the loan balance actually rises for a while – something
 that is essentially unheard of in other countries.
Graph 5
The result of all that mortgage borrowing was, as shown in Graph 6, an increase in
 leverage, defined to be the ratio of home mortgage debt to the value of the
 housing stock. This measure had been quite stable in the United States for
 a number of years. But it increased in those last couple of years of the boom,
 reaching around 45 per cent by the time prices peaked sometime in 2006.
 (The exact date depends on the price series used.) In Australia, the equivalent
 ratio is below 30 per cent. Since many home owners own their homes outright,
 the US figure implies that many Americans had very little equity in their
 homes by the time the boom peaked. And of course, this measure of leverage
 has increased a great deal since US housing prices started to fall.
Graph 6
US households weren't alone in gearing themselves up like this. Although corporate
 sectors around the world were by and large relatively restrained in their
 behaviour, there were some pockets where borrowing and gearing expanded a
 great deal. Some examples include the asset-backed commercial paper market,
 which is often used to finance entities that invest in other securities, and
 the leveraged loan market, often used to finance buyouts of companies. And
 as Graph 7 shows, leveraged buyout activity boomed, especially in North America
 and Europe. As with the mortgage market, the excesses built up most where
 the financing structures were most opaque, and the underestimation of the
 risks was greatest.
Graph 7
The Onset of the Crisis
But you can't borrow your way to a good time forever, and this recent example
 of a credit-fuelled boom was no exception. The first signs of trouble were
 in the US mortgage market. Lending standards had eased so far – and
 outright fraud had gotten to be such a problem – that arrears rates
 started to rise more than lenders and investors expected. Graph 8 shows that
 the rise started in around 2006 for both prime and sub-prime mortgages, but
 became more obvious through 2007. The extraordinary thing was that, unlike
 in every other housing bust, arrears rates increased significantly before
 the labour market started to weaken.
Graph 8
The first consequence of this was the failure of a number of US mortgage lenders.
 Some of these were brought down by early defaults, where the borrower didn't
 even make the first payment. If a loan is securitised and sold, the lender
 typically has to compensate the buyers of the securities if the loan defaults
 soon afterwards.
But not all of these losses on mortgages could be pushed back on the original lender
 or broker, especially if these had already gone out of business. After years
 of underestimating risks on mortgage-related and other complex securities,
 banks and other investors started to realise just how risky these securities
 were. They also started to realise that they didn't know how exposed their
 counterparties were to these losses. Following a series of loss announcements
 and suspensions of some bank-sponsored investment funds in mid 2007, market
 participants began to hoard liquidity. They were worried about their counterparties,
 but they were also worried about their own future liquidity needs.
As a result, the asset-backed commercial paper market froze in several countries.
 The rates at which banks would lend to each other in overnight and term money
 markets started to widen. Normally these money market rates sit close to the
 policy rates set by central banks, but that relationship broke down in August
 2007, as Graph 9 shows. Investor demand for certain kinds of mortgage-backed
 securities also dried up in the following months. Lenders that had depended
 on short-term money markets or securitisation therefore started to find it
 very difficult to obtain funding.
Graph 9
The easing of lending standards during the boom was especially marked in US mortgage
 markets, and so were its consequences. Compared to loans in most other countries,
 US mortgages are more likely to be packaged into securities. And if the market
 price of these securities should fall, accounting treatment often requires
 that the loss be recognised immediately, which is not the case for a traditional
 loan portfolio. For these reasons, it should not be surprising that banks'
 losses have been concentrated in securities holdings rather than traditional
 on-balance sheet lending. This meant that investment banks and others with
 large securities trading and investment books have been especially affected.
 The first major firm that had to be rescued was Bear Stearns, but many others
 had already declared losses by then. As shown in Graph 10, total profits in
 several banking systems started to turn negative.
Graph 10
In this environment, banks' perceptions of risk increased, and they started to
 tighten lending standards. A feedback loop started to develop. Banks were
 becoming more risk-averse, but so were their customers, who started to pull
 back on spending. The major industrialised economies of the United States,
 euro area and Japan were already experiencing economic contractions by the
 first half of 2008.
As investors and others began to realise the macroeconomic consequences of the turmoil,
 other asset markets were also affected. Share prices fell sharply all over
 the world, especially for banks, as shown by the indices in Graph 11. Prices
 fell even further when Lehman Brothers failed.
Graph 11
Lehman had been an important player in many of the securities and derivative markets
 that were freezing up. It even had a sub-prime mortgage subsidiary, which
 it shut down in August 2007. Lehman had already incurred substantial losses
 in the quarters prior to its failure. And once people start to become concerned
 about a bank's solvency, it becomes very hard to prevent the loss of counterparty
 confidence that can bring that insolvency on.
When Lehman failed, it triggered a further increase in risk aversion. There was a
 flight to the safety of government bonds, and away from emerging market and
 other assets. Yield spreads on traditionally risky assets widened further,
 as well as those on newer kinds of derivatives and securities such as credit
 default swaps or collateralised debt obligations.
Those newer classes of assets were especially affected by the increase in the price
 of risk. They didn't have much history to use to measure their riskiness
 in the upswing, so the subsequent surprise factor in the downswing was greater.
 Also weighing on confidence is the fact that it is not clear if those asset
 classes can even survive. When markets are very liquid and risk premiums are
 low, the financial system can approach the textbook, complete-markets ideal,
 where every possible pattern of pay-offs can be created and every individual
 risk can be hedged. But when risk appetite returns to a more normal, lower
 level, markets become less complete again. Some of the more exotic structured
 products might not survive as viable asset classes outside of a credit-market
 boom.
Consequences
When risk aversion rises like this, the macroeconomic consequences can be severe.
 Since at least Keynes' day, it has been recognised that economies run
 in large part on confidence. When firms and consumers no longer feel confident,
 they pull back from spending. When banks and other financial institutions
 no longer feel confident, they pull back from lending. Projects that seemed
 likely to be profitable in the good times suddenly seem risky and less attractive.
 Bank regulation and behaviour might explain how a US mortgage crisis propagated
 into essentially a North Atlantic banking crisis. But trade and confidence
 effects explain why that North Atlantic banking crisis has escalated into
 a global problem.
The intensification of the current crisis following the Lehman failure in September
 saw the deterioration of many macroeconomic indicators. Industrial output
 contracted sharply in much of the world. Commodity prices had been booming
 earlier in the year, but declined significantly towards the end of the year.
 There was a sudden contraction in the volume of world trade. In this environment,
 forecasters have had to scale down their forecasts for output growth repeatedly.
 As Graph 12 shows, the IMF is now forecasting that global output will contract
 in 2009. This would be the first annual contraction in output since at least
 the Second World War.
Graph 12
The weak global macroeconomic outlook implies that borrowers have become riskier.
 Some are likely to face greater difficulty servicing their debts. Bad loans
 normally rise relative to total lending when economies turn down, and the
 current global downturn will be no exception to this pattern. In the current
 environment, this could weigh on the profitability of already weakened banking
 sectors in the major economies.
The Australian Scene
The Australian financial system has withstood the shocks coming from overseas better
 than many others. Australian-owned banks have recorded solid profits over
 the past year. Unlike banks in many other countries, they have been able to
 raise additional capital where required from private investors, at only modest
 discounts to the market price of their equity at the time.
There are a number of reasons for their relatively good performance during a period
 of considerable turbulence. One of these is that they had not previously accumulated
 large exposures to the kinds of tradable securities in which losses at other
 banks have been concentrated. Rather, Australian banks were focused on their
 domestic lending business. Australia usually runs a current account deficit,
 so our banks were seeking offshore funding for their domestic activities,
 not casting around for foreign assets in which they could invest their domestic
 surpluses.
Another reason is that housing and mortgage markets did not become as over-extended
 as in the United States. For a start, the underlying position of the household
 sector was better in Australia. Graph 13 shows two aspects of this point.
 First, in the left panel, the real earnings of average Australian workers
 were growing much faster than in the United States. Second, in the right panel,
 the total incomes of typical Australian households have been further boosted
 by the tight labour market. The employment-to-population ratio has been rising
 here; by contrast, in the United States, it never really recovered from its
 2001 recession.
Graph 13
The housing market in Australia also wasn't so over-extended, and in any case
 it had already had its boom. As the left panel of Graph 14 shows, the truly
 rapid growth rates in national housing prices had ceased around the end of
 2003, especially for apartments. The Australian market was going through a
 period of consolidation when the US market melted down. Prices were still
 rising in Australia, especially in Perth and other areas affected by the mining
 boom. But unlike in the United States, housing supply had not boomed in the
 same way for the past five years. There simply has not been an overhang of
 supply built up that would subsequently weigh on prices.
Graph 14
In thinking about the sustainability of a particular level of housing prices, we
 must take many things into account. Theory and experience suggest that average
 inflation, credit constraints, tax rates and the distribution of income all
 matter to the so-called user cost of housing, and thus equilibrium housing
 prices. Just looking at one thing – say the ratio of prices to household
 incomes – is really not enough. In addition, looking at one type of
 housing in isolation – say, detached houses – gives only a guide
 about movements, not a level that can be compared across countries. So it's
 best to use prices of all dwellings, houses and apartments together, and assess
 the whole market. The right-hand panel of Graph 14 shows overall dwelling
 prices as a ratio to post-tax income. This is not a measure of sustainability
 or equilibrium housing prices, because all those other determinants of equilibrium
 user cost also change over time. But even taking this crude measure as a guide,
 since 2003, dwelling prices have been rising more slowly than household incomes
 in Australia.
Another reason the Australian housing market was less over-extended was that lending
 standards did not ease as much as in the United States. Sitting on the other
 side of the world, it's easy to lose sight of just how far lending standards
 did decline in the US mortgage market. Low-doc loans exist in Australia but
 they are less common. And in contrast to common practice in the United States,
 low-doc didn't mean providing no documentation at all. No-deposit mortgages
 are also less common in Australia than they were in the United States over
 the boom period.
One reason for the more moderate easing in standards here is that the regulatory
 arrangements concerning mortgage lending are different. For example, Australia's
 prudential regulator, APRA, raised capital requirements on certain kinds of
 riskier mortgage products. There are also important differences in consumer
 protection laws concerning lending, and in the way foreclosure law affects
 lenders' decisions, as was detailed in the Bank's
Financial Stability Review
, released last month.
The tax systems also differ between the two countries. Australian households cannot
 deduct the interest on their own home's mortgage against their tax, so
 they are not effectively encouraged to keep their mortgage balances high.
 Many Australian households pay off more than they have to. In doing so, they
 accumulate potential redraws that serve both as precautionary saving and an
 additional buffer of equity against falls in housing prices.
Partly as a result of these tax and regulatory differences, Australian households
 by and large have more of a financial buffer against falls in housing prices
 than their American counterparts did. Timely data are hard to come by, but
 we can look at current loan-to-valuation ratios based on households' own
 assessments of their mortgage balance and the current value of their home,
 using the HILDA survey. The distribution of these loan-to-valuation ratios,
 as seen in Graph 15, saw an increase in the proportion of households with
 high ratios between 2003 and 2007. Overall, though, that proportion remained
 low compared with the United States. It seems that relatively few households
 in Australia face going into negative equity, even if housing prices do fall
 somewhat. By contrast, in the United States, some private-sector estimates
 suggest that more than 10 per cent of mortgage borrowers are already
 in negative equity, perhaps as many as one in six. Thus a much greater proportion
 of US home owners risk defaulting if they get into repayment difficulty,
 because they cannot easily sell or refinance if the mortgage is worth more
 than the home.
Graph 15
As the crisis has unfolded, there are signs that Australian banks and other lenders
 have become more risk-averse and they have tightened lending criteria somewhat.
 However, it appears that good quality borrowers can still obtain and roll
 over credit. The Australian household and business sectors have also become
 much more risk-averse than in recent years. Some indicators of this change
 include higher household saving, and a shift from debt to equity funding by
 some firms. Their demand for credit has weakened as they have become more
 cautious. Together with those tighter lending standards, this has contributed
 to a slowdown in credit growth.
Countermeasures
At this stage, policy-makers around the world are focusing on solving the immediate
 problems in the banking system. Governments and central banks are also providing
 macroeconomic stimulus through fiscal and monetary policy easing. Restoring
 the global banking system to health is a precondition for a recovery in credit
 supply and economic activity. As such, it has to take priority over longer-term
 reforms.
In this environment, the need for credible steps to restore the health of the financial
 system is crucial. Governments in the most-affected countries have provided
 substantial support to financial institutions and markets, especially since
 the Lehman failure. Most have ensured banks' access to funding by guaranteeing
 wholesale debt issuance; some have injected capital into banks; and a few
 have helped banks to reduce the risk in their balance sheets.
There are several ways of undertaking this de-risking of balance sheets. Governments
 can buy the assets outright and place them in an entity separate to the bank;
 they can insure assets remaining on banks' balance sheets against losses;
 or, they can invest in joint investment funds that buy the assets. Each of
 these approaches has been used in at least one country in the recent crisis.
 At this stage it is hard to say if there is one right way to deal with these
 issues. The important thing is that they are dealt with.
Despite these considerable efforts, confidence in the financial system remains fragile.
 Some market-based indicators of confidence have nonetheless improved in recent
 weeks. Money market spreads have retraced much of the increase that occurred
 following the Lehman failure. Equity markets have also staged a partial recovery,
 especially after the US Government released further details about its own
 programs for de-risking bank balance sheets.
On top of these efforts to deal with the immediate problems, there is also considerable
 focus on reforms to the financial system architecture, to prevent a similar
 crisis from occurring again. Policy initiatives under discussion include changes
 to the regulation of credit rating agencies, the pay incentives faced by financial
 institutions and their staff, and the regulation of bank capital and liquidity.
Many of these initiatives have been developed under the auspices of international
 groupings of central banks and bank regulators, such as the Financial Stability
 Forum, now known as the Financial Stability Board, and the Basel Committee
 on Bank Supervision. Both groupings have expanded their memberships in the
 past few weeks, in particular to include major emerging economies. Australia
 was already represented on the Financial Stability Forum, and is one of the
 countries that have just joined the Basel Committee.
Central banks and other authorities around the world are working together to deal
 with the crisis and finalise these initiatives. Some of the reforms being
 considered will take a couple of years to be introduced. The global financial
 system is therefore facing a period of change. The present financial crisis
 has followed a period in which the price of risk was unusually low and conducive
 to the build-up of excesses in credit markets. These easier conditions are
 unlikely to return any time soon. What happens over the next few years, at
 least, is highly uncertain. For the time being, credit conditions will probably
 still be tighter than had been the case a few years ago. There will probably
 be less financing available for asset acquisition. Among the important open
 questions are: how quickly the banking systems in major economies can repair
 their balance sheets; and how quickly confidence can be restored.
