BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Some Effects of the Global Financial Crisis on Australian Financial Markets – Sydney
DATE: 31/03/2009
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2009/sp-ag-310309.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Some Effects of the Global Financial Crisis on Australian Financial Markets
Guy Debelle
[1]
Assistant Governor (Financial Markets)
Finance Professionals Forum
Sydney
–
31 March 2009
Audio
23.9
MB
My talk today focuses on some of the ways that the global financial crisis has affected

 Australian financial markets. Upfront, the positive point to emphasise is that

 the effect of the crisis on Australian financial markets has been considerably

 less than in many other countries. That said, many markets in Australia have

 been, and continue to be, significantly affected. In some instances, this has

 warranted a policy response to address the particular market dysfunction.
Before describing some of these effects and the policy responses, I will first give

 a potted summary of the global financial crisis to give some context to the

 developments in Australian markets. The
Financial Stability Review
(FSR) published last Thursday by the Reserve Bank provides a considerably more detailed

 discussion of the evolution of the crisis, as does the IMF's
Global Financial Stability Review
.
As the RBA's recent FSR points out, the crisis can be viewed through the prism

 of risk. Risk premia were excessively low for a number of years leading up

 to the middle of 2007. There are many explanations that have been advanced

 for why this was so. Some attribute it to the prolonged period of economic

 stability in a number of major countries dating back to the early 1990s which

 caused investors to become overly optimistic about the future. Some attribute

 it to the low interest rates that prevailed for much of the earlier part of

 this decade which caused investors to search for higher yields in new and less

 well understood products. I find the ‘search for yield’ explanation

 somewhat incomplete. It focuses primarily on the average return of the investment

 along with the investment's diversification benefit as measured by its

 correlation with other asset classes. The element that is incomplete is why

 the risk element of the risk/return trade-off was downplayed or mis-assessed.
Thus I would attribute a very large role in the financial crisis to a wholesale failure

 of risk assessment and risk management. In that regard, a recent speech by a colleague at the Bank of England, Andy Haldane, highlighted the statement

 by David Viniar, the CFO of Goldman Sachs, in August 2007:
‘We are seeing things that were 25 standard deviation moves, several days in

 a row.’
I repeat, that was in August 2007, in the very early days of the crisis. I would

 hazard a guess that we have seen quite a few more 25 standard deviation moves

 in the subsequent 18 months. The month of October 2008 following the collapse

 of Lehman Brothers delivered significantly more than 25 standard deviation

 events. It was, hopefully, a once in a lifetime event. (As Andy points out

 in his speech, a 25 standard deviation event actually is already a once in

 a lifetime event, where the life in this case is that of the universe!)
What this shows is that the models used to assess and manage risk were in many cases

 plain wrong. This applies to models used by investors, issuers and regulators.

 In some cases, the models may have been close to right, but their results were

 overridden by other considerations, including,
inter alia
, a short-term profit motive and asymmetric compensation

 for risk-taking.
This mis-assessment or mismanagement of risks led to a large number of investment

 decisions being taken which have subsequently proved to be extremely costly.
Another mis-assessment that occurred was the assumption that off-balance sheet vehicles,

 which were investing in these misvalued products, were really off the balance

 sheets. The disintermediation that had occurred to the ‘shadow’

 banking system had turned out to be a veil, not unlike the curtain behind which

 the Wizard of Oz

 operated.
[2]
Once the veil was removed, financial institutions found themselves dealing with large

 amounts of exposure to underperforming assets that they had not anticipated.
As these exposures have materialised, we have seen an enormous increase in risk aversion.

 Just as risk premia had been too low for a number of years prior to 2007, we

 now see an overshooting in the other direction. In addition, trust in the financial

 system has been substantially compromised, both between the public and the

 financial sector and between financial institutions. Counterparty risk aversion,

 that is the willingness to deal with other financial entities, is at elevated

 levels, with the Lehman's collapse exacerbating an already fragile environment.
While elements of the above problems were present in Australia, they were present

 to a significantly lesser extent than in many other developed countries. One

 significant factor contributing to their absence was that the core of the Australian

 financial sector has remained highly profitable from lending to households

 and businesses with, for example, the larger Australian banks able to deliver

 pre-tax rates of returns on equity of well over 20 per cent for many years.

 Hence there was no need for these institutions to engage in any search for

 yield outside their traditional realm.
As Australian financial institutions had minimal exposure to the securities that

 have beset other financial institutions and had solid balance sheets (as documented

 in the FSR), there has been considerably less concern about counterparty risk

 in local markets.
Nevertheless, the dislocation in global financial markets over the past two years

 has translated in varying degrees to local markets. In the remainder of my

 talk, I will discuss some of these channels.
The most obvious manifestation to the general public of the impact of the financial

 crisis on Australia has been the decline in the local stock market. From its

 peak in November 2007 to the lows reached earlier this month, the local market

 declined by 54 per cent. This fall compares to the peak to trough

 decline of 57 per cent in the US market, 61 per cent in

 Europe and 60 per cent in the Japanese market. Thus, the impact on

 this market has been similar to that in other countries. As Graph 1 shows,

 the decline in the local market has been one of the largest on record.
Graph 1
While these large falls have been comparable, the Australian market had generally

 outperformed these other markets in earlier years so that while the US and

 European stock markets had fallen back to levels last seen in the mid 1990s

 at the time of their most recent lows, the Australian market had returned to

 its level of mid 2003. The Japanese market's recent lows were back at

 levels last seen in 1984.
In recent weeks, the Australian share market has risen along with other global share

 markets so that for the March quarter to date, the local market is now down

 by only a few per cent, significantly smaller than the 19 per cent

 fall recorded in the December quarter.
Reflecting the comparative health of the Australian banking system, the decline in

 the share prices of commercial banks in Australia has been considerably less

 than the declines recorded in the US and the UK (Graph 2). The fall has

 been similar to that for Canada, whose banking system shares a lot of similarities

 with the Australian one, including its current state of profitability.
Graph 2
The Australian market along with other equity markets has experienced substantial

 volatility at times. As Graph 3 shows, in 2008 the number of days where

 the local market recorded either rises or falls exceeding 3 per cent

 was unprecedented. Twenty-two of the 40 large movements in 2008 occurred in

 the fourth quarter. It is interesting to note that despite the market falling

 substantially in net terms, most of the largest daily movements were actually

 rises.
Graph 3
The financial crisis initially developed in the credit market. Indeed, it took a

 number of months in the second half of 2007 for the equity market to catch

 up to the credit market. One of the obvious initial manifestations of the crisis

 was increased spreads in short-term money markets beginning in August 2007.

 The spread is the difference between bank borrowing costs at a particular maturity

 and the policy rate expected by the market at the same horizon. These increased

 spreads were in part a function of the increase in counterparty risk aversion

 that I spoke about earlier. Banks were more inclined to hold onto cash rather

 than lend it to others.
The Reserve Bank responded to the resultant increase in precautionary demand for

 cash by financial institutions by increasing the supply of cash in the system,

 measured by exchange settlement (ES) balances. If we had not done so, there

 would have been upward pressure on the cash rate (the interest rate on overnight

 borrowing in the interbank market) driving it above the target set by the Reserve

 Bank Board in their monetary policy decision. As the demand for cash has fluctuated

 throughout the crisis period, the Reserve Bank has adjusted the ES balances

 to ensure that the cash rate has remained at its targeted level. As Graph 4

 shows, the level of ES balances has tended to peak around quarter end, when

 banks have a preference to have more cash and undertake less interbank lending

 on their books for reporting purposes.
Graph 4
The initial rise in spreads in Australia was significantly less than in the US, UK

 and Europe where counterparty risk rose considerably further. Indeed, almost

 throughout the crisis period, money market spreads in Australia have been lower

 than in other markets.
Graph 5
Tensions clearly peaked around the time of the Lehman's collapse, when the

 spread between the 90-day bank bill and the expected cash rate rose as high

 as 100 basis points (Graph 5). Turnover in the money market, as was

 the case in all global markets, was significantly curtailed.
In order to address the pressure on term money market spreads, the Bank increased

 the maturities of its daily open market operations. This was aimed at enhancing

 liquidity in the term money market. The Bank's system of open market

 operations has always had the capacity to adjust the term of the operations

 very quickly, and we have availed ourselves of this flexibility through the

 crisis period. Towards the end of last year we began to offer terms of six

 months and one year on a regular basis.
These issues are discussed in more detail in a
speech
I gave last October.

 As I noted in that speech, to allow the Bank greater capacity to address the

 pressure on term money markets, we introduced a term deposit facility, which

 is effectively an exchange settlement balance at a longer maturity.
Recently, there have been a number of signs of an improvement in conditions in the

 money market. Spreads have fallen noticeably, and are now well below the average

 of the crisis period. They have not fallen back to their pre-crisis levels

 (although the one-month spread has been around that level in recent days).

 However, I am not sure the pre-crisis level is necessarily an appropriate benchmark,

 as it could be argued that spreads were excessively compressed in that period.
Furthermore, as the demand for cash has abated, the Bank has been able to reduce

 the supply of ES balances back to around $2½ to $3 billion. We

 have seen demand for longer maturities in our market operations decline significantly.

 On a number of days when we have offered the longer terms in our daily operations,

 we have found no demand. Notwithstanding this, the Bank will continue to offer

 these longer terms on a regular basis going forward. As a result, we have also

 been able to reduce term deposits outstanding to a very low level with the

 intention, at this stage, of not offering them again for some time unless circumstances

 warrant otherwise.
Moving out along the maturity spectrum beyond the short-term money market, there

 has been a significant impact of the global financial crisis on the bond market.

 As the crisis has unfolded, there has been a marked process of re-intermediation.

 Corporates who had previously been able to borrow directly in financial markets

 found that these markets were no longer accessible and turned to the banks

 for funding. This process saw a surge in intermediated business credit in Australia

 in late 2007.
There was very little Australian corporate bond issuance throughout 2008 but in the

 last few weeks there have been some signs of life. In global bond markets,

 there has been a marked surge in non-financial corporate issuance since the

 beginning of this year. Indeed, corporate issuance in the US so far this year

 has been around or even higher than pre-crisis levels in terms of volume, if

 not in terms of spread. One interesting development in the local market is

 that two of the recent corporate offerings have been targeted at the retail

 market. It will be certainly interesting to see how that plays out.
In Australia, a very large share of private-sector bonds is issued by the financial

 sector. Again reflecting the developments in global credit markets from August

 2007, bond issuance by the banks was clearly affected. Initially, this took

 the form of a widening in spreads at issuance (Graph 6). Then at various

 times in the months following, it was difficult to issue at any price (for

 both Australian and other global financial institutions). The banks therefore

 took their opportunities to fund themselves as they arose. The banks adopted

 a conservative strategy of getting as far ahead on their funding programs as

 possible. This was evident in January and February 2008, when there was

 sizeable issuance by the banks in offshore markets. Indeed, in January 2008,

 issuance by Australian banks was a significant share of total issuance (by

 both US and other global institutions) in the US market.
Graph 6
As is evident in Graph 7, funding markets shut completely following the collapse

 of Lehman Brothers. All global financial markets were dislocated by this event,

 but not surprisingly term debt markets were about the most affected. The destruction

 of confidence between counterparties in the financial system was very large.

 Investors were extremely unwilling to take on any exposure to a financial institution

 at any maturity. In many money markets around the world, maturities shortened

 dramatically so that only the overnight market was (barely) functioning and

 a number of central banks became effectively the intermediator of last resort.
Graph 7
In response to the drying up of term funding markets, a number of countries, beginning

 with Ireland, began announcing government guarantees to support debt issuance

 by their banks. In a global financial market, where institutions are competing

 for funds, the provision of a guarantee to one group meant that it was very

 difficult for others to compete effectively for funds. Hence, in the wake of

 the dislocation induced by Lehman's, many countries, including Australia,

 moved to guarantee bank debt issuance.
Soon after the introduction of the guarantee, Australian banks were able to once

 again access term debt markets. To date, the Australian banks have raised $81 billion

 under the guarantee scheme. There has, however, been little investor appetite

 for unguaranteed debt, despite other indications of an improvement in credit

 market conditions. It is a little surprising that investors do not have interest

 in unguaranteed paper, and are not keen to see part of the 70 basis point

 fee that the banks pay to the Government for the guarantee ending up in their

 own pocket instead.
As a result of their ability to issue under the guarantee scheme, the Australian

 banks are well advanced on their funding needs for this year. Their funding

 needs have been further addressed by the rapid growth in deposits in recent

 months. The combination of increased term funding and deposit growth has seen

 a decline in the share of bank funding accessed from short-term wholesale debt

 markets.
While term funding markets are functioning better, and there have been some recent

 signs of life in the corporate bond market, the same cannot be said of the

 securitised debt market. As is well known to all, securitisation has been at

 the heart of the global financial crisis since its inception. While the problems

 in the securitisation process in the US, many of which relate to the mis-assessment

 and mismanagement of risk discussed earlier, were not present in the Australian

 market, the local market has been similarly dislocated.
Prior to the crisis, securitisation accounted for around 25 per cent of

 housing credit in Australia. However, as I described in an earlier
speech
, and my colleague Tony

 Richards discussed
last week
, the process of securitisation

 in Australia was significantly different to that in the US. In Australia, the

 institution originating the loans that comprised the securitisation maintained

 a number of linkages to the loans, typically including a direct financial stake,

 as well as a substantial reputational link. Moreover, lending standards in

 Australia did not change materially. The data indicate that the loans that

 were securitised by banks were not materially different in quality from those

 that were not. For the banking sector, securitisation was primarily an alternative

 funding source that was accessed when it was cost effective to do so and provided

 a more diversified funding base. Obviously for the non-banking sector, securitisation

 was the primary funding source. As the securitised market has been dislocated,

 the non-banking sector has been particularly affected.
Graph 8 shows that issuance of residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS)

 since the second half of 2007 has been minimal. One factor contributing to

 this development has been the sizeable overhang of supply in the secondary

 market. Prior to the crisis, well over half of Australian RMBS were bought

 by offshore investors, of which structured investment vehicles (SIVs) were

 an important component. The demise of the SIVs has seen both a marked reduction

 in demand but also has seen them sell the RMBS back into the local market as

 they were forced to liquidate their portfolios. As a result, spreads in the

 secondary market are very wide, and far too wide to make new issuance economic.
To address this problem, the Government, through the Australian Office of Financial

 Management (AOFM), has undertaken a program of purchasing new RMBS issues.

 To date, the AOFM has purchased $3 billion of RMBS, with a further $5 billion

 to be purchased. However, there has been no issuance in recent months other

 than the AOFM program.
Graph 8
At the shorter end of the asset-backed market, the asset-backed commercial paper

 (ABCP) market has also been substantially affected. ABCP outstanding in the

 onshore market rose in the first few months as a number of banks funded back

 onshore, assets which had previously been funded offshore as the offshore market

 was greatly impaired (Graph 9). Subsequently, as investor appetite for

 ABCP has diminished domestically too, the stock of paper outstanding has declined

 significantly, the cost of issuing the paper has risen and the average maturity

 has shortened.
Graph 9
In response to the dislocation in these asset-backed markets, the Reserve Bank has

 widened the pool of collateral that is eligible in our open market operations.

 Most forms of highly rated asset-backed paper are now eligible.
Taken together, the increased money market spreads, the increased spreads on longer

 term issuance and the dislocation in securitised markets have seen a rise in

 the cost to the banks of funding their lending. For a few years prior to the

 crisis, much of the banks' funding tended to move broadly in line with

 the cash rate set by the Reserve Bank Board. However, with the rise in spreads

 that has occurred, this relationship is currently not as strong. This has then

 contributed to the divergence between movements in the cash rate and lending

 rates.
Notwithstanding this, as was noted in the most recent
Statement on Monetary Policy
, the pass-through of the reduction

 in the cash rate since last September to housing interest rates has been more

 complete than in almost any other developed country. This means that this important

 channel of the monetary transmission process has not been impaired, in stark

 contrast to a number of other countries, most notably the US. The relative

 strength of Australian financial institutions and Australian financial markets

 more generally has ensured that this has occurred.
I will now turn to discuss some of the effects of the crisis on the foreign exchange

 market. I covered this topic in detail
only recently
, so I will be

 brief here. The most obvious impact of the crisis has been the depreciation

 of the Australian dollar, but in addition to that, a notable development has

 been the marked increase in volatility in the foreign exchange market. As Graph

 10 shows, the daily range in which the Australian dollar has traded against

 the US dollar has been well above average throughout the crisis period. The

 volatility was particularly marked in October 2008, most notably on the

 evening of the 8
th
of October when the Australian dollar depreciated

 9 per cent against the US dollar, and 11 per cent against

 the yen, in six hours of trading.
Graph 10
A number of the large movements in the Australian dollar have taken place in the

 last hours of trading in New York. During those times, there have been extraordinarily

 large movements in many financial prices in both directions. The Australian

 dollar has had a particularly high correlation at times with the S&P 500

 (Graph 11), to some extent reflecting the fact that some investors regard

 the Australian dollar as a good proxy for global financial market sentiment.
Graph 11
Reflecting very poor liquidity in the foreign exchange market on particular occasions

 throughout the crisis period, the Bank has stepped in to enhance liquidity

 in the market to ensure that price adjustments were as smooth as possible.
Finally, the foreign exchange swap market has also been dysfunctional at times. In

 particular, for much of the crisis period, there has been a global shortage

 of US dollars outside US markets. A recent article in the
BIS Quarterly Review
nicely describes the sources of this

 shortage.
[3]
As the article notes, much of the excess demand for US dollars in the

 swap market came from European banks to fund their US dollar-denominated assets.

 With the increase in counterparty risk aversion, American banks (who have easy

 access to US dollars) were less willing to lend to European banks. While originating

 in Europe, this shortage spilled over into other foreign exchange swap markets,

 including in this region.
To address this problem, the US Federal Reserve entered into swap agreements with

 a number of other central banks, including the RBA, to distribute more US dollars

 into these swap markets. The introduction of this facility, and in particular,

 the move to provide unlimited US dollars at a fixed price in Europe, the UK

 and Switzerland, seems to have contributed to a marked improvement in the market.

 In Australia, we have seen a marked drop in demand for this facility. At our

 two most recent auctions, we received bids of under US$2 billion against

 the $US 10 billion on offer at the auction, so that the total amount outstanding

 currently under this program is $US 9½ billion.
Conclusion
To conclude, the disruption in financial markets since the middle of 2007 has had

 a marked impact on Australian financial markets and the Australian economy.

 I have discussed some of those channels today, but there are a number of others

 that I have not covered here, which are covered in more detail in last week's

 FSR.
While local markets have been disrupted, the degree of dislocation has, in most cases,

 been considerably less than in other countries. One important reason for this

 is that the degree of counterparty risk aversion has been less in Australian

 markets given that Australian financial institutions had minimal exposure to

 the securities that have compromised the balance sheets of other financial

 institutions around the world.
Nevertheless, whilever the global financial system remains disrupted it will continue

 to undermine the effect of the sizeable policy stimulus being provided at the

 moment. The restoration of public confidence in the global financial system

 and the restoration of confidence between financial entities is a very necessary

 step on the road to global recovery.
Endnotes
I thank Josh Kirkwood for his assistance in preparing this talk.
[1]
The Wizard of Oz was originally written as a financial allegory about the debate

 between the Gold Standard and William Jennings Bryan's desire for a

 Silver Standard.
[2]
See P McGuire and G von Peter, ‘
The US Dollar Shortage In Global Banking
’,
BIS Quarterly Review
March 2009, pp 47–63.
[3]
