BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: The Global Outlook – Sydney
DATE: 18/02/2009
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2009/sp-ag-180209.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
The Global Outlook
Malcolm Edey
Assistant Governor (Economic)
Committee for Economic Development of Australia (CEDA)

 Economic and Political Overview 2009
Sydney
–
18 February 2009
Audio
19.15MB
Download
254KB
Once again, I thank CEDA for the invitation to speak here today. This is the fifth

 year that I've spoken at this event, and it's certainly the toughest

 year for the global economy that we've seen during that time.
Economic events around the world have moved very quickly over the past few months.

 We've known for some time that a significant downturn was occurring in

 the major industrial countries, as they felt the effects of the global financial

 crisis. But for much of last year, other parts of the world were looking quite

 resilient. China and the other developing economies in Asia (and elsewhere)

 mostly kept growing at a good pace up until the September quarter, and world

 commodity prices up to that point were still close to their peaks.
But the period since then has seen a sharp deterioration in conditions. The downturn

 in the G7 economies intensified in the December quarter, and at the same time

 it spread to other parts of the world, including Asia, Latin America and eastern

 Europe.
For the world economy as a whole, 2009 is shaping up as a very difficult year. IMF

 forecasts released in late January are for world growth of half of one per

 cent this year, with the G7 economies contracting by 2 per cent. If these forecasts

 are realised, it would amount to the weakest year for the global economy, and

 for the advanced industrial countries, in the post-war period.
Graph 1
Two things stand out as being quite remarkable about the recent sequence of events.

 One is the abrupt nature of the deterioration. The graph we're looking

 at here shows the sequence of forecasts for the G7 economies, and for the world

 as a whole, that were made over the course of the past year. As recently as

 July last year, the IMF's 2009 forecast was for world growth of 3.9 per

 cent, which would have been close to its long-run average. A downward revision

 to the world outlook by more than 3 percentage points over the six-month

 period since then is, to my knowledge, unprecedented. Much of that revision

 has taken place within the last three months. I make these observations not

 as a criticism of forecasters, but as an indication of how quickly the momentum

 of the world economy was changing during this period. For the G7 economies

 the shift was almost as pronounced, from a forecast of plus 1 to minus 2 over

 the same period.
Graph 2
The other notable feature is the highly synchronised nature of the downturn. We can

 illustrate that by looking at the proportion of Australia's trading partners

 that are growing at a pace significantly below trend. It's worth noting

 here that the four-year period up to 2007 was itself highly unusual, in that

 none of Australia's major trading partners fell into that category during

 that time. In contrast, growth in virtually all of Australia's trading

 partners will be well-below-trend this year, if official forecasts are realised.

 This would also mean that the current cycle is more highly synchronised than

 the three previous international recessions, in the early 80s, the early 90s

 and in 2001.
Graph 3
The trigger for this rapid downgrading of the international outlook has been the

 flow of very weak data coming from around the world in the past few months,

 pertaining mainly to the December quarter. Preliminary estimates are that the

 US economy contracted by 1 per cent in the quarter, having posted only a small

 fall in the previous quarter and moderate growth on average over the year prior

 to that. Consumer spending and business investment both weakened noticeably,

 and the housing sector has been an ongoing drag on activity for some time.

 Job losses accelerated during the quarter to more than half a million a month.
Graph 4
Graph 5
Similar patterns are being seen in a number of the other advanced economies. GDP

 in both the UK and the euro area fell by 1½ per cent in the quarter.

 We learned earlier this week that Japanese GDP fell by 3 per cent. Across the

 Asian region in particular, a number of countries experienced unusually sharp

 falls in measures of output and international trade during this period. In

 Japan, for example, industrial production fell by 20 per cent over the

 final three months of the year, as did the volume of exports. Similar movements

 occurred across the smaller economies in the region. China's GDP continued

 to grow in the quarter, but at a much reduced pace.
Graph 6
Graph 7
Graph 8
Clearly, then, the deterioration in global conditions in the December quarter was

 both abrupt and widespread.
What caused it?
I suggest three main factors were at work.
The first was a widespread loss of confidence in the wake of the collapse of the

 US investment bank Lehman Brothers, which occurred on 15 September last year.

 You will recall that this was a period of exceptional turmoil in global financial

 markets. The Lehman's collapse itself followed the effective nationalisation

 of the US federal mortgage agencies a week earlier. These events were then

 followed in quick succession by the nationalisation of the US insurer AIG,

 along with a string of other announcements of the failure or near-failure of

 financial institutions in the United States and Europe. Uncertainty about

 the nature and scope of various rescue packages proposed through this period

 added to the general turmoil. It was during this period that a number of governments

 moved to guarantee deposits in their banking systems.
One indicator of the way these events affected confidence is the reaction of equity

 markets. In the three months following the Lehman's collapse, world equity

 prices recorded some of their largest daily movements (in both directions)

 in history. In net terms, equity prices in the major economies fell by around

 30 per cent in that period. They have, however, fluctuated around a more stable

 average since then.
Graph 9
Survey-based measures of business and consumer confidence also fell sharply in the

 major economies. It seems plausible that improvements in communication, and

 the more rapid transmission of economic news, have contributed to making these

 swings in confidence more highly synchronised than they were in the past.
Graph 10
In any case, while it's clear that conditions were generally weakening already

 from around mid 2008, they took a sharp turn for the worse in the period immediately

 after the Lehman's collapse. Households and businesses around the world

 seem to have made a rapid re-evaluation of their spending plans, and in particular

 they cut back on their discretionary spending. One very clear example of that

 was a sharp drop in the demand for cars in the final months of 2008. This resulted

 in car sales in the major economies falling from their early 2008 levels by

 around 25 per cent.
Graph 11
A second factor, also related to the Lehman's collapse, is likely to have been

 a further tightening of credit standards in the major economies. This manifested

 itself, amongst other things, in disruptions to trade credit and insurance,

 and in a tightening of lending for consumer and business spending.
Graph 12
Thirdly, these effects seem to have been transmitted very quickly around the world

 through the trade channel, as businesses cut back on production in response

 to reduced orders. Falls in exports and production were particularly pronounced

 for cars, steel and electronics.
There were probably some internal cyclical dynamics in some countries that amplified

 these effects. In China, for example, the economy had for some time been growing

 at a faster-than-trend pace, and the authorities had taken steps to rein in

 growth during 2007 and the first half of 2008. With external demand falling

 away, there seems to have been a build up of inventories that prompted a sharp

 adjustment to production volumes late last year. More generally, firms around

 the world probably sought to economise on their inventories in response both

 to weaker expected demand and reduced availability of working capital.
Graph 13
It seems likely that the contraction in activity seen in the December quarter contained

 a significant one-off element. Businesses and consumers made a big adjustment

 to their spending levels in response to the shock to confidence, and businesses

 cut production and inventories in response to the fall in demand and tighter

 credit. It's too early to tell, though, what the trends in demand and

 activity will look like as we emerge from this period. We don't yet have

 sufficient data to get a good reading on that.
What we do know is that economic downturns don't last forever. So despite the

 gloomy circumstances, it's important to ask the question: what are the

 factors that can contribute to an upturn in due course? I've given you

 three factors that contributed to the recent deterioration, so let me counterbalance

 that with three factors that, over time, can be expected to contribute to an

 upturn.
The first factor is the substantial set of expansionary measures that have been taken

 through conventional monetary and fiscal policies. Interest rates have been

 cut to very low levels in most countries, and there are some very large fiscal

 policy initiatives in the pipeline around the world. In a number of countries,

 including the United States and China, discretionary fiscal expansions of the

 order of 2 per cent of GDP look like being implemented in 2009, on top of the

 working of the automatic stabilisers.
Table 1: Discretionary Fiscal Easing in Selected Economies
per cent of GDP
Estimated easing in 2009
(a)
United States
over 2
United Kingdom
over 1
Germany
1½
Japan
1¼
China
over 2
South Korea
over 2
Taiwan
over 2
Australia
2½
(a) Based on policy announcements and media reports.
Secondly, the major economies have taken a range of steps to provide direct assistance

 to their financial sectors. These have taken several forms – including

 central bank facilities to improve access to liquidity, direct injections of

 capital into financial institutions and the provision of government guarantees.

 Probably more needs to be done in the major economies on this front, but there

 are some tentative signs at least that these steps are contributing to some

 improvement in the functioning of financial markets. The extreme volatility

 that followed the Lehman's collapse has eased off in the last couple

 of months. And the availability of government guarantees has seen a recovery

 in bond issuance by banks around the world. This is helping to put banks in

 a position where they can be more confident of their long-term funding.
My third point is that the normal cyclical dynamics of the global economy can eventually

 be expected to run their course. By this I mean several things. The de-stocking

 that typically occurs in the early stages of an economic downturn is essentially

 a limited phenomenon. It only needs to occur once. Similarly, where over-building

 has occurred, it will take some time to work off the accumulated over-supply,

 but eventually the growth of underlying demand will reassert itself. We are

 seeing that mechanism gradually playing out in the US housing sector, where

 the fall in housing starts has meant that excess stocks of new homes are being

 wound back, which is an essential precondition for eventual recovery.
Graph 14
Other cyclical forces will work through asset and credit markets. During a generalised

 loss of confidence, a range of markets including those for equities, for housing

 and for commodities can often overshoot fundamentals on the downside. But at

 some point, they will reach a level that is sufficiently cheap to encourage

 investors back into the market. I can't say whether they might be close

 to that point yet, but it is encouraging that both equities and commodity prices

 have been more stable in the last couple of months after the sharp falls that

 we saw in the December quarter.
Graph 15
These various mechanisms work on different time frames. A conventional inventory

 cycle might be quite short. At the other end of the scale, experience suggests

 that balance sheet repair can take considerable time. Nonetheless, governments

 around the world are taking significant steps to speed up the process, and

 various further proposals to take bad assets off the balance sheets of troubled

 institutions are still being considered.
There are reasons to expect that the Australian economy can continue to perform better

 than its international counterparts in the difficult period that lies ahead.

 Australia had more momentum than most comparable economies in the period leading

 into the crisis. As in other countries, substantial monetary and fiscal measures

 have been taken to support growth. But an important difference is that the

 Australian financial system remains in much better shape than its international

 counterparts. As a result of that, we have been able to gain much more traction

 from cuts in official interest rates. In the period since the RBA started cutting

 the cash rate in September, substantial rate cuts have been passed through

 to end borrowers, particularly for housing loans. This is in marked contrast

 to other countries, where banks have been more heavily affected by financial

 strains and the degree of pass-through has been much more limited. Another

 factor helping to insulate the domestic economy from events abroad is the depreciation

 of the exchange rate.
Graph 16
Having said all that, there's no doubt that Australia will be operating in

 a difficult international environment this year. Official forecasts, including

 those of the IMF, imply that output in the major industrial economies will

 contract further in the first half of this year, but start to pick up later

 in the year and into 2010. The situation is still very uncertain but, for the

 reasons I've been outlining, that seems like a reasonable expectation.
Thank you.
