BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: The Australian Experience with Inflation Targeting – Rio de Janeiro
DATE: 15/05/2009
SPEAKER: Rio de Janeiro
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2009/sp-ag-150509.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
The Australian Experience with Inflation Targeting
Guy Debelle
[1]
Assistant Governor (Financial Markets)
Banco Central do Brasil XI Annual Seminar on Inflation Targeting
Rio de Janeiro
–
15 May 2009
1. Introduction
The past two decades have seen the increasingly widespread adoption of inflation

 targeting as the framework for monetary policy. While inflation-targeting regimes

 share a number of similarities, most importantly the focus on an inflation

 rate as the objective of monetary policy, there are a number of differences

 in terms of their practical implementation.
One approach which has been the boilerplate for a number of emerging market countries,

 including that of Brazil, is that practised by the Bank of England. This approach

 places a strong reliance on model-based forecasts (while still providing some

 scope for judgmental adjustments). On paper, the Australian approach lies towards

 the other end of the spectrum. It takes more explicit account of the dual mandate

 of price stability and full employment. The inflation target is to maintain

 ‘
consumer

 price inflation between 2 and 3 per cent, on average,

 over the cycle
.’ This definition of the inflation target

 is perhaps the most flexible amongst the inflation-targeting countries. Despite

 these differences, the outcomes in Australia in terms of both inflation and

 economic growth have been at least as good as those in other countries, and

 the degree of predictability of the monetary policy decision is on a par with

 other countries.
This paper describes the Australian approach to inflation targeting by drawing together

 various papers and speeches published by the Reserve Bank of Australia over

 the past decade and a half. The next section provides details of the inflation-targeting

 framework in Australia, focusing on the aspects of the framework in Australia

 that provide scope for greater flexibility. In doing so, it compares the Australian

 framework to that of the UK. Section 3 describes three episodes over the past

 decade that demonstrate the flexibility of the Australian framework.
The global financial crisis is providing a significant stress test of the inflation-targeting

 framework, including in Australia. Section 4 discusses the challenges to the

 framework and provides a preliminary assessment of how the framework has withstood

 the challenge. In doing so, it discusses the vexed issue of the appropriate

 response of monetary policy to asset prices. It also briefly covers two other

 open issues: the possibility of a price-level target, and the usefulness of

 the current ‘state of the art’ technology, warning about the dangers

 of an over-reliance on the technology.
2. Institutional Details of the Inflation-targeting Framework in Australia
The legislation establishing the Reserve Bank of Australia in 1959 specifies that

 the goal of the Bank is to set monetary policy to best contribute to:
the stability of the currency of

 Australia;
[2]
the maintenance of full employment in Australia; and
the economic prosperity and welfare of the people of Australia.
The legislation clearly states that monetary policy has both nominal and real objectives,

 similar to the goals specified for the Federal Reserve

 Board.
[3]
Unlike a number of other inflation-targeting countries, Australia's adoption

 of an inflation-targeting framework was evolutionary rather than revolutionary.

 To a large extent, the evolutionary shift reflected the absence of a catalytic

 crisis such as the radical program of economic reform that occurred in New

 Zealand following a prolonged period of poor economic outcomes, or in the case

 of the UK and Sweden, the sudden departure from the ERM. It also reflected

 a recognition that previous monetary frameworks in Australia (which covered

 the gamut of possibilities) had not been successful in maintaining low inflation

 (Graph 1).
Graph 1
In part for this reason, at the inception of the inflation target there was no change

 to the legislated framework, which has not materially altered since its inception

 in 1959 (Table 1).
[4]
Moreover, the existing legislative framework was regarded as satisfactory:

 the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) has always had a high degree of legislated

 independence (Macfarlane 1996). However, the operational independence was not

 always as high. The Australian experience reinforces the notion that legislation

 does not guarantee independence (although it can certainly hinder it); it is

 the practice which matters most.
Table 1: The Inflation-targeting Frameworks in Australia and the UK
Reserve Bank of Australia
Bank of England
Governing Statute
Reserve Bank Act 1959
Bank of England Act 1998
Statutory goal
Stability of the currency and the maintenance of full employment
Price stability
Inflation target
2 to 3 per cent on average over the cycle
2 ± 1 per cent
Target specified in
Statement on the Conduct of Monetary Policy
Annual letter from the Chancellor to the BoE
Measure of inflation
CPI
Harmonised Price Index
Action in the event of a target breach
na
Letter of explanation sent to the Chancellor
Inflation report
Statement on Monetary Policy
Inflation Report
– inflation forecasts
Yes
Yes
– output forecasts
Yes
Yes
Policy decision announcements
Yes
Yes
Explanation of policy decision
Detailed press release
Two weeks later when minutes are released
Monetary policy decision-maker
Reserve Bank Board – 2 internal members, 7 external incl. Secretary

 of the Treasury
Monetary Policy Committee – 5 internal members, 4 external
Minutes published
Yes
Yes
In Australia (as in Sweden and Finland), the inflation target was adopted first by

 the Reserve Bank in 1993, as an operational interpretation of the price stability

 goal of its legislated mandate.
[5]
The inflation-targeting framework in Australia was subsequently verbally endorsed

 by the government of the day, but was not formally endorsed until 1996, when

 a new government signed a letter of agreement with a new Governor, upon his

 appointment. This
Statement on the Conduct of Monetary

 Policy
reiterated the Reserve Bank's broad goals stipulated

 in the
Reserve Bank Act
, and endorsed the inflation target as the

 practical interpretation of the medium-term goal of price stability. The status

 of the
Statement
has been reinforced by the issuance of a second
Statement
(almost identical to the first) upon the re-appointment of Governor Macfarlane

 in 2003 and the appointment of current Governor, Glenn Stevens, in 2006, as

 well as upon the only change of government that has occurred since the formalisation

 of the inflation target. The joint announcement of the inflation target between

 the Government and the central bank helps demonstrate that there is unlikely

 to be any inconsistency between the setting of monetary and fiscal policy.
The
Statement
in Australia is very similar to the Letter of Remit from

 the Chancellor to the Bank of England in defining the practical interpretation

 of the goal of price stability. The latter is required by legislation, whereas

 the
Statement
is not.
The
Statement
clarifies the possible tension between the real and nominal

 goals that are embodied in the
Reserve Bank Act
. It recognises that price stability is the main contribution

 that monetary policy can make to sustained growth in output and employment,

 but also recognises that monetary policy-makers need to be cognisant of the

 effects of monetary policy on the real economy.
In the UK, New Zealand and Europe, there is a clear lexicographic ranking of the

 real and nominal objectives, with the primary goal of the RBNZ, the Bank of

 England and the ECB being price stability, while real economy goals are given

 a subordinate weighting. For example, the
Bank of England Act 1998
states that the objectives of the Bank of

 England shall be (a) to maintain price stability, and (b) subject to that,

 to support the economic policy of Her Majesty's Government, including

 its objectives for growth and employment.
The recognition that growth/employment outcomes were an important consideration for

 the central bank was initially seen as setting the RBA apart from other inflation-targeting

 central banks where the rhetoric (at least) reinforced the primacy of price

 stability. But despite these apparent differences, in practice the experience

 suggests that there has been little substantive difference in this aspect of

 the framework.
In the event of demand shocks, there is not a large conflict between the real and

 nominal objectives; the monetary response is the same to meet both objectives,

 and the actions of all the inflation-targeting central banks would not be significantly

 different. There may be some difference at the margin in terms of the speed

 with which inflation is returned to the target range. The Australian system

 potentially puts more emphasis on minimising short-term output variability

 and tolerating greater inflation variability. In doing so, it needs to rely

 less on transmission channels such as the exchange rate which can have a more

 immediate effect on inflation, than working through the output gap.
In the case of most supply shocks, where the required response to meet the two objectives

 may differ in the short term, each of the frameworks is sufficiently flexible

 to cause no material difference in the central bank's response. Only

 in the event of a large supply shock (such as the oil price shocks of the 1970s)

 might any difference in response across the different frameworks become apparent.
All of the central banks have both inflation and output (employment) in their objective

 functions and practice some form of flexible inflation targeting (Svensson

 1997). That is, none of the central banks are an inflation ‘nutter’

 where inflation only is in the objective

 function.
[6]
The dual mandate of the Reserve Bank of Australia would again tend to suggest

 a higher weight on output stabilisation than the other central banks, in that

 if a shock were to drive inflation and output away from target in divergent

 directions, it would tolerate a slower return of inflation to target (i.e.

 inflation variability would be higher) to reduce output variability.
To some extent, the framework in Australia is similar to an approach of targeting

 nominal income growth, without the attendant problems that may beset the latter.

 These include the problem of public communication, where the public is likely

 to be more understanding of inflation than the more nebulous concept of nominal

 growth, as well as the problem that nominal income is often subject to sizeable

 revision by the statistical agency.
Accountability
In exchange for the independence and greater discretion that an inflation-targeting

 framework permits a central bank, it is important that the central bank be

 held accountable on a regular basis to the public. To some extent, financial

 markets are continuously holding a central bank accountable for its actions.

 Any deviation from a ‘sensible’ course for monetary policy would

 likely be penalised by movements in the longer end of the yield curve or by

 movements in the exchange rate.
However, more formally (and democratically), the
Statement

 on the Conduct of Monetary Policy
requires that the Governor and other

 senior central bank officers appear before a parliamentary committee twice

 a year to explain their thinking and actions on monetary policy. These appearances

 are in public, and allow the public, via the parliament, to question whether

 the central bank's actions remain consistent with the inflation target.
The RBA's accountability is collective rather than individual as is the case

 with the Bank of England. The Board as a whole is accountable, in large part

 reflecting its composition where the majority of members are business people

 rather than practising economists. Individual accountability in the RBA's

 case may compromise the ability of the business members of the Board to take

 decisions in the national interest rather than their sectoral interest (Stevens

 2007).
There are no explicit penalties imposed on the RBA should inflation move outside

 the 2 to 3 per cent range. In part, this reflected a concern that a hard-edged

 band with explicit penalties would introduce a discontinuity in the payoff

 function which might induce unnecessary instability in monetary policy settings.

 The penalties in the Australian framework are less explicit. The RBA is increasingly

 uncomfortable at an increasing rate as inflation moves away from the desired

 level.
In the UK, should inflation fall below 1 per cent or rise above 3 per cent

 the Monetary Policy Committee is required to write a letter of explanation

 to the Chancellor. The accountability in Australia is, in this regard, less

 formalised, with the penalties being imposed via financial markets, the parliamentary

 testimonies and through loss of reputation.
Communication
More generally, the adoption of inflation targeting has coincided with a large increase

 in the written and spoken output of central banks. Increased communication

 and transparency is beneficial for any monetary policy framework but it has

 played a particularly prominent role in inflation-targeting regimes. In part

 this reflects the starting point of many central banks that adopted inflation

 targeting: they generally had a poor inflation history and low credibility

 with the public and financial markets. Thus a high degree of communication

 and transparency was necessary to build credibility as quickly as possible,

 to enhance the transmission of monetary policy and to provide an anchor for

 the public's expectations of future inflation. In this respect, Mervyn

 King (1997) has characterised inflation targeting as ‘trust building

 by talk’ (see also Kuttner and Posen 1999). Indeed, the inflation target's

 role as a coherent framework for the central bank to communicate with the public

 may be one of its greatest benefits.
There are two important issues for the central bank to communicate to the public.

 Firstly, the central bank should use every opportunity to reiterate the target

 itself and emphasise their commitment to it, to increase the likelihood that

 it acts as an anchor for inflation expectations. Secondly, it needs to communicate

 a general understanding of the central bank's reaction function.
Speeches by the Governor and senior officials of the RBA have been a primary vehicle

 to enhance the status and understanding of the inflation-targeting framework

 in Australia. Aspects of the framework may also be conveyed in the press release

 that the RBA issues announcing changes in monetary policy, which includes detailed

 reasoning for the policy change. From the inception of the inflation-targeting

 regime, the press releases have made explicit reference to the inflation target

 as the primary justification for the monetary policy decision.
The other major source of information on the central bank's reaction function

 has been the quarterly inflation reports or their equivalent. The RBA had traditionally

 published a detailed assessment of its monetary policy actions only in its

 annual report, with very brief accounts of current economic conditions published

 quarterly in the RBA
Bulletin
. However, with the inception of the inflation target, the

 quarterly assessments on its view of the current and future state of the Australian

 economy gradually increased in length and depth of analysis, to reach their

 present form where they are published as a stand-alone document – the

 quarterly
Statement on Monetary Policy
.
[7]
Moreover, over time the RBA has provided more detail about its forecasts such

 that currently numerical forecasts for output and inflation are presented each

 quarter. In this sense too, the RBA's communications strategy has evolved

 more gradually than other central banks, but practice has converged over time.
The inflation target has served as a useful organising framework for this document.

 Analysis is provided on all of the variables that feed into the RBA's

 overall outlook for inflation and output, with the concluding section focusing

 on the outlook for inflation and the risks to that outlook.
Ex post
it is important to explain

 why observed CPI outcomes are, or are not, consistent with the central bank's

 view of inflation, and some time is spent in the RBA's quarterly
Statement

 on Monetary Policy
explaining the details and implications of the

 quarterly CPI outcomes. Whether or not the central bank accurately forecasts

 the next quarter's outcomes to the nearest decimal point, however, implies

 a degree of knowledge and precision that a central bank does not possess. Thus

 the focus of the public and financial markets should be on the accuracy of

 the central bank's inflation forecast at the policy horizon.
In recent years, the RBA has enhanced its communication in a number of

 ways.
[8]
While the details of the RBA Board's decision had been made public in

 a press release at the time of changes in monetary policy, they had not been

 made public when the stance of monetary policy was left unchanged. Since 2007,

 a detailed press release follows every decision.
Moreover, since the middle of this decade, the introduction to the
Statement on Monetary Policy
had summarised the deliberations taken

 by the RBA Board at their monthly meetings on monetary policy but the detailed

 minutes of the meeting were not published. Again, since the end of 2007, the

 minutes of the Board meeting are published with a two-week lag. The individual

 views of the Board members are not attributed, which is appropriate given the

 composition of the RBA Board, where only two of the members are full-time central

 bankers, with the majority of the others being business people.
It is however possible that there is a limit to transparency. If the central bank's

 communications suggest that it has greater knowledge or greater precision in

 its inflation control than it does in reality, then when this becomes apparent

 and the public's expectations are disappointed, the central bank's

 credibility may be damaged. There is likely to be some advantage from being

 modest in communicating what the central bank knows and can do. This does not

 mean that the central bank can hide behind a veil of uncertainty but rather

 that it should acknowledge that uncertainty and convey to the public the implications

 of the uncertainty for its inflation forecasts and policy actions.
Flexibility
There are a number of aspects of the Australian framework which have the potential

 to deliver greater flexibility in the practical implementation of the inflation

 target. These include the dual mandate specified in the goals, the emphasis

 on a (thick) point target rather than a band, and the specification of a horizon

 for the target.
The ‘2 to 3 per cent’ specification may appear to suggest that the

 inflation target in Australia is a narrow band. However, the intent of this

 language is that the target is a ‘thick point’ rather than a range,

 or in other words, the desirable rate of inflation for the Australian economy

 is ‘2 point something’ (Stevens and Debelle 1995).
Relatedly, and at the heart of the output/inflation variability trade-off, is the

 horizon over which inflation is returned to target. The RBA's inflation

 target is defined ‘over the course of the cycle’, ‘allowing

 for the natural short-run variation in inflation’. While the allowable

 short-run variation is not defined, the aim is that in most circumstances,

 the Bank's inflation forecast should lie between 2 and 3 per cent

 at the monetary policy horizon, that is, the maximum impact of changes in monetary

 policy on inflation.
In circumstances where the forecast lies outside the range over the policy horizon,

 the forecast path for inflation should be such that inflation would be expected

 to return to between 2 and 3 per cent within a reasonable period, that

 is, the trend in inflation should be clearly back toward the target range.

 In Australia, there is thus no specific horizon for the inflation target, allowing

 greater flexibility in policy-setting, and less variability in output. The

 Bank of England has been more explicit in focusing on an optimal horizon of

 eighteen months to two years
(Batini and Haldane 1999; Bean 2003).
3. Flexibility in Practice
To illustrate the practical application of the inflation-targeting framework in Australia

 and its flexibility, it is useful to focus on the operation of monetary policy

 in three particular episodes (Graph 2). The first in 1994 demonstrates

 the pre-emptive monetary policy response to demand shocks. The second is the

 Asian crisis where there was a major negative shock to external demand and

 a large depreciation of the exchange rate. The third is the introduction of

 the goods and services tax in 2000 which boosted the price level by 3 per cent

 in one quarter.
Graph 2
3.1 Responding to demand shocks
By the middle of 1994, signs of inflationary pressure were evident as economic growth

 was accelerating toward 6 per cent. The labour market had tightened as

 the unemployment rate had declined by around 3 percentage points in two

 years, and wage pressures were building. Inflation expectations in financial

 markets had increased by around 2 percentage points. However, underlying inflation

 was still at 2 per cent.
In anticipation of a rise in inflation, and reflecting its inflation forecasts, the

 Bank raised the cash rate by 275 basis points in three moves over the second

 half of 1994. The press releases that accompanied these tightenings emphasised

 the need to act pre-emptively to curtail the upward movement in inflation.

 Subsequently, in 1995, inflation did indeed rise to slightly above 3 per

 cent in underlying terms, but by less than would have been the case had the

 tightening in monetary policy not taken place. Indeed, the financial markets

 anticipated significantly more tightening than actually occurred, reflecting

 their lack of faith in the credibility of the relatively new inflation-targeting

 framework.
In 1996, as demand pressures were easing, inflation was forecast to move lower, even

 though inflation at the time was still 3.1 per cent. The stance of monetary

 policy was moved back toward a more neutral setting, reflecting the inflation

 forecasts.
In this situation, the overall monetary policy decision was relatively straightforward

 as the required movement was the same to meet both inflation and output goals,

 as is the case in the event of demand shocks.
This episode also demonstrates the flexibility offered by the medium-term nature

 of Australia's inflation target. In 1994, monetary policy could have

 been tightened sufficiently to ensure that underlying inflation did not rise

 above 3 per cent. But the rise was forecast only to be temporary after which

 inflation was expected to fall back below 3 per cent, hence the additional

 tightening was not delivered. As a result, there was less volatility in output.

 The critical issue in determining the extent of the tightening was whether

 inflation was forecast to return to the 2 to 3 per cent range within the policy

 horizon (around 18 months). In both instances, the flexibility of the

 framework also allowed the decision of whether the target was in jeopardy to

 be reassessed as the situation evolved.
3.2 The Asian crisis and exchange rate shocks
At the onset of the Asian crisis, the Australian economy was growing at around trend

 rates, with domestic demand beginning to accelerate, and underlying inflation

 at 1.6 per cent. Monetary policy had been eased over the prior year or so in

 anticipation of the decline in inflation that subsequently occurred. Thus the

 shock hit the Australian economy at a time when it was in reasonable shape

 with the stance of monetary policy already relatively expansionary.
Exports to east Asia accounted for around one-third of Australia's exports.

 In the year following the onset of the crisis, Australia's exports to

 the region declined by nearly 20 per cent, directly subtracting around

 1 percentage point from aggregate growth. Thus the decline in output in the

 east Asian region represented a significant negative demand shock to the Australian

 economy. Australia's terms of trade also fell sharply as commodity prices

 declined, further exacerbating the decline in export demand.
Graph 3
In the event, inflation rose by less than was forecast, in part because of the decline

 in the pass-through of the exchange rate depreciation, as well as a greater-than-expected

 disinflationary impulse from the Asian region which put downward pressure on

 import prices.
If policy had been set to ensure that inflation did not rise above 3 per cent, the

 rise in interest rates would have exacerbated the contractionary shock to foreign

 demand. With the benefit of hindsight, given the lower-than-expected inflation

 outcomes, this would have resulted in a significant undershooting of the inflation

 target.
The flexible inflation target served as a useful framework to think about the Asian

 crisis. Strong consideration was given to the goal of output stabilisation

 because the inflation target in the medium term was not felt to be in jeopardy.

 In addition, the policy credibility that had built up since the adoption of

 the inflation-targeting regime also allowed the Reserve Bank greater flexibility

 in its policy response.
3.3 Price-level shocks
On 1 July 2000, a 10 per cent broad-based goods and services tax was introduced,

 replacing a wide range of indirect taxes that had been levied primarily on

 goods. As a result, the price level measured by the CPI rose by 3 per

 cent. Year-ended CPI inflation was thus boosted by 3 percentage points

 until this rise in the price level dropped out of the calculation one year

 later. Underlying measures of inflation were similarly boosted because of the

 broad-based nature of the tax. In the September quarter 2000, the CPI inflation

 rate was 6.1 per cent, while the weighted median inflation rate (before accounting

 for the effect of the tax) was 5.4 per cent.
The increase in the price level was fully anticipated by households and financial

 markets. However, the increase in the CPI did not feed through to medium-term

 inflation expectations or into wage outcomes.
[9]
This was helped by the provision of income tax cuts at the same time (and adjustment

 of benefits) which offset the effects of the rise in the price level so that

 real incomes were not harmed.
The Bank did not seek to offset the effect of the GST on the price level. It assumed

 that the boost to the price level would be once-off, and that the credibility

 of the inflation-targeting framework would ensure that inflation expectations

 remained anchored at the target rate. It announced this strategy well in advance

 of the event, to help condition expectations that the rise in inflation would

 only be temporary. Again, the assessment was made that the inflation target

 was not in jeopardy in the medium term with year-ended inflation forecast to

 be within the targeted range once the effect of the GST had passed.
In the event, the Bank's strategy was successful and the inflation target proved

 to be credible. Almost all of the public discussion at the time on the appropriate

 setting for monetary policy focused on the inflation outcomes excluding the

 influence of the changes in the tax rate (Graph 4). The price level shock

 was mostly regarded as a non-issue. Medium-term inflation expectations remained

 stable.
Monetary policy was tightened reflecting the combination of other sources of price

 pressure, including strong economic growth, a sharp rise in oil prices and

 the depreciation of the exchange rate.
Graph 4
4. Current Challenges
The Global Financial Crisis
A long-standing criticism of the inflation-targeting framework was that it had not

 been properly tested. I find this criticism somewhat disingenuous. Firstly,

 the framework itself has contributed to the stability. Secondly, the inflation-targeting

 period had not been completely benign. It included the Asian crisis, the Russian

 debt default and the collapse of LTCM, large falls and large rises in oil prices.

 In Australia's case, it also included a large depreciation and large

 appreciation of the exchange rate. As shown above, the targeting framework

 handled all these events well.
Moreover, for Australia, the period also included one of the largest rises in the

 terms of trade in the country's history. In the past, large terms of

 trade increases in Australia had led to serious macroeconomic problems with

 a rapid inflationary boom, followed by bust. This time around, the inflation

 rate rose to 5 per cent for a year or so, but has since returned to the target.
Notwithstanding this, the inflation-targeting framework is clearly being severely

 tested in the current circumstance. While the inflation rate in most countries

 is currently consistent with the target, many forecasts assume a rapid fall

 and even deflation, with, for example, the Bank of England currently forecasting

 a prolonged undershooting of the target. At the same time, in many countries,

 conventional tools of monetary policy have been exhausted with policy interest

 rates at zero, resulting in the widespread application of unconventional policy

 responses.
One obvious question to ask is whether other monetary frameworks would have fared

 any better. In that regard, it is worth noting that the three major economic

 areas, none of which have an explicit inflation-targeting framework have suffered

 at least as large an economic dislocation as the inflation-targeting countries,

 and in the case of Japan, considerably larger. I do not see a strong argument

 that previous frameworks would have delivered any markedly different outcomes.

 The policy response by inflation-targeting central banks has been very rapid

 as the crisis has unfolded, notwithstanding the fact that in some cases, the

 current level of inflation was above the target range.
However, a possibly more pertinent question to ask is whether the inflation-targeting

 framework itself led to any mistakes that contributed to the crisis and that

 would have been avoided under other frameworks. One criticism that has been

 advanced is that the supposedly narrow focus on CPI inflation has led central

 banks to neglect developments in other prices, particularly asset prices. Thus,

 the long-running debate on the role of asset prices has come to the fore again.
Before discussing the asset price issue, again it is worth repeating that the issue

 is whether inflation targeting itself led to monetary policy settings being

 easier than would have been the case in other frameworks. I do not see a strong

 argument in favour of this proposition. Asset price booms and busts and credit-related

 booms have occurred under many different monetary regimes, including in highly

 regulated financial systems.
Asset prices
The debate prior to this crisis can be (perhaps simplistically) characterised as

 between those who argued that an inflation-targeting central bank should care

 about asset prices to the extent that they affected the forecasts of output

 and inflation over the policy horizon, and those who argued that additional

 attention needed to be paid to asset prices and the possibility of credit imbalances.

 The prominent variant of the latter was the Borio-White criticism that central

 banks had an asymmetric response to asset prices where asset prices booms were

 not resisted but asset price busts were responded to vigorously by monetary

 policy, thereby sowing the seeds of the next asset price bubble and bust. Note

 that this argument was applied to many central banks, most obviously the US,

 not just those who targeted inflation.
In my view, the current episode vindicates the position that monetary policy, narrowly

 defined as the setting of the policy interest rate, should be confined to targeting

 inflation. Set interest rates primarily to achieve the inflation goal as that,

 in itself, contributes to sizeable social gains. A departure from that runs

 the risk of losing the nominal anchor that the inflation target provides.
But other tools, most notably the much-touted (although not clearly defined) macro-prudential

 instruments, should be used to address asset price and credit imbalances. I

 do not think that a slightly tighter setting of interest rates would have prevented

 the development of the imbalances that have led to the current financial crisis.

 When human psychology is such that optimism about asset price rises is at the

 fore, then an excessively stringent setting of interest rates would be required

 to suppress the optimism. The Australian and Scandinavian experience in the

 late 1980s shows the sort of interest rate settings required to achieve such

 an outcome. In that example, a credit boom and bubble-like asset price dynamics

 took hold and only a very high setting of real interest rates ultimately curtailed

 that, but at the cost of a historically high level of unemployment.
I do not think it would be socially acceptable or desirable to endure the level of

 unemployment that would come with the high interest rates necessary to pop

 the bubble. It is asking too much of the single monetary policy instrument,

 namely, the targeted short-term interest rate to target both financial excesses

 and inflation.
Nor do I believe there is much to be achieved by ‘leaning against the wind’.

 The wind that is blowing in most episodes of credit booms is generally at least

 gale force. Setting interest rates a bit higher in such circumstances is likely

 to be close to futile when such credit dynamics take hold. Again, what would

 be the point of undershooting the CPI inflation target and enduring a higher

 than desirable level of unemployment with little to be gained. How would such

 actions be explained to the public?
Instead I would argue that other instruments should be deployed that more directly

 address, at the source, the provision of the excess credit that leads to these

 imbalances. That is the discussion which needs to be (and is) taking place.

 These instruments would be a supplement to the setting of the monetary policy

 instrument to achieve the inflation target. I am not arguing that these alternative

 instruments will be successful in countering asset price bubbles and credit

 imbalances, because I think bubbles are a permanent feature of the landscape

 resulting from entrenched human behaviour. Rather, instruments other than the

 interest rate tool are likely to be more effective without some of the attendant

 social costs.
This assumes that it is possible to identify that excesses are indeed occurring.

 I do not see this as being as large an obstacle as others, most notably Alan

 Greenspan (at least his earlier pre-crisis views). Identification of over-inflated

 asset prices and excess credit expansion is no more or less easy than the identification

 of consumer prices pressures. Moreover, a number of macro-prudential instruments

 under consideration would have some measure of automatic stabilisation built

 in, reducing the need for discretionary decision-making.
Price-level or inflation target
The inflation target in Australia is defined on average over the [business] cycle,

 which, if taken literally, suggests that it may be interpreted as a price-level,

 rather than an inflation-rate, target. However, the averaging refers more to

 the distribution of inflation outcomes than to a strict average of CPI outcomes.

 That is, the intent is that over the course of the business cycle, the bulk

 of the distribution of year-ended inflation outcomes should lie between 2 and

 3 per cent, not that the annualised average inflation rate from the start of

 the business cycle to the end should necessarily lie between 2 and 3.
Practically, this translates into a policy of letting bygones be bygones and allowing

 ‘base’ drift in the price level. A shock to the price level which

 temporarily lowers the inflation rate below 2 per cent does not imply

 that monetary policy will be set to ensure an offsetting period of high inflation.
While no country has adopted a price-level target, Canada is actively considering

 it, and I am sure my co-panellist, Dave Longworth, will discuss this issue.

 Hence I will only touch on this briefly.
Ball, Mankiw and Reis (2003) argue that a price-level target rather than an inflation-rate

 target should be the optimal goal for a central bank. The primary justification

 for their proposal is that an inflation-rate target is costly because it does

 not permit long-run predictability of the price level, which has first-order

 welfare effects in their models. Ball
et al
's argument depends

 importantly on their assumption that agents have completely forward-looking

 expectations. After a positive shock to the price level, knowing that the central

 bank has a price-level target, agents fully anticipate the disinflation required

 to return the price level to target. As the disinflation is fully anticipated,

 there are no expectational errors and hence there is no cost in terms of lost

 output from the disinflation.
In a model where there are costs to disinflation (which would include a model with

 backward-looking expectations or less than full credibility of the central

 bank) the gains from full predictability of the price level may not offset

 the costs of occasional disinflations following positive price level

 shocks.
[10]
More generally, I think the strongest argument against a price-level target is that

 the absence of long-term indexed contracts suggests that the benefits of long-run

 price predictability are not that large.
The technology
Inflation targeting is often characterised as inflation-forecast targeting, most

 notably by Lars Svensson. The approaches taken in forecasting inflation by

 the various central banks have some similarities and some differences. The

 Bank of England, RBNZ, Riksbank and Norges Bank,
inter alia
, make significant

 use of large scale macro-models, whereas the RBA puts greater reliance on single-equation

 models. A DSGE model exists but is only a small input to the policy process.
The RBA's inflation forecast is based on a suite of single-equation models

 of inflation supplemented with judgmental adjustments. In this respect, the

 RBA's approach to inflation forecasting corresponds to Blinder's

 recommendation: ‘Use a wide variety of models and don't ever trust

 any of them too much’ (Blinder 1999, p 12).
The RBA has used larger macroeconomic models in the past, but generally found their

 performance to be unsatisfactory from a monetary policy perspective. In part,

 this is because the large scale of the models diminishes the ability to observe

 the key macroeconomic relationships central to the policy decision.
In the UK, the Bank of England also makes extensive use of a large-scale macro-model,

 and a significant portion of the policy formulation process is taken up with

 the discussion of the necessary judgmental adjustments to the equations of

 the model to reflect current developments. In addition, various smaller alternative

 models are used to provide information on relationships not well handled by

 the central

 model.
[11]
As always, these models are based on the average outcomes over the estimation period.

 At any point in time, the central bank may have some knowledge about the current

 and future residuals in the equation which are not easily incorporated into

 the modelling framework. Hence, all of the central banks make judgmental adjustments

 to the forecasts generated by the models.
To some extent, the models tell you the easier part, which is a summary of the main

 inter-linkages in the economy. The harder part is often knowing where exactly

 (or even approximately) the macroeconomic conjuncture is, and the extent to

 which behavioural changes are moving the economy away from the model's

 framework. This is where a central bank always has to rely on the detailed

 knowledge of its staff, often supplemented with an extensive liaison program

 with the business community (which the RBA has found to be invaluable). The

 human element, I believe, is a critical part of the policy process.
More generally, I am uncomfortable with the reliance placed on New Keynesian models

 in the policy process.
[12]
As a heuristic device to ensure consistency of thinking, then I think such

 models can be beneficial. But I do not see them as having contributed much

 to the real-world policy debate. I have not seen them as providing insights

 that were not already self-evident.
Moreover, I am sceptical of many of the underlying assumptions and calibrations in

 these models. The models appear to have worked well in the period of relative

 stability that has characterised the Great Moderation. But then, random-walk

 models of inflation worked pretty well during this period too. I fear that

 parts of the central bank community have become blinded by the science and

 the technique, and that there has been excess allocation of intellectual resources

 to this pursuit (which perhaps could have better been focused on financial

 stability issues).
In the current circumstance, these models have not been useful because they generally

 do not handle credit well, if at all. Obviously work is being done to address

 this and Mike Woodford's paper yesterday indicated substantial progress.

 But it seems to me that these models need to add a healthy dose of Post Keynesianism

 to their New Keynesian foundations.
When the input of models would perhaps have been most beneficial, we have been trying

 to apply linear frameworks to a world which in the current circumstances is

 at its most non-linear.
5. Conclusion
Inflation targeting in Australia has coincided with a period of low and stable inflation,

 and a prolonged economic cycle with a high average rate of growth, which has

 only recently come to an end. Monetary policy alone clearly cannot take the

 credit for these outcomes, but one can argue it has been supportive of them.

 Monetary policy appears to have been broadly successful in its aim to ‘let

 the economy grow as fast as possible, consistent with the inflation target’.
Australia's inflation-targeting framework has remained basically unchanged

 since its adoption in 1993. In 1993, the Australian framework was at the flexible

 end of the spectrum of inflation-targeting practice, and was criticised for

 being too lax. The economic outcomes suggest that the greater flexibility of

 the Australian approach has not been at the expense of economic performance.

 Equivalently, the experience also suggests that a rigid application of an inflation-targeting

 framework may not be necessary, and that there may be elements of the Australian

 approach which may be applicable to emerging market economies considering adopting

 an inflation target.
Over the years, there has been a convergence in practice, arguably toward the more

 flexible end of the spectrum, with an increased focus on medium-term outcomes.

 To some extent, this shift has been possible because of the increased credibility

 of the inflation-targeting central banks. While some differences may still

 remain across central banks in terms of the structure of the frameworks and

 in communication practices, in practice, these differences are generally superficial

 and have not appeared to have had a discernible impact on economic outcomes.
The inflation-targeting framework is being severely stress-tested at the moment.

 I would argue that it is withstanding the test reasonably well, and at least

 as well as the alternatives. I do not accept the argument that the supposedly

 narrow focus of an inflation target has contributed to the current conjuncture.

 Rather I would argue that the current situation reinforces the idea that the

 standard operation of monetary policy should continue to be directed at the

 inflation target, but that it needs to be supplemented by other tools to address

 the ever-present threat of financial imbalances.
References
Ball L, NG Mankiw and R Reis (2003) ‘Monetary Policy for Inattentive Economies’,

 NBER Working Paper No 9491.
Batini N and AG Haldane (1999), ‘Forward-Looking Rules for Monetary Policy’,

 Bank of England Working Paper No 91.
Batini N and A Yates (2001), ‘Hybrid Inflation and Price Level Targeting’,

 Bank of England Working Paper No 135.
Bean C (2003), ‘Asset Prices, Financial Imbalances and Monetary Policy: Are

 Inflation Targets Enough?’, paper presented at the BIS Conference on

 Monetary Stability, Financial Stability and the Business Cycle, 28–29

 March, Basel.
Blanchflower D (2009), ‘The Future of Monetary Policy’, Open Lecture

 at Cardiff University, 24 March.
Blinder AS (1999),
Central Banking in Theory and Practice
, MIT Press, Cambridge

 MA.
Debelle G (1998), ‘Inflation Targeting and Output Stabilisation’, in

 M Blejer, A Ize, A Leone and S Werlang (eds),
Inflation Targeting in Practice:

 Strategic and Operational Issues and Application to Emerging

 Market Economies
, IMF, Washington DC, Chapter 6.
Debelle G (1999), ‘Inflation Targeting and Output Stabilisation’, RBA

 Research Discussion Paper No 1999-08.
Fraser B (1993), ‘Some Aspects of Monetary Policy’, Reserve Bank of Australia
Bulletin
, April, pp 1–7.

 Available at
<
https://www.rba.gov.au/publications/bulletin/1993/apr/pdf/bu-0493-1.pdf
>
King M (1997), ‘Changes in UK Monetary Policy: Rules and Discretion in Practice’,
Journal of Monetary

 Economics
, 39(1), pp 81–97.
Kuttner KN and AS Posen (1999), ‘Does Talk Matter After All? Inflation Targeting

 and Central Bank Behavior’, Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff

 Report No 88.
Macfarlane IJ (1996), ‘Making Monetary Policy – Perceptions and Reality’,

 Reserve Bank of Australia
Bulletin
, October, pp 32–37. Available at <
https://www.rba.gov.au/publications/bulletin/1996/oct/pdf/bu-1096-3.pdf
>
Pagan A (2003), ‘Report on Modelling and Forecasting at the Bank of England’,

 Report to the Court of Directors of the Bank of England. Available at <http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/archive/Documents/historicpubs/qb/2003/qb030106.pdf>
Stevens, GR (1999), ‘Six Years of Inflation Targeting’, Reserve Bank

 of Australia
Bulletin
, May, pp 46–61.
Available at <
https://www.rba.gov.au/publications/bulletin/1999/may/pdf/bu-0599-2.pdf
>
Stevens GR (2007), ‘Central Bank Communication’, Address to the Sydney

 Institute, 11 December.
Available at <
https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2007/sp-gov-111207.html
>
Stevens GR and G Debelle (1995), ‘Monetary Policy Goals for Inflation in Australia’,

 in AG Haldane (ed),
Inflation Targeting
, Bank of England, London, pp 81–100.
Svensson LEO (1997), ‘Optimal Inflation Targets, “Conservative”

 Central Banks, and Linear Inflation Contracts’,
American Economic Review
, 87(1), pp 98–114.
Williams JC (1999), ‘Simple Rules for Monetary Policy’, Board of Governors

 of the Federal Reserve System, Finance and Economics Discussion Series No

 1999-12.
Endnotes
This paper draws on a number of articles I have written on this topic over the years

 and has benefited from the comments of many colleagues. The opinions expressed

 are those of the author, and not necessarily those of the Reserve Bank of

 Australia.
[1]
These goals were determined for a fixed exchange rate regime. With the floating of

 the currency in 1983, the first of these goals has been interpreted to mean

 price stability, rather than literally the stability of the exchange rate.
[2]
The similarity reflects the fact that the goals of both central banks were determined

 immediately after the Second World War (in Australia's case, these

 goals had been given to the Commonwealth Bank in 1945), with the Depression

 still relatively fresh in the minds of the legislators.
[3]
At that time, the central banking and trading functions of the (then) government-owned

 Commonwealth Bank were separated, with the Reserve Bank of Australia created

 to handle the former and the Commonwealth Bank continuing as a commercial

 bank. The Commonwealth Bank's role as Australia's central bank

 dates back to the early part of the 20
th
century.
[4]
A case can be made that the first public exposition of the inflation target came

 in 1993 in a speech by then Governor Fraser (1993): ‘My own view is

 that if inflation could be held to an average of 2–3 per cent over

 a period of years, that would be a good outcome’. Such a formulation

 was repeated and refined in subsequent speeches by Fraser and the inflation

 target was gradually elevated in prominence in the eyes of the public and

 financial markets. In particular, the inflation target was prominent in the

 justification for the interest rate increases in the second half of 1994.

 For more details, see Stevens (1999).
[5]
Note that even an ‘inflation nutter’ central bank will have a positive

 weight on output in its reaction function, even with a zero weight on output

 in its objective function (see Debelle 1998).
[6]
The 1996
Statement on the

 Conduct of Monetary Policy
reinforced the status of these documents

 as a primary means of accountability and communication for the RBA.
[7]
See ‘
Central Bank Communication
’,

 Address by Governor Glenn Stevens to the Sydney Institute, December 2007.
[8]
Some wage agreements did have a clause which allowed for larger increases should

 the boost to the CPI be greater than expected.
[9]
Batini and Yates (2001) and Williams (1999) examine this issue more formally.
[10]
For more detail on forecasting at the Bank of England, see Pagan (2003).
[11]
Blanchflower (2009) addresses this concern in more eloquent detail.
[12]
