BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Financial Stability: Review and Response – Brisbane
DATE: 06/10/2010
SPEAKER: Brisbane
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2010/sp-so-061010.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Financial Stability: Review and Response
Luci Ellis
Head of Financial Stability Department
CPA
 Congress
 2010
Brisbane
–
6 October 2010
Audio
10.16
MB
asset quality, banking, global economy, global financial crisis, regulation
I'd like to thank CPA Australia for the invitation to speak to you today. As
 you may know, we recently released our twice-yearly
Financial Stability Review
. Most of what I have to say today
 draws heavily from that document. I would like to cover the main themes we
 have been focusing on, as described in the Review, before concluding with
 a couple of points of particular relevance to the accounting profession.
It's now more than three years since the turmoil first started in overseas interbank
 markets. And it's just over two years since Lehman Brothers failed.
 Conditions in the global financial system started to recover last year, and
 continued to do so over the past six months. But global financial markets
 remain prone to bouts of uncertainty. We saw an example of that in April and
 May, when concerns about Greek government finances spilled over into bank
 funding markets.
The latest data suggest the financial strength of Australian banks is continuing
 to improve. The domestic non-financial sectors also seem to be in a fairly
 sound state. Both households and businesses seem to have become a bit more
 cautious: that is probably a good thing, in that it might buttress their resilience
 to any future shocks that could come along. In short, Australia has come through
 the global disruptions of recent years in reasonably good shape. But the lessons
 of the crisis are still being absorbed, and in the policy community there
 is still much work to be done.
The Global Scene
The initial convulsion of 2007 and 2008 might seem to be over, but there's no
 doubt that the after-effects remain. In the boom phase of any cycle, investors
 pay little mind to the risks they run. All the talk is optimistic; all the
 expectations are of asset prices rising seemingly forever. The shocks that
 do occur are shrugged off.
But after the crisis has occurred, it is as if people can think
only
of risk, of what could go wrong. So it has been in the recent
 period. Before the crisis, markets were little perturbed by many events that,
 in other circumstances, might have triggered a panic. A hedge fund might fail;
 a small country's exchange rate might drop suddenly; or some US mortgage
 companies might start to collapse. All these things happened in 2006. Yet
 risk spreads stayed low, and the structured finance production machine kept
 chugging on (Graph 1).
Graph 1
But since Lehman Brothers failed in September 2008, along with distress and collapse
 at other firms, risk aversion has increased. Markets seem more skittish. Smaller
 bouts of turbulence broke out, as concerns moved first to eastern Europe,
 then to Dubai. So when attention turned to countries like Greece, we saw that
 in the current, risk-averse, environment, a weak economy and fiscal position
 would no longer be ignored.
Greece was hardly involved in the original crisis of 2007 and 2008. Greek banks'
 exposure to poor-quality US housing-related assets was essentially zero. They
 were not major counterparties of the global financial firms that failed or
 became distressed, such as Bear Stearns or Lehman Brothers. Like any banking
 system, though, Greek banks are highly exposed to their domestic sovereign
 – both directly via bond holdings and funding spreads, and indirectly
 via the economy. Once concerns about Greece's fiscal position flared,
 it was not surprising that its banks were also affected. Loan losses in a
 weak economy only exacerbated those fears. Bank share prices fell (Graph 2).
Graph 2
Then investors started worrying about the exposures of banks in other countries to
 Greece's government and banks. Other countries with weakened fiscal positions
 started to face scrutiny. Euro area countries faced a double burden in this
 situation. Unlike countries with their own currency, it is harder for them
 to get a boost to growth from a depreciating exchange rate, because they share
 a currency with many of their most important trading partners.
More recently, these concerns seem to have eased off somewhat. The joint European/IMF
 rescue package and the public stress testing of banks have both helped assuage
 some uncertainties. But markets remain concerned about Greece and countries
 such as Ireland. We can see this in risk spreads in sovereign debt markets,
 as well as in banks' share prices.
Looking at the global financial system more broadly, the picture is one of tentative
 improvement. Major banking systems have returned to profitability, which is
 helping them to rebuild the capital they need. In large part, this is because
 bad loan charges are now falling, as the economy improves (Graph 3).
 There are, however, large differences across countries, and across different
 types of bank in the same country.
Graph 3
The Australian Financial System
In contrast to the banking systems in the United States or Europe, the Australian
 banking system has come through the last few years quite well. Banks and other
 deposit-taking institutions in Australia remained profitable in aggregate
 throughout the period. The sector remains well capitalised. And their bad
 and doubtful debt charges have started to turn down, especially at the major
 banks. The upshot is that return on shareholders' equity for both the
 major and smaller Australian banks dipped, but not very far in the scheme
 of things (Graph 4). And for both groups of banks, profitability has
 already started recovering.
Graph 4
The quality of banks' assets did not deteriorate as much as in the last downturn
 in the early 1990s. The stock of their domestic assets that are considered
 impaired or otherwise non-performing is still drifting up in dollar terms.
 But there are signs it might be nearing a peak. As a share of all loans on
 their domestic books, non-performing assets seem to be stabilising (Graph 5).
Graph 5
Part of the reason why this ratio has stabilised relates to the composition of banks'
 balance sheets. Compared with the early 1990s, a much smaller fraction of
 their domestic balance sheets is comprised of business lending, which is riskier
 in general. It also tends to deteriorate faster in an economic downturn. Housing
 lending has become more important to lenders over the past 20 years.
 The trend continued more recently, as housing lending expanded while business
 credit contracted.
In passing, I would note that Australian banks have almost no exposure to Greece
 or the other smaller euro area countries.
Over the past couple of years, Australian banks took a number of actions to buttress
 their liquidity and funding positions. They now rely less on short-term wholesale
 funding, and more on funding sources that are considered more stable. Among
 these is deposit funding. Banks and other deposit-takers have increased deposit
 interest rates relative to market rates, making deposits more attractive to
 savers. In fact, growth in deposits has actually outpaced that in credit over
 the past couple of years (Graph 6).
Graph 6
The Links to the Non-financial Sectors
Policymakers' concerns about financial stability stem, in the end, from the effects
 that the financial system can have on the real economy. We care about financial
 crises because of the economic and human costs they entail, not because of
 any direct concern for the financial firms themselves.
Policymakers must also be mindful of the feedback from the real economy to the financial
 sector. If the non-financial sectors are resilient to shocks, the financial
 system will not face as large losses from loans gone bad in a downturn. So
 we pay a lot of attention to the financial situations of the household and
 business sectors. We examine their balance sheets in detail. And we focus
 on lending standards, that is, the terms on which they are borrowing. These
 are hard to measure, but it is vital to track them. If either households or
 businesses were to overstretch themselves, they would become vulnerable to
 any macroeconomic or financial setback.
Our reading of recent data is that the Australian household and business sectors
 have, in aggregate, entered a phase of expansion. But they seem to be showing
 more financial caution than they did prior to the crisis. Although wage incomes
 and profits were quite soft during late 2008 and 2009, the effects of monetary
 and fiscal policy stimulus largely cushioned this. As the effects of policy
 wane, we are now seeing some hand-off back to employment income and profit
 growth.
At the same time, the housing market has probably cooled somewhat. Growth in dwelling
 prices has tapered off in recent months, especially in more expensive suburbs.
 Housing credit growth has slowed. New lending to first-home buyers reverted
 to closer to its historical share of loan approvals after the additional government
 grants expired (Graph 7). The difference has not so far been made up
 by other types of buyers. In particular, loans to property investor households
 have not surged the way they did during the more buoyant, rather speculative
 period in the early 2000s.
Graph 7
Businesses have entered the current upturn with stronger balance sheets in aggregate
 than they had at the peak of the global credit boom. Profitability has recovered
 to more normal levels. The outlook for mining company profits is particularly
 strong, for obvious reasons. But even before this turnaround, many firms had
 been using their internal funds to strengthen their finances, often to replace
 debt funding that had become more expensive and less available. Gearing ratios
 for listed firms have declined considerably as a result, especially for those
 firms and industries that were most leveraged before (Graph 8).
Graph 8
The Policy Response
The crisis and its aftermath hold many lessons for policymakers. The international
 system for regulation of banks needed to be improved. So did the way it had
 been implemented in some countries. The crisis showed that many banks around
 the world needed more capital. And they needed better-quality capital that
 could absorb losses while the bank was still a going concern.
The community of international regulators have been hard at work developing a new
 capital standard to meet this need. Recently the Basel Committee on Banking
 Supervision agreed on new capital requirements for banks. Previously, banks
 were required to hold a minimum amount of capital equal to 8 per cent of assets
 weighted by their riskiness. They also had to hold at least 4 per cent
 of risk-weighted assets in higher-quality so-called ‘Tier 1’ capital.
 There was no explicit standard for common equity – the most loss-absorbing
 kind of capital. But depending on how national supervisors interpreted the
 word ‘predominant’, banks could hold as little as 2 per cent of
 risk-weighted assets in that form of capital.
The new Basel standards set a new minimum for common equity of 4½ per cent
 of risk-weighted assets, and 6 per cent for Tier 1 (Table 1). They
 also involve a new ‘conservation buffer’ of 2½ per cent
 of common equity. Banks are likely to meet this buffer in normal times. Otherwise
 they will be subject to limits on their dividends and bonus payments. Including
 the buffer, the new standards imply that banks will hold at least 7 per
 cent of common equity, up from as little as 2 per cent. At 8½
 per cent, the Tier 1 capital requirement including the buffer will be more
 than double the previous minimum.
Table 1: New Capital Requirements
Per cent
Common equity
Tier 1 capital
Total capital
Minimum
4.5
6.0
8.0
Conservation buffer
2.5
Minimum plus conservation buffer
7.0
8.5
10.5
Counter-cyclical buffer range
(a)
0 to 2.5
(a) Common equity or other fully loss-absorbing capital
Source: GHOS
There are also other changes involved in these reforms. Some instruments that used
 to count as capital will be excluded under the new standard; these will have
 to be replaced. Certain intangible and other assets will not be treated as
 having value, so they will have to be deducted from capital. And a range of
 other assets, including those most affected by the crisis, will have higher
 risk weights applied to them. So a 7 per cent capital ratio under the old
 system won't equal 7 per cent under the new system. How different the
 number could be will vary across banks and countries. The difference is probably
 smaller for Australian banks than some other places.
As you may have read, we expect that the Australian banks would already meet these
 requirements, or so nearly that they could do so quite easily. This is partly
 because APRA already required them to deduct many of the things that are newly
 required to be deducted under the Basel standards. Australian banks also don't
 tend to have large trading books, holding assets of the kinds that are to
 have higher risk weights under the new system. But for some banks in other
 countries, the task of reaching the new minimum, plus the buffer, is quite
 large.
The Basel reforms to capital are an important element in the international policy
 response to the crisis. But I would not want to give the impression that this
 was the only thing that needed to be done. Focusing only on capital would
 be like saying that all we needed to do to stop people being injured in car
 crashes was to ensure they all had big enough airbags. But bigger airbags
 are not enough. We also need safer driving, diligent policing and better roads.
For safer driving, we need to look to the people behind the wheel. As my colleague
 Guy Debelle recently pointed out, in the lead-up to the crisis, financial
 institutions had been seriously underestimating the risks they were
 running.
[1]
Since the crisis, they are being more cautious. But it's a hard way to
 learn the lesson. And eventually memories will fade and the reckless driving
 will start again. Of course sometimes people are minded to drive more carefully
 if they think they might be booked. So we also need to encourage better driving
 with diligent policing.
For diligent policing, read prudential supervision. Prudential regulation is only
 one part of the framework for ensuring the safety of the financial system.
 Supervision – how the rules are enforced – is arguably even more
 important. The Australian prudential regulator, APRA, has long taken a relatively
 conservative line compared to their counterparts in some other countries.
 They have enforced somewhat tighter rules in some areas than the Basel Accord
 required. But they have also placed a lot of emphasis on supervision. The
 importance of good supervision recently received strong international
 support.
[2]
We don't want banks to think that they are so well capitalised that it
 doesn't matter how much risk they take, or what kinds. There needs to
 be some limits to the total amount of risk-taking in the system. That is where
 supervision fits in.
For better roads, read financial infrastructure. There is a huge amount of work going
 on at both national and international levels to improve the infrastructure
 of financial markets, particularly for derivative securities traded over the
 counter, not on exchanges.
Another way of getting better roads is to have clearer signs and lane markings. Banks
 need to know where they are, and regulators and investors need to be confident
 that they know too. I am, of course, referring to the importance of robust
 and reliable accounting standards. One of the things that went wrong in the
 crisis was that confidence in structured financial securities collapsed. Mortgage-backed
 securities and collateralised debt obligations (CDOs) were among those most
 affected. Some of these securities never really traded in liquid markets.
 Their values were supposedly marked-to-market, but some of those prices were
 ‘guesstimates’ at best. Investors didn't know how much these
 securities were worth. And they panicked because they didn't know which
 banks held them and were therefore facing large unrealised losses. That uncertainty
 was a large part of the reason why distress in one relatively small market
 in a single country – the US sub-prime mortgage market –
 spread to other markets until it snowballed into a full-scale global banking
 crisis.
As this audience would know – almost certainly better than I do – there
 have been a number of important and welcome changes to international accounting
 standards of late. Several more are still out for consultation. I would like
 to point out two today. The first relates to how complex securities are valued.
 In short, it does not make sense to mark-to-market when the market doesn't
 really exist. The second relates more to the traditional lending business
 of banks. New rules for recognising impairments will allow banks to accumulate
 loan-loss provisions before explicit signs of impairment on those loans are
 observed. Accounting standards serve the needs of many different stakeholders,
 and I am conscious that there are diverse views about this change. From a
 financial stability perspective, at least, this change is welcome, because
 it encourages banks to provision for future loan losses better. Perhaps more
 importantly, it might reduce the incentives they face to make risky loans
 that seem profitable in a boom, but only because it was a boom.
So as you can see, even though Australia was relatively less touched by the crisis,
 there is still plenty to do. And as the economic expansion unfolds, we will
 need to be alert for signs that excessive risk-taking has emerged once again.
Thank you.
Endnotes
Debelle, G ‘
On Risk and Uncertainty
’,
 Address to Risk Australia 2010 conference, Sydney, 31 August 2010.
[1]
See Viñals J
et al
(2010) ‘The Making of Good Supervision: Learning to Say
 “No”’, IMF Staff Position Note SPN/10/08.
[2]
