BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: The Evolving Financial Situation – Sydney
DATE: 16/02/2010
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2010/sp-ag-160210.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
The Evolving Financial Situation
Guy Debelle
[
*
]
Assistant Governor (Financial Markets)
Women in Finance Lunch
Sydney
–
16 February 2010
Audio
9.50MB
Download
168KB
It is getting on for nearly three years since the onset of the financial turmoil

 that has bedevilled us for much of that time. Thankfully there are signs of

 a sizeable improvement in many markets in recent months, although I believe

 it is still premature to declare victory. While the general trend is positive,

 there are a number of risks still lingering that I will talk about a bit later.
In my talk today I will summarise the state of play in three major parts of the Australian

 and global financial markets: the credit markets, equity markets and the foreign

 exchange market. I will also describe the actions the Reserve Bank has taken

 in response to the evolving turmoil in markets over the past three years –

 outside of the interest rate decisions taken by the Reserve Bank Board. Reflecting

 the fact that Australian markets have generally functioned better than those

 in other developed economies, the need for policy intervention by the Reserve

 Bank was considerably less than for other central banks. Moreover, most of

 the actions that the Bank undertook have been completely unwound.
Before that, I will step back and give my quick potted summary of the cause of the

 financial turmoil. As I have said before, I would attribute a very large role

 in the financial crisis to a wholesale failure of risk assessment and risk

 management.
To illustrate this failure of risk assessment, I will use a quote I used in an earlier

 speech but it bears reiterating. In August 2007, David Viniar, the CFO of Goldman

 Sachs, said ‘We are seeing things that were 25 standard deviation moves,

 several days in a row.’
That was in August 2007, in the very early days of the crisis. The month of October 2008

 following the collapse of Lehman Brothers delivered significantly more 25 standard

 deviation events in Viniar's distribution of risks. October 2008

 was, hopefully, a once in a lifetime event. As my colleague at the Bank of

 England Andy Haldane pointed out, with a normal distribution, a 25 standard

 deviation event actually is already a once in a lifetime event, where the life,

 in this case, is that of the universe!
Given the extraordinarily low probability of even one 25 standard deviation event

 occurring, this illustrates that the models and statistical distributions used

 to assess and manage risk were, in many cases, plain wrong. This applies to

 models used by investors, issuers and regulators.
Credit markets
Credit markets were where it all began. This was where the failure of risk assessment

 and management was greatest, although it was also where the realisation first

 occurred that risks had been badly miscalculated. Indeed, for much of 2007,

 credit markets were a long way ahead of other markets in seeing the problems

 which were to come. Other markets, most obviously the equity market, remained

 generally unaware of what was unfolding in the credit world.
Asset-backed markets were where concerns first arose, particularly securities backed

 by US sub-prime housing loans. With some of these securities, it is optimistic

 to refer to them as
asset
-backed!
In the first half of 2007, great uncertainty arose about the quality and value of

 these securities and the assets that underpinned them. There was further uncertainty

 about whose books these assets resided on, generating a marked rise in counterparty

 risk aversion amongst financial institutions. That is, institutions became

 less willing to lend to each other, both because of concerns about the financial

 strength of the counterparty as well as a desire to hoard any available liquidity,

 should they themselves need it. This was most obviously manifest in a rise

 in short-term borrowing costs, represented here by the spread between Libor

 (bank bills in the case of Australia) and the expected policy rate (Graph 1).

 This spread is probably the best short-hand way of illustrating the fluctuating

 tensions in financial markets over the past three years.
Graph 1
As is apparent in the graph, this spread was generally markedly lower in Australia

 than in the major financial centres, indicating that these tensions were a

 lot less in Australia. This reflects the fact that the balance sheets of Australian

 banks were considerably stronger than those in other countries. They did not

 have material holdings of, or exposure to, the securities backed by US mortgages.

 In addition, the quality of the loans on their books, which were almost entirely

 domestic, was also materially better than in some other banking systems. More

 generally, the counterparty concerns in the local market were generally much

 less here than elsewhere.
The Lehman event is also very apparent on the graph. Prior to Lehman, markets were

 clearly disrupted but there was a sense that the situation was generally manageable.

 In the period immediately after Lehman, there were fears the system was out

 of control. There were a few periods where the only market with any significant

 liquidity was on-the-run US Treasuries. Spreads widened significantly following

 the Lehman failure from already high levels. Indeed, these spreads are really

 only indicative as very little trading was occurring in that period in any

 market. Counterparty concerns were at their zenith with little confidence about

 who might be next to fall over.
The significant dislocation in financial markets following the Lehman failure, the

 US money market fund, Reserve, ‘breaking the buck’ and the rescue

 of AIG, Fannie Mae and Freddie Mac, resulted in large scale interventions by

 governments around the world. In many advanced economies, schemes to support

 securities markets were introduced. In the US, these schemes were an alphabet

 soup of acronyms such as TALF, MMIFF and CPFF. Governments also guaranteed

 the deposits and debt raisings of their banks.
While Australian markets were dislocated through this period, the dislocation was

 generally less and shorter lived. Hence the Reserve Bank was not required to

 intervene to the extent necessary in other countries. I will come back to this

 shortly.
While the financial situation in Australia was significantly better than many other

 countries, the Australian government introduced a guarantee on wholesale debt

 and deposits. With the guarantee in place in many other countries, Australian

 banks would have been at a significant competitive disadvantage in terms of

 funding costs had they not had the guarantee. In addition, the guarantee allowed

 the banks to access another group of investors who had an appetite for sovereign

 credit but not bank credit.
The Australian banks made fairly extensive use of the government guarantee of their

 debt. The need to use the guarantee for the most part reflected the high risk

 aversion of investors and was as much an issue of price as market access. The

 guarantee allowed the banks to raise funds considerably cheaper than they could

 without it. (This is evident in the fact that Goldmans issued an unguaranteed

 bond in the US in early 2009 at an extremely wide spread of more than 400 basis

 points over Treasuries.) It also allowed the banks to issue at longer maturities.

 Even in the worst of the crisis, in the last quarter of 2008, the banks were

 still able to rollover short-term wholesale funding, both on and offshore,

 without using the guarantee.
As risk aversion has dissipated, and spreads have narrowed, there has been an increase

 in unguaranteed issuance. For some months now, for the major banks, the cost

 of issuing unguaranteed debt, particularly at shorter maturities has been no

 higher, and often lower, than the cost of issuing guaranteed debt once account

 is taken of the guarantee fee. You can see from Graph 2 that this has led to

 an increase in unguaranteed issuance and a decline in guaranteed issuance.

 That is, the price mechanism works.
Graph 2
Reflecting the improvement in market conditions and the continued strength of the

 Australian banking system, the Treasurer has announced that the wholesale guarantee

 will cease at the end of March.
From Graph 1, it is apparent that spreads narrowed considerably over the second half

 of 2009. This was true both at shorter maturities shown here, but also at longer

 maturities. This narrowing demonstrates the considerable improvement in credit

 market conditions and the abatement of risk aversion. The improving conditions

 has also been reflected in the increase in issuance.
A further indication of the improvement in conditions, is that in Australia, the

 banks have been increasing the average maturity of their debt in recent months.

 They have tended to reduce the share of short-term bills in their funding mix

 and increase the share of longer maturity bonds, including a number of 7 and

 10-year issues.
Securitisation markets have also begun to show some signs of life from the end of

 last year.
[1]
There have been sizeable RMBS issues by ME Bank, Bendigo and Adelaide, Westpac

 and most recently AMP and Bank of Queensland (Graph 3). One reason for

 this is that the stock of RMBS on issue has declined quite significantly over

 the past two years reflecting the lack of issuance and the amortisation of

 the existing issues, so investors have holes in their RMBS portfolios to fill.

 The current pace of issuance is around that required to maintain the existing

 stock at its current level (and is not too far short of the share of housing

 credit that it was earlier this decade). Moreover, the secondary market overhang

 caused by the portfolio liquidation of a number of SIVs has been largely eliminated.

 This has seen secondary market spreads tighten significantly.
Graph 3
One can think of securitisation as being somewhat akin to a three or four year bond

 in terms of funding, given the effective life of an RMBS. The spreads on the

 recent RMBS issues are only a bit higher than those on the recent unguaranteed

 issues by the major banks of equivalent maturity, and the gap is narrowing.

 This means that RMBS is again beginning to provide a competitive source of

 funding, particularly for the regional banks (which pay higher spreads on their

 debt issues) and non-bank lenders which had both previously depended more on

 this source of funding.
Equity markets
As I said earlier, equity markets took longer to be affected by the financial crisis,

 continuing to rise through much of the second half of 2007, peaking in November.

 But for the general public, the equity market was the most obvious manifestation

 of the crisis. Graph 4 compares the movement in the equity market in this

 episode with previous large movements. The current episode was one of the most

 rapid declines, surpassed only by 1987, and it was nearly as deep as the decline

 in 1973.
The local market moved broadly in line with other global equity markets, notwithstanding

 the relative outperformance of the Australian economy. Equity markets in many

 emerging economies generally fell by even more than equity markets in advanced

 economies, again despite stronger economic outcomes. The best example of this

 is the Chinese stock market which experienced a peak to trough decline of 70

 per cent.
These large declines in equity prices resulted in a very large destruction of household

 wealth. However, a large portion of that decline in household wealth has been

 regained since the trough in equity markets in March 2009 because, while

 the decline was one of the sharpest on record, the rebound has also been relatively

 rapid. In China, the recovery has been even more rapid with the Chinese equity

 market rising by over 100 per cent at one point.
Graph 4
One marked feature of the Australian equity market over the crisis was the record

 amount of equity raisings that occurred in 2009 (Graph 5). Australian

 companies raised just shy of $100 billion over the course of last year.

 Equity was raised by non-financial companies as well as financial institutions.

 Some part of this equity raising reflected businesses turning to equity as

 a source of funds in the face of tightening in lending standards by banks.

 Equity has also been used to replace debt issues as they came to maturity.
Graph 5
But these equity raisings have generally not been cheap. They often occurred at a

 sizeable discount to the prevailing stock price. And as I just noted, in most

 cases, equity prices have risen substantially from the time of the capital

 raising. Good news for those who subscribed to the capital raising, but not

 so cheap for the company.
This large amount of equity raising is part of the explanation for the decline in

 business credit that we have seen. Through much of 2009, total business funding

 had been growing at a reasonable rate despite negative growth in business credit

 (Graph 6). Companies had been using their equity raising primarily to

 pay down debt.
[2]
That is, businesses turned away from intermediated credit from the banking

 system to raise funds directly from the market.
Graph 6
Foreign Exchange markets
I gave a speech on the recovery in the foreign exchange market late last

 year,
[3]
so I will only give a short recap of the main points now. There has been a

 very large swing in the Australian dollar over the past 18 months (Graph 7).

 The exchange rate depreciated by over 30 per cent from its peak in July 2008

 to its trough in March 2009 and has subsequently appreciated to be now not

 much more than 5 per cent below the July 2008 peak on a trade-weighted basis.

 These swings in the exchange rate have played an important role in buffering

 the economy from the turmoil in the global economy.
Graph 7
Some of the depreciation in the currency and subsequent appreciation reflected the

 movements in risk aversion that are also evident in the money market spreads

 I discussed earlier. Indeed, the Australian dollar was often cited as a barometer

 of market sentiment. This is evident in Graph 8 which shows the very high correlation

 between the Australian dollar and equity markets during the crisis (and interestingly

 this correlation has declined significantly of late). In part this correlation

 was high because as risk aversion increased, investors retreated to their home

 markets, repatriating their holdings of foreign assets. In addition, a number

 of highly leveraged investors were forced to liquidate their portfolios that

 often included Australian dollar investments, as losses mounted on their other

 asset holdings. Significant flows were also generated by non-leveraged investors

 with foreign equity investments, which needed to rapidly adjust the size of

 their foreign exchange hedges in response to the sharp moves in global equity

 values.
Graph 8
Notwithstanding the fact that the Australian foreign exchange market is generally

 very liquid, there were occasions when liquidity became scarce around the times

 of maximum risk aversion, particularly following Lehman. That marked reduction

 in liquidity prompted the Reserve Bank to enter the market to mitigate the

 liquidity shortfall. We were not seeking to maintain any particular level of

 the exchange rate, indeed as I mentioned earlier, we were quite comfortable

 with the direction of the exchange rate. Rather we were seeking to redress

 the market dysfunction that was resulting from the significant lack of liquidity.

 The reserves used in the foreign exchange intervention have been subsequently

 repurchased in a way that minimised any impact on the market.
RBA actions
Let me now turn to the actions of the RBA during the crisis, outside of the policy

 rate decisions. One summary way to compare the actions of the RBA with that

 of other central banks is to look at movements in their balance sheets. Graph

 9 shows that the Reserve Bank provided a sizeable degree of liquidity support

 to the market following Lehman, but that our balance sheet has since declined

 as this liquidity support has been unwound. The graph also shows the substantial

 increase in the balance sheets of the Fed, ECB and Bank of England, which have

 all yet to decline.
Graph 9
One marked difference between the increase in our balance sheet and that of the Bank

 of England and the Fed, is that here, the increase resulted predominantly through

 our regular market operations (although the foreign exchange swap facility

 with the Fed accounts for a sizeable portion of the rise in our balance sheet,

 see below). In contrast, the bulk of the increase in the UK and US is from

 direct purchases of government securities (and mortgage securities in the US)

 associated with their policy of quantitative easing.
The actions we undertook to provide liquidity to the domestic money market were conducted

 almost entirely within our pre-existing framework for market operations. We

 have always dealt with a wide range of counterparties (which are not just banks

 as is often mistakenly thought), and we have always had the capacity to adjust

 the term of our operations very quickly. Because we operate in the market every

 day, it is relatively straightforward for us to assess the degree of tension

 in the market and respond accordingly. Our operating system is flexible and

 we availed ourselves of that flexibility through the crisis period. Obviously

 our life was made easier by the fact that the difficulties we faced were markedly

 less than those in other countries, but the framework we had established over

 a number of years did make our task easier.
The extent of liquidity we provided can be gauged by looking at the evolution of

 exchange settlement (ES) balances which are the balances in the accounts that

 financial institutions hold with us. As counterparty risk rose, banks were

 more inclined to hold larger precautionary balances with us. To allow us to

 provide assistance to the debt markets by undertaking more repos without putting

 undue pressure on the overnight cash market, in late October, we introduced

 a term deposit facility This was effectively an ES balance held for a week

 or two, rather than overnight.
Graph 10 shows that balances held at the RBA peaked in late 2008 at the height of

 global risk aversion. But notwithstanding a recent seasonal increase around

 the end of the year, ES balances are back to around $1½ billion

 and banks no longer have any term deposits with us. So that aspect of our liquidity

 support has been fully unwound.
Graph 10
To provide some certainty to longer term funding, we offered 6 month and 1 year terms

 for our repos on a daily basis from October 2008. But as demand for these longer

 terms diminished, we ceased offering these daily, although we are still willing

 to deal at these longer terms if it is consistent with our liquidity management

 objectives and the pricing is appropriate.
Another action we took during the crisis was to expand the sphere of collateral eligible

 for our market operations. We now accept all AAA-rated paper (except highly

 structured paper). As I have said before, we intend to maintain that wider

 collateral pool.
Another significant change to our collateral policy we made was to accept so-called

 self-securitised RMBS from the issuing institution. Our counterparties made

 extensive use of this, particularly as collateral for our longer-term repos.

 By the end of December 2008, self-securitised RMBS accounted for just under

 half of our repo collateral. But as those repos have matured, their share of

 our collateral has declined to under a quarter.
Composition of Repo Book
Collateral Type
End Jun 2008
Per cent
End Dec 2008
Per cent
End Jan 2010
Per cent
General Collateral
– CGS
1.6
0.7
9.8
– Semis
7.3
1.2
26.7
– Supras
2.8
0.8
2.9
– Govt Guaranteed ADI paper
0.0
0.0
4.6
Private Securities
– ADI paper
82.3
43.1
29.2
– RMBS (self-securitised)
0.0
45.2
22.6
– RMBS (other)
5.3
5.3
3.3
– ABCP
0.6
3.0
0.8
– Other
0.0
0.6
0.2
Total value of Repo Book ($b)
55.1
98.9
26.2
Finally, in October 2008, we, along with a number of other central banks, established

 a foreign exchange swap facility with the Fed. This facility was introduced

 to address the global shortage of US dollars (outside the US) which was causing

 a substantial dislocation in swap

 markets.
[4]
Under this facility, we auctioned US dollars, obtained under swap from the Fed for

 Australian dollars, to our domestic counterparties in exchange for domestic

 collateral. (We took a larger than normal margin on that collateral to protect

 us from the exchange rate risk). Usage of this facility peaked at the end of

 December 2008 and it was last accessed here in April 2009. The facility was

 formally terminated, along with those of other central banks, on 1 February.
The clear theme here is that the RBA did provide assistance to contribute to the

 smoother functioning of financial markets through the turbulence, but the assistance

 we were required to provide was considerably less than in other countries,

 and importantly, we have been able to unwind it as market conditions have improved.
Lingering risks
As I hope I have made clear, there has been a significant improvement in financial

 market conditions since their nadir just over a year ago. However, risks remain.

 I do not see these downside risks in Australian or Asian financial markets

 but rather in the major North Atlantic markets of the US, Europe and the UK. Indeed, in Asia, the risks are more on the upside.

 While most of the recent jitters have been associated with sovereign concerns,

 I think risks stemming from the financial sector are still there.
To some extent, one can characterise much of the past three years as problems originating

 in the financial sector feeding into the macroeconomy. We are now into the

 phase where the weakness in the global macroeconomy is feeding back into the

 financial sector.
In that regard, a significant risk, in my assessment, is that we are still yet to

 see the full impact of the weakness in the North Atlantic economies on the

 loans on the books of financial institutions. The bulk of the losses to date

 by these institutions have been write-downs in the value of securities held

 on their books. While these write-downs have been absorbed, albeit with some

 difficulty and with substantial capital raisings, given the size of the output

 contraction, one would expect that we are not all that far advanced in the

 adverse credit cycle that normally accompanies recessions. For the North Atlantic

 economies, this was a big recession which, combined with large falls in both

 commercial and housing property prices, should result in large loan losses.
Last May, the US authorities released the results of a stress test of their 19 largest

 financial institutions and concluded that these institutions could survive

 a scenario not dissimilar to the one we are seeing currently. In some cases,

 survival was predicated on the raising of additional capital which has subsequently

 occurred. While one therefore might be reasonably confident of the ability

 of these institutions to absorb the deterioration in their loan books, my concern

 is more with the second tier (and beyond) of the US financial system. This

 lower tier, which is a sizeable share of the US financial sector, has loan

 portfolios which are very regionally concentrated with a sizeable weighting

 to commercial property. The experience of previous cycles indicates that the

 commercial property cycle takes a long time to unfold, and we may have some

 way yet to travel. These problems in the banking system will almost certainly

 hinder credit provision in the US, particularly to the SME sector, which doesn't

 have the direct access to capital markets that larger corporates have.
Even though one might be relatively confident that the major financial institutions

 have the ability to absorb the loan losses still to come, there may also be

 a concern that there could be an adverse effect on public confidence, should

 these institutions report further quarterly losses. The general public might

 well be surprised that losses are continuing to occur, given the sizeable public

 sector support that has already been provided.
While these risks are there in the North Atlantic, they are not present in our part

 of the world. In Asia, bank balance sheets have remained in sound condition

 throughout and hence are no impediment to credit provision. Indeed, there is

 a marked contrast between the balance and nature of the risks in Asia and the

 North Atlantic. While the near-term risks may be on the downside in the US

 and Europe, they would appear to be on the upside in Asia. The interplay between

 the contrasting fortunes of these two parts of the world is likely to be the

 critical factor in determining the evolution of the global economy, and Australia

 is now more tied into one than the other.
But the above are risks, not the central case. The central case is that financial

 markets have improved considerably over the past year. This improvement has

 allowed a sizeable portion of the interventions in financial markets undertaken

 by central banks over the past three years to be unwound. This is particularly

 true in Australia, where the measures we undertook were considerably less and

 have been unwound.
Endnotes
I thank Anna Brown for her assistance with this talk.
[*]
I spoke about this at length not long ago, see ‘
Whither Securitisation?
’,

 speech given to the Australian Securitisation Conference 2009, 18 November 2009.
[1]
My colleague John Broadbent talked about this late last year, see ‘
Reconnecting 

 Corporate Australia with Frozen Credit Markets
’, speech given

 to Corporate Finance World Australia 2009, 10 November 2009.
[2]
‘
The 

 Australian Foreign Exchange Market in the Recovery
’, speech

 given to the Westpac Research and Strategy Forum, 10 December 2009.
[3]
Baba N and F. Packer (2009), ‘
From

 turmoil to crisis: dislocations in the FX swap

 market before and after the failure of Lehman

 Brothers
’, BIS Working Paper no. 285.
[4]
