BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: The Current Economic Landscape – Sydney
DATE: 18/02/2010
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2010/sp-ag-180210.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
The Current Economic Landscape
Philip Lowe
Assistant Governor (Economic)
Committee for Economic Development of Australia (CEDA)

 Economic and Political Overview
Sydney
–
18 February 2010
Audio
5.93MB
Download
93KB
I would like to thank CEDA for the invitation to be part of this panel today. It

 is a pleasure to be here. As you may know, the Reserve Bank recently released

 its latest
Statement on Monetary Policy
. This morning, I would like to pick up

 on three of the main themes discussed in that document. These are: the two-speed

 global recovery; the resilience of the Australian economy; and the moderation

 of inflation in Australia.
The World Economy
A year ago when this conference was held, the world economy looked to be standing

 on the edge of a precipice. Output was contracting, international trade was

 collapsing, consumer and business confidence were falling, and risk aversion

 was extreme. At the time, many serious observers were talking about the possibility

 of a rerun of the problems of the 1930s.
As we now know, the world economy moved back from the precipice. Global output grew

 by around 3 per cent over the final nine months of last year, international

 trade has recovered some of its earlier falls, confidence has improved somewhat,

 and risk aversion has abated. As a result, many observers are now predicting

 that global growth will be around 4 per cent this year and next – a much

 better outcome than that feared likely a year ago.
One reason that we have moved back from the edge is the policy responses of governments

 and central banks. These responses provided the public with the assurance that

 policy makers would not stand idly by. Collectively, they were sufficient to

 interrupt the corrosive cycle of falling confidence undermining spending, then

 feeding through to even lower confidence and even lower spending.
The pick-up in the global economy has, however, been quite uneven. In the advanced

 economies, the recovery to date has been weak, especially in light of the very

 large contractions in output that occurred. In contrast, in Asia the bounce

 back has been much stronger, with many of the economies in the region growing

 solidly and operating with much less spare capacity. Looking forward, this

 two-speed world is likely to continue for some time yet.
In the advanced economies, growth has generally returned, although this has much

 to do with the dynamics of the inventory cycle and the boost to spending from

 temporary fiscal measures. While it is not unusual that these factors play

 a major role in the early part of a recovery, a stronger pick-up in private

 demand than has occurred to date will be needed for a self-sustaining recovery

 to take hold. In many countries, both consumption and investment are still

 very weak, with individuals and businesses remaining very cautious (Graph 1).
Graph 1
Looking forward, the central scenario for most of these economies remains a subdued

 recovery. It is likely that many of them will continue to be weighed down by

 the desire of households to reduce leverage and increase savings. And with

 considerable excess capacity, a strong recovery in business investment also

 appears unlikely, at least in the near term. Many of the advanced economies

 have weak financial sectors with little appetite for risk. Many also face very

 significant medium-term fiscal challenges that need to be addressed. If history

 is any guide, overcoming these various balance-sheet headwinds will take considerable

 time.
The picture in Asia is very different. A number of economies have had near V-shaped

 recoveries; this is particularly evident in the data for industrial production

 and trade (Graph 2). Unemployment is coming down and, unlike in the advanced

 economies, core inflation has troughed and is starting to increase. Throughout

 the region, the stimulatory settings of both monetary and fiscal policy that

 were put in place have proved to be an effective antidote to the problems emanating

 from the major North Atlantic countries. The region has also avoided the financial

 headwinds created by a troubled financial sector and high levels of public

 debt.
Graph 2
The recovery has been strongest in China, with the economy growing by 8¾ per cent

 last year. This strong growth has also provided a boost to many other economies

 in Asia and beyond, with Chinese imports having increased rapidly (Graph 3).

 In the middle part of the year, the growth in China was driven by a surge in

 public-sector infrastructure, but more recently there has been some rebalancing,

 with exports and consumption rising strongly.
Graph 3
The challenges facing China are obviously different from those facing the advanced

 economies. Foremost amongst these is deciding how, and when, to scale back

 some of the policy stimulus that was put in place. As many observers have noted,

 if stimulatory policy settings remain in place for too long, there is a risk

 of overheating, leading to difficulties down the track. But calibrating the

 withdrawal of the stimulus is difficult and there are clearly risks in both

 directions. On balance, it is plausible to argue that the recent tightening

 in credit conditions is a favourable development in that it increases the likelihood

 that the Chinese economy is on a sustainable path. Time will tell though.
This two-speed world presents a very interesting backdrop for the Australian economy.

 There remains some risk that developments in the advanced economies could again

 derail growth in the global economy. But the more likely scenario remains a

 relatively subdued recovery in the advanced economies and stronger growth in

 Asia, with domestic demand in the region making a greater contribution to growth

 than has been the case historically.
If this is how things play out, the Australian economy is well placed. Around 70 per cent

 of our exports now go to Asia and the strong growth in the region has supported

 commodity prices. This is reflected in our terms of trade, which are likely

 to increase strongly over the next year from what is an already high level

 (Graph 4).
Graph 4
Domestic Developments
This brings me to my second theme – the general resilience of the Australian

 economy.
Amongst the advanced economies, Australia is the only one to have avoided a negative

 year-ended growth rate during the global downturn. While activity did contract

 in the final quarter of 2008, it is likely to have grown by around 2 per cent

 in 2009.
This is a considerably better outcome than thought likely a year ago and it has led

 the Bank to revise up its forecasts for growth for 2010 and 2011. Most of this

 upward revision occurred between mid last year and November, with only very

 modest revisions since then. Our central forecast is for the economy to grow

 by around 3¼ to 3½ per cent over each of the next couple of years

 (Graph 5). This is slightly above the average of the past two decades

 and, if it occurred, would likely see a gradual reduction in the spare capacity

 that currently exists.
Graph 5
This outlook is based on a judgment that growth in private demand will gradually

 strengthen, with public demand providing support to economic activity in the

 short term. The housing sector is now firmly in the upswing phase of the construction

 cycle, and increased investment in the resources sector over coming years is

 expected to see investment, as a share of GDP, return to the very high levels

 seen in late 2008. In terms of consumption, we are expecting reasonably solid

 growth, although below the pace of earlier years as households continue to

 take a more cautious approach to their finances.
There is one technical issue regarding these forecasts that I would like to draw

 your attention to – that is the assumption about interest rates used

 by the Bank's staff when putting these forecasts together. For some years,

 it had been our practice to produce forecasts assuming that the cash rate remained

 unchanged throughout the forecast horizon. This approach had the obvious advantage

 of simplicity, but when the cash rate is a long way from its normal level,

 it is not particularly realistic.
So, in August last year we changed our approach. Since then, we have prepared our

 forecasts on the technical assumption that the cash rate returns towards a

 more normal setting over time. Our overall objective here is to provide the

 community with a general sense of how we think the economy is likely to evolve

 over the next few years and to do this we need to make realistic assumptions.

 Broadly speaking, the paths the staff have used have been similar to those

 implied by market interest rates at the time the forecasts were prepared. It

 is important to stress that this neither implies a commitment by the Board

 to the particular path used nor an endorsement by the Bank of the market pricing.
One aspect of our recent economic performance that particularly stands out is the

 solid performance of the labour market, with the unemployment rate having peaked

 at 5¾ per cent (Graph 6).
Graph 6
This is clearly a much better result than earlier thought likely and it has been

 important in underpinning a high level of confidence in the community. In turn,

 this has helped short circuit what could have been a damaging dynamic –

 that is, rising unemployment feeding through to weak confidence and lower incomes,

 in turn feeding through into lower spending and a further increase in unemployment.

 There are a number of factors that have helped here, but the one that I would

 like to highlight today is the greater flexibility of the labour market.
In previous economic slowdowns, when the demand for labour declined, people lost

 their jobs almost one for one with the decline in labour demand. On this occasion,

 things turned out quite differently, with the increase in the unemployment

 rate being smaller than suggested by historical relationships between output

 and employment. Partly this was because many firms and their employees agreed

 to reduce working hours rather than to reduce the number of people employed.

 In other cases, there was an agreement that wage increases would be reduced

 or delayed as a way of preserving jobs. The good news is that this flexibility

 in employment relationships worked in limiting job losses in the economy. This

 has had obvious social benefits as well as supporting overall confidence in

 the community. Without this flexibility, it is likely that the outcomes would

 not have been as favourable.
In looking forward, there are number of issues that deserve particularly close analysis

 as we gauge the current pulse of the economy. I would like to touch briefly

 on three of these.
The first is the weakness in business credit. Over the past year, business credit

 has fallen by 7 per cent (Graph 7). The last time we saw this type

 of outcome was in the early 1990s, when the economy was in a deep recession

 and investment was collapsing.
Graph 7
Making an assessment of why this contraction is occurring is difficult, but in all

 probability the weakness reflects both supply and demand factors. In the commercial

 property area, the supply of finance remains constrained with many lenders

 having little appetite to increase their commercial property lending. On the

 other hand, the demand for loans by many businesses in the broader economy

 appears to have declined. Many firms have used equity raisings and/or their

 cash reserves to pay down debt and, as a result, the rate at which loans are

 being repaid is historically high (Graph 8). Over time, as the economy

 strengthens and investment picks up, a reversal of these trends would be expected.
Graph 8
The second issue is the evidence of ongoing cautiousness by both households and businesses

 at a time when confidence is reported to be very high. This cautiousness can

 be seen not only in business credit figures, but also in household spending

 decisions and in surveys of firms' investment plans (Graph 9). It

 appears that one legacy of the global downturn is that many people, despite

 being generally confident about the future, are taking a more conservative

 approach to their spending. As we go forward, one of the things that will shape

 how the economy evolves is how these attitudes change.
Graph 9
The third issue is the extent to which the timing of expenditure has been affected

 by temporary fiscal measures. Through much of last year, a question that was

 frequently asked, both in Australia and elsewhere, was whether the signs of

 recovery primarily reflected temporary fiscal measures. One concern was that

 some of these measures were simply bringing forward the timing of expenditure,

 and that once this bring-forward was complete, spending would again decline.

 A related concern was the possibility that spending might also weaken when

 the temporary boost to income from various fiscal transfers was not repeated.
Around the world, it is clear that temporary incentives or payments have had significant

 effects on spending patterns: the various car scrappage schemes are perhaps

 the best example of this. In Australia, we have also seen some of these effects,

 particularly with the increased first-home owners' grants and temporary

 tax deductions for business investment. The latter, for example, has had a

 significant effect on vehicle sales to businesses (Graph 10).
Graph 10
Looking forward, there remains some possibility that, with these measures now having

 been wound back, activity could again slow. However, as time has passed, the

 likelihood of this being the case has declined. Household consumption held

 up better than expected over the second half of 2009 after the fading of the

 effects of the earlier cash payments. Over recent months, there is some evidence

 to suggest that the purchase of various services by the household sector has

 been particularly strong with, for example, a marked increase in spending on

 restaurants, cafes and take-away food (Graph 11). This is unlikely to

 be related directly to temporary fiscal measures. More broadly, the expansion

 of the resources sector and the improvement in the terms of trade reflect structural

 developments in the world economy, rather than temporary policy measures in

 Australia.
Graph 11
Inflation
The third area that I would like to touch on is the moderation in inflation that

 has occurred in Australia.
If we go back to the September quarter 2008, the year-ended inflation rate in underlying

 terms was running at a little over 4½ per cent. It is now around 3¼

 per cent, with the outcome for the December quarter around 0.6 per cent,

 a marked step down from rates in previous quarters. This moderation is in line

 with what we had been expecting for some time.
This reduction in inflation reflects three main factors: a slowing in wage growth

 in the private sector; the appreciation of the exchange rate; and an increase

 in spare capacity in the economy. These factors all take time to fully work

 their way through, so we expect a further period of modest quarterly outcomes

 and thus further moderation in the year-ended inflation rate.
One issue that has attracted some attention lately is how the Bank assesses the rate

 of underlying inflation. Here, it is important to point out that we do not

 have a mechanical approach. What we are trying to do is to discern the average

 rate of increase in prices, abstracting from particularly unusual movements.
At any point in time, we are looking at the whole range of price changes in the economy

 and using various analytical techniques to derive measures of central tendency.

 Inevitably, these different measures produce slightly different outcomes, but

 they show the same general patterns over time (Graph 12). Since there

 is no single unambiguously ‘right’ measure, we look at them all.

 Then, using all the information at our disposal, we make our general assessment

 of the rate of underlying inflation.
Graph 12
We do all this because we have found it a useful input into thinking about how CPI

 inflation – which after all is our objective – is likely to evolve

 over time. As we go through the process of putting our inflation forecasts

 together, understanding recent price pressures in the economy is important,

 and we have found looking at the various measures of underlying inflation helpful

 in this process. But to emphasise again, our focus here is very much a forward-looking

 one.
Our latest inflation forecasts were set out a few weeks ago in the
Statement on Monetary Policy
. We expect that CPI inflation will be

 around 2½ per cent in 2010 and just a little higher in 2011 (Graph 13).

 These forecasts represent small upward revisions to those set out three months

 ago, largely reflecting the fact that the economy looks to have less spare

 capacity than earlier thought likely.
Graph 13
Concluding Remarks
Overall, the Australian economy finds itself in a much better position than the other

 advanced economies. We have come through the global downturn better than expected

 and, unlike many other advanced economies, employment has recently grown strongly

 and the level of investment remains high. We are benefiting from high commodity

 prices and from our links with Asia. Inflation is moderating, and is expected

 to be consistent with the medium-term target over the next couple of years.
Risks of course remain, both in the advanced economies and in Asia. But the central

 scenario for Australia over the next few years remains a positive one, with

 the challenges that we are likely to face being quite different from those

 facing the other advanced economies.
Thank you.
