BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: The Outlook for Dwelling Investment – Sydney
DATE: 13/11/2012
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2012/sp-so-131112.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
The Outlook for Dwelling Investment
Jonathan Kearns
[
*
]
Head of Economic Analysis
Address to the Australian Business Economists' Lunchtime Briefing
Sydney
–
13 November 2012
Audio
15.52
MB
Housing is important to all of us as a place to live. Housing construction has traditionally

 been one of the most cyclical parts of the economy. It tends to share this

 cycle with housing renovation activity and housing turnover. Given the important

 influences this housing cycle can also have on other parts of the economy,

 such as consumer spending on durable goods, it is easy to see why we pay so

 much attention to housing as an important driver of economic activity.
It is notable then that, for the past decade or so, the rate of housing construction

 has not been particularly cyclical, and has been at a low level. Indeed, some

 indicators suggest that supply has not kept up with demand. There are tentative

 signs, however, that dwelling investment (that is, investment in housing) will

 pick up which would, in part, offset the smaller contribution to growth that

 we expect from resource investment in the coming years. Today I will discuss

 what rate housing demand might be growing at, and then I will come back to

 talk about housing supply before finishing with some general comments about

 the outlook for dwelling investment.
Housing Demand
The growth of demand for housing largely depends on the growth of the number of households,

 which is determined by population growth and changes in the average number

 of people in each household. The rate of population growth has been higher

 over the past seven or so years than over the preceding 30 years (Graph 1).

 Despite this, the growth rate of the dwelling stock did not increase, and for

 a few years the population was even growing faster than the dwelling stock.

 Population growth depends on births and deaths, and net immigration. Net immigration

 to a large extent depends on demographic factors and government policy, but

 it can also be influenced by economic growth and the cost of

 housing.
[1]
Graph 1
The other major determinant of the number of households is average household size

 (or equivalently the household formation rate – the rate at which new

 households are formed). Over the 20th century, average household size declined

 reflecting increased incomes and demographic factors, notably a lower birth

 rate and an increase in the share of single adult households with or without

 children (Graph 2). However, this long trend decline in average household

 size came to an end in the early

 2000s.
[2]
Consequently, over the past decade the number of households has no longer

 been growing faster than the population. So for a given rate of population

 growth, the demand for housing would seemingly be growing more slowly.
Graph 2
But household size doesn't only reflect demographic preferences, it can also

 reflect economic factors as well – in particular, the cost of housing

 (relative to incomes). If housing was less expensive, then young adults may

 decide to move out of their parents' home earlier, people may decide

 to live by themselves rather than in a group household, and more people may

 decide to have a holiday home.
As has been well documented, the price of housing increased strongly relative to

 incomes in Australia over the 1990s and into the early 2000s. This largely

 reflected households' greater ability to borrow with the decline in nominal

 interest rates reducing initial mortgage repayments, as well as deregulation

 and innovation in the financial sector improving households' access to

 credit. While the increase in the cost of housing will have tended to reduce

 the household formation rate, people's greater access to credit is likely

 to have offset this to some extent as they found it easier to get a loan

 to purchase a home sooner.
The sharp increase in house prices from 1999 to 2003 is likely to have had a dampening

 effect on household formation rates, and so the demand for housing. We can

 get some guide to the relative importance of the cost of housing and demographic

 factors in the levelling off in average household size by looking at the

 structure of households. A few effects seem to stand out as important. First,

 the number of dependent children in families stopped falling as rapidly with

 some increase in fertility rates; this would not be caused by an increase

 in house prices. Second, the share of households with two adults living as

 husband and wife or partners stopped falling; presumably this largely reflects

 social factors, although house prices could also have been relevant. Third,

 the decline in the average size of group households levelled off; this is

 more likely to reflect the increase in the cost of housing. So while we certainly

 can't be precise, the evidence from household types suggests that demographic

 factors are clearly important in explaining the average household size levelling

 off, but that the increase in the cost of housing also seems to have played

 a role.
It is interesting to note that Australia was not alone in experiencing a long trend

 decline in average household size followed by a levelling off in more recent

 decades (Graph 3). While all of the Anglo-Saxon countries in this graph

 experienced a run-up in house prices around the turn of the century, there

 were some differences in the magnitude of that increase and the behaviour

 of house prices over the preceding decade. So while the levelling off in

 average household size in all of these countries may, in part, be a response

 to increases in house prices, it would seem likely that similar demographic

 factors have also played a part.
Graph 3
Despite the recent increase in population growth, the levelling off in average household

 size has meant that the growth in the number of households has been slower

 since around 2000 than in preceding decades. Often analysts calculate a

 concept of ‘underlying demand’ which is said to be the demand

 for new housing there would have been in the absence of significant changes

 in price growth. It is the demand for new housing resulting from the growth

 in the population and change in average household size attributable to factors

 other than the cost of housing. But, as I outlined earlier, it isn't

 really possible to distinguish what part of the levelling off in average

 household size is the result of demographic preferences, and how much is

 due to the cost of housing. Depending on what assumptions are made about

 this, some basic calculations can suggest that, since 2005, new construction

 and ‘underlying demand’ have been somewhere between being broadly

 in balance to there being a shortfall of up to 50,000 dwellings per year.
However, if we think that there has indeed been a relative shortage of supply over

 the past decade or so, one puzzle is why house prices have been flat or

 even declined a little (relative to incomes) over this period. One possibility

 is that, after the large increase in prices in the late 1990s and early

 2000s, there has been a gradual reassessment by households of the fundamental

 value of housing, and their willingness to take on debt to fund housing.

 If households have indeed lowered the value they place on housing, but prices

 only adjust slowly – in part because of frictions in the housing market

 including possibly in supply – this could restrict the rate of new

 construction. Historically, new construction has typically increased with

 faster growth in house prices, and so an extended period of weak house price

 growth could be a factor in the limited increase in the supply of new housing.
Housing Supply
So why might housing supply have fallen short of ‘underlying demand’?

 One obvious constraint on new construction is the supply of land. Much

 of the development in cities' inner suburbs is on brownfield sites,

 such as formerly industrial land, and a larger share of this is higher-density

 housing. In contrast, new construction in outer suburbs is more likely

 to be on greenfield sites, that is newly developed land, and a higher share

 of this is detached housing. So the supply issues in inner and outer suburbs

 can be somewhat different, and are likely to be different again to those

 that may affect supply in regional areas. Yet, over the past decade or

 so, the cycle in housing construction has been broadly similar in all of

 these different areas, with flat or declining construction up to 2009 in

 New South Wales and Victoria, before there was some pick-up (that was stronger

 in Victoria)
(Graph 4)
. So, overall, the cycle of construction in different

 locations also suggests that demand has been a dominant factor in weak

 construction over the past decade, or that if there are supply constraints

 they apply to all types of development and locations.
Graph 4
A couple of months ago, the Bank released an article that discussed the supply-side

 issues in the housing market that our liaison contacts, and other public

 reports, have highlighted as being

 significant.
[3]
The planning process is typically seen to be complex, and had become more

 so over time. The number of regulations that developers have needed to

 comply with increased, and these have often been administered by different

 agencies that have not always coordinated well.
The provision and funding of infrastructure is also difficult. In the past, governments

 put in place and funded roads, water and other services, and community

 infrastructure, paying for these out of general revenue. But, in recent

 decades, there has been a move toward ‘user-pays’ with the

 developer often responsible for the provision of much of the new infrastructure

 and the up-front cost needing to be incorporated in the development stage.

 Who ultimately pays for this infrastructure will depend on the substitutability

 between new dwellings and established housing, developers' profit

 margins and how responsive is the price of undeveloped land.
The ownership of undeveloped land has also been highlighted as an issue in some circumstances.

 Where the ownership of land on the city fringe is dispersed, say, through

 many ‘hobby farms’, or equivalently in the inner city where

 existing blocks could be used for infill, it can be difficult for developers

 to negotiate the purchase of sufficient land to make development economically

 viable. Proposed developments can also attract opposition from nearby

 existing residents. These objections can take many forms including increased

 congestion, a change in the character of the area, environmental issues

 or reduced value of their own homes.
Many of these changes, such as greater environmental legislation and user-pays infrastructure,

 have been implemented for social and economic efficiency reasons, and

 so may be beneficial overall. But delays and uncertain timing –

 while infrastructure provision is negotiated, or additional regulations

 or local concerns are satisfied – are costly for developers. Delays

 and uncertainty can increase the cost of financing and charges incurred

 such as rates payments, as well as increasing the required rate of return

 to compensate for the greater

 risk.
[4]
Governments at state and local levels have responded to these issues in a range of

 ways. In some states, there have been centralised authorities established

 to deal with major new residential development proposals. A related initiative

 has been a simpler approval process for projects that adhere to a set

 of predetermined standards. There have also been some measures to release

 more greenfield land and cap infrastructure costs. Industry participants

 report that these various initiatives are generally having a positive

 effect, but there remain complex issues and differing views on appropriate

 responses.
Other Indicators of Housing Balance
Given the difficulties in interpreting housing demand and supply, an alternative,

 and possibly more direct, way to examine the tightness of housing supply

 is to look at the rental market.
Some share of properties being vacant is normal as tenants move out and vacancies

 are advertised. But a high vacancy rate indicates that there are excess

 dwellings available at the rents being charged, while conversely a low

 vacancy rate is indicative of a shortage of rental properties. Of course,

 if there is a relative shortage of rental properties then rents will tend

 to rise faster than otherwise, and so the rate of increase in rents is

 another indicator of the strength of demand relative to supply. As this

 graph shows, there is a fairly close relationship over time between the

 vacancy rate (on an inverted scale) and the increase in rents after accounting

 for inflation (Graph 5). The decline in the vacancy rate, and the

 increase in real rents since the early 2000s, indicate that the rental

 market has been tightening. For the past seven years or so, real rents

 have been rising and the vacancy rate has been below its long-run average,

 suggesting the rental market has been quite tight.
Graph 5
Tightness in the rental market will generally be indicative of tightness in the overall

 property market. While the typical owner-occupier property will differ

 to the typical rental property in many ways, there is significant interconnection

 between the markets for owner-occupier and rental properties. Properties

 that investors might purchase could otherwise be attractive to first-home

 buyers, while many households rent while waiting to purchase. Also, for

 some people, the decision whether to rent or to buy will be influenced

 by the relative cost and availability of rental properties and properties

 for sale.
Dwelling Investment
Overall, the information on the strength of demand related to demographic factors,

 and the tightness in the rental market, suggest that the rate of new construction

 has been lower than might have been expected. So it seems an expansion

 of new construction could easily be accommodated by the market. What rate

 of construction might we then expect to see in the next few years?
The first graph I presented today (Graph 1) showed that over the past 15 years

 or so the housing stock has grown at a rate a little above 1½ per cent,

 much lower than the rates of 2–3 per cent in the prior

 decades. Indeed, despite the growth in population, the number of new dwellings

 constructed each year has cycled around 100–160 thousand since the

 early 1970s. Given the growth in economic activity, that would suggest

 that housing construction has become a smaller share of the economy. But,

 in fact, new dwelling investment has cycled within a steady range (Graph 6).
Graph 6
There are two main reasons why dwelling investment has grown in line with the economy

 while the number of dwellings constructed has remained pretty stagnant.
First, dwellings have become ‘bigger and better’. The average volume

 of newly constructed dwellings more than doubled from 1960 to 2010, reflecting

 increases in both the size and quality of new homes (Graph 7). Construction

 of larger homes, and extensions, have led the share of all homes with

 four or more bedrooms to increase from 13 per cent in 1970

 to around one-third now. New construction also uses higher-quality materials

 in construction, for example the proportion of houses with brick walls

 rose from 65 per cent in 1994 to around 80 per cent

 a bit over a decade later and new dwellings use higher quality fixtures,

 such as taps and tiles, etc.
Graph 7
The second contributing factor is that dwelling construction has become comparatively

 more expensive over time. Since 1970, the cost of dwelling construction

 has increased by about 25 per cent more than generalised prices

 in the economy, at least in part reflecting the labour intensity of construction.
So while the number of dwellings constructed each year hasn't grown, the size,

 quality and relative cost of each dwelling has. The result is that dwelling

 investment as a share of total economic activity has cycled around a

 relatively stable level for several decades. It is difficult to say how

 these trends may change in coming years, with the exception of noting

 that homes probably won't continue to get bigger. Growth in the size

 of detached houses slowed recently and there has been a larger share

 of higher-density dwellings, which tend to be smaller.
The other part of dwelling investment is alterations and additions to existing dwellings.

 New construction and renovation activity tend to follow very similar

 cycles, even if the cycle in renovation activity is generally more muted

 (Graph 8). The factors that drive construction, such as interest

 rates and house prices, clearly also have a big influence on renovation

 activity. The increasing average age of the dwelling stock, from a low

 of 17 years in the early 1980s to around 21 years today, might suggest

 that renovation activity will increase over time. But other factors,

 such as the increasing share of higher-density homes, are likely to work

 in the other direction, dampening renovation activity.
Graph 8
Another notable feature of dwelling investment since around 2003, and in contrast

 to previous decades, is the absence of a strong cycle. This hasn't

 only been the absence of a strong upswing, but also that dwelling investment

 hasn't had the sharp falls over this period that might have been

 expected, for example, in 2004 when dwelling prices stopped increasing

 sharply or in the economic downturn in 2009.
In recent years, the share of higher-density dwellings in new construction has increased,

 and this trend would seem likely to continue. This may have ongoing implications

 for the nature of the construction cycle given
higher-density
dwellings take longer from planning, through construction,

 to completion.
Conclusion
So what is the outlook for dwelling investment? While the long-run decline in the

 average number of people per household seems to have tapered off at least

 partly for demographic reasons, the strong population growth in recent

 years and the relatively low rate of dwelling construction suggest that

 there is sufficient demand for housing in the economy that an increase

 in supply could easily be absorbed. The relatively tight conditions in

 the rental market lead to a similar conclusion. Other factors are also

 working in favour of an increase in dwelling investment. Interest rates

 have fallen and income growth has been relatively strong. That said,

 some factors suggest that the recovery may be relatively modest, including

 that households have not shown an inclination to take on debt at the

 same rate they did in the 1990s and early 2000s, and that the ratio of

 prices to income is high relative to its history, suggesting that it

 is unlikely that a large increase in prices is in prospect. So, overall,

 it looks likely that dwelling investment will pick up at a relatively

 moderate rate in the medium term. How quickly and how strongly of course

 remain important questions for understanding the impact on the overall

 economy.
Endnotes
I would like to thank Trent Saunders for his valuable assistance in the preparation

 of this talk.
[*]
If housing is relatively expensive in Australia, then it may be that fewer Australians

 living abroad, and foreigners eligible for visas or permanent residency,

 decide to move to Australia because of the cost of living.
[1]
The primary source used here for data on population and the number of households

 is the ABS
Australian Demographics Statistics
release, extended with

 information from the Census where needed. The results from the 2011

 Census suggested that the resident population was around 300,000 less

 than previously estimated. This partly reflected a change in the methodology

 used by the ABS for estimating the net undercount in the Census. The

 ABS has incorporated this revision in the resident population estimates

 by distributing it evenly over the five years since the previous Census.

 This has affected both the population levels and growth rates over

 this period; however, as advised by the ABS, we have instead estimated

 population growth using the components of population growth. The resulting

 growth rates have only been very marginally affected by the incorporation

 of the new information from the 2011 Census. So the change or growth

 in demand for housing over the past two decades is little affected

 by this change in the level of the population.
[2]
See Hsieh, Norman and Orsmond (2012).
[3]
For a discussion of the potential effect of various frictions in housing supply,

 see Kulish, Richards and Gillitzer (2011).
[4]
References
Hsieh W, D Norman and D Orsmond (2012) ‘
Supply-side Issues in the Housing Sector
’,

 RBA
Bulletin
, September, pp 11–19.
Kulish M, A Richards and C Gillitzer (2011) ‘
Urban Structure and Housing Prices: Some Evidence from 

 Australian Cities
’, RBA Research Discussion Paper 2011-03.
