BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Implications for the Australian Economy of Strong Growth in Asia – Canberra
DATE: 19/09/2012
SPEAKER: Canberra
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2012/sp-ag-190912.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Implications for the Australian Economy of Strong Growth in Asia
Christopher Kent
[
*
]
Assistant Governor (Economic)
Speech to the Structural Change and the Rise of Asia Conference
Canberra
–
19 September 2012
Audio
14.09MB
Download
1. Introduction
Strong economic growth in the Asian region, particularly in China, over the past

 decade or more has had important macroeconomic and structural effects on the

 Australian economy. Most obvious has been the rise in the terms of trade to

 historically high levels (Figure 1), a resource investment boom, the appreciation

 of the exchange rate, and the reallocation of productive factors, with employment

 growing strongly in resource and resource-related activities and declining

 in a number of non-resource industries.
Figure 1
Growth in Asia is providing many benefits for the Australian economy. The commodity-intensive

 nature of this growth has pushed commodity prices to a high level, which is

 supporting significant investment in the productive capacity of the Australian

 resource sector and is expected to continue to support production and export

 of resources, as well as employment, incomes, tax revenues and wealth. And

 the appreciation of the exchange rate has lowered the cost of many imported

 goods for Australian consumers. While not all parts of the economy have benefited

 equally, for the economy as a whole the process of adjustment has proceeded

 much more smoothly than has been the case in previous resource booms; over

 the past seven years, growth has generally never been too far from trend, inflation

 within the target, or not too far from it and not for very long, and unemployment

 has been relatively low (Figure 2). This is perhaps all the more notable

 given the difficult circumstances internationally over recent years. In part

 this reflected the relative strength of the Chinese economy through 2009 and

 2010 that benefited Asia and pushed Australia's terms of trade to new highs

 after they dipped during the height of the global financial crisis.
Figure 2
The relatively smooth adjustment of the economy overall through this boom in the

 terms of trade, at least to date, has certainly not been the norm in previous

 booms in commodity prices. A key aspect of the good performance of the macroeconomy

 through the current boom has been the flexibility of the exchange rate regime,

 with the high nominal exchange rate acting as a timely mechanism facilitating

 the reallocation of productive factors across industries. Of course, this process

 is not a painless one. It entails significant pressures on many trade-exposed

 industries that have not benefited from higher product prices but have faced
higher wages
(at least in foreign currency terms) and a softening in

 demand.
As well as promoting the reallocation of productive resources across the economy,

 the high exchange rate is one of the means by which all Australian consumers

 have been able to benefit from high commodity prices, by directly increasing

 their purchasing power over imports. Indeed, the purchasing power of the average

 wage has risen in
all
major industries since the terms of trade began to rise in 2003/04,

 despite upward pressure on the prices of non-tradable goods and services during

 the boom due to competition for domestic factors of

 production.
[1]
For some industries, such as mining, construction and professional services,

 the real (consumer) wage has grown quite strongly, while growth in real wages

 has been more subdued, yet still positive, in rental, hiring & real estate,

 retail and manufacturing. Growth in real household disposable income per capita

 has been stronger than growth in real wages, since part of the higher tax revenue

 from the stronger profits in the resource sector has been redistributed to

 households through income tax cuts and transfers.
Another feature of the current terms of trade boom is the greater extent of foreign

 ownership in the resource sector, with some estimates suggesting that foreign

 ownership is around four-fifths (Connolly and Orsmond 2011). In addition, the

 imported content of the current boom in resource investment has been higher

 than in previous booms. Both of these factors mean that the expansionary effect

 of the terms of trade boom is less than is implied by the extent of investment

 and profits in the resource sector.
The adjustment process through the current episode has also been helped by inflation

 expectations remaining well anchored, combined with greater flexibility in

 the labour market, relative to earlier booms in commodity prices. The combination

 of the high exchange rate, a record of low and stable inflation and a relatively

 flexible labour market means that while demand for labour, and the growth of

 wages, has been higher in the resource and resource-related sectors, this has

 not led to a significant increase in wages in Australian dollar terms across

 the economy as a whole. This was not the case in earlier commodity price booms

 (Battellino 2010).
The fact that the adjustment to date has occurred relatively smoothly means that

 the economy is reasonably well placed to deal with the adjustments that lie

 ahead. One aspect of this is that the resource boom is expected to turn from

 one of strong growth in investment to one of strong growth in the production

 and export of resources. Given that the investment phase in the resource sector

 is typically relatively intensive in the use of labour, this means that the

 demand for labour in the resource sector is likely to ease after the peak in

 investment. Another feature of the adjustment from here on in is the decline

 in the terms of trade. Indeed, this is already under way, with commodity prices

 having peaked in the second half of 2011 and forecast to decline further over

 the next few years as the global supply of commodities gradually increases

 relative to demand. As with the expansionary phase of the resource boom, a

 flexible exchange rate would also be expected to help the economy adjust to

 both anticipated and unanticipated developments. Among the many uncertain developments

 that might require the exchange rate to adjust, there is the possibility that

 the path of the terms of trade will vary substantially from that which is expected

 (which in turn will depend on global demand for, and supply of, commodities).

 Similarly, the path of resource investment (the timing and magnitude of the

 peak in investment), and the demand for, and supply of, labour in resource

 and resource-related activities are also subject to a degree of uncertainty.
In terms of the path of commodity prices, an important unknown is the extent to which

 the growth in the demand for commodities, which has been very strong over recent

 years, might ease over the longer term as the emerging economies in Asia mature.

 In particular, the rate of urbanisation in Asia, which has driven much of the

 demand for resource commodities, is expected to eventually slow and then

 stabilise
[2]
(although demand for non-resource commodities such as food will increase as populations

 and incomes grow). Also, the typical pattern of economic development suggests

 that activity in emerging Asia is likely to become less focused on the production

 and consumption of goods over time and relatively more focused on the production

 and consumption of services. While such a transformation might appear to be

 disadvantageous for countries like Australia that have hitherto been focused

 on supplying emerging Asian economies with commodities, it may be that Australia

 is able to benefit from such a shift. Indeed, some Australian service industries,

 such as education and tourism, have already experienced a significant increase

 in demand from Asia, notwithstanding the high level of the exchange rate. Moreover,

 the important thing to remember is that incomes still have a long way to grow

 in much of the Asian region in order to reach levels enjoyed in the advanced

 economies. And rising incomes in this large part of the global economy is relatively

 advantageous for Australia, partly because the distance from Australia to the

 region is much less than the distance from Australia to most advanced economies.
In the remainder of this paper we examine the implications for the Australian economy

 of strong growth in Asia, particularly in the context of the large increase

 in the terms of trade since the early 2000s.
Section 2
presents a theoretical framework that describes

 how a small open economy might be expected to adjust to a boom in commodity

 prices. Within the context of this theory,
Section 3
then

 discusses developments in the Australian economy since the onset of the boom

 in commodity prices:
Section 3.1
examines the impact of

 the higher commodity prices on the terms of trade, the exchange rate, and national

 income;
Section 3.2
analyses the mining investment boom

 phase and the implications for the broader economy; and
Section 3.3
discusses the mining production phase when additional capacity comes on line.
Section 4
concludes.
2. Adjustment to a Boom in Commodity Prices
2.1 The ‘Model’
Before turning to the question of how the Australian economy has adjusted to the

 boom in commodity prices, we first describe how a small open economy such as

 Australia's might adjust
in theory
to such a boom, drawing on earlier work by Gregory (1976),

 Corden and Neary (1982) and Corden (1982, 1984). A key part of the adjustment

 process is the appreciation of the real exchange rate. Much of that can occur

 via the nominal exchange rate in the case of an inflation-targeting regime

 with a flexible exchange rate such as exists in Australia. The real exchange

 rate must still appreciate in the case of a fixed nominal exchange rate regime,

 but more of this occurs through inflation of wages and prices, as was the case

 in Australia during the Korean War wool boom of the 1950s (see
Appendix A
for a discussion of this earlier episode). By helping to insulate the domestic

 economy from these inflationary pressures, the flexible exchange rate is an

 integral part of a smooth transition, and one that provides important benefits

 to the economy given that, in reality, the future path of the terms of trade

 is never certain.
To understand the elements of the adjustment process, we briefly describe a small

 open economy model with three sectors: the resource sector, the ‘other’

 tradable sector, and the non-tradable sector; two factors of production: labour

 and capital; and (mineral and energy) resource endowments. Most of the commodities

 produced are assumed to be exported. Resource endowments can be thought of

 as being in fixed supply, but of varying quality (that is, some bodies of ore,

 or fields of petroleum based minerals are more costly to extract than others).

 Extraction requires the building of capital ‘infrastructure’, such

 as removing any overburden, digging wells, and building extraction, processing

 and transport facilities. All of this takes some years to put in place but

 then lasts for many years.
In the case of Australia's recent experience, the shock to commodity prices that

 underpins the boom in the terms of trade is best thought of as being quite

 persistent. Even though the exact extent of the boom has been, and remains,

 uncertain, the key point is that commodity prices rise to a high level for

 quite some time. They are then expected to decline as more supply is brought

 forth, at home and elsewhere in the world.
To take full advantage of a persistent increase in commodity prices requires an expansion

 in the productive capacity of the resource sector. Assuming that the capital

 stock takes time to adjust, this entails a rise in investment in the resource

 sector over the course of a number of years; implicitly this reflects the fact

 that it is quite costly, or even impossible, to adjust the capital stock rapidly.
The process of adjustment to the boom in the terms of trade can usefully be characterised

 as occurring in three overlapping phases. First, commodity prices, and hence

 the terms of trade, increase significantly. The second phase entails a build-up

 in the capital stock in the resource sector. This investment phase, which might

 last for some years, is relatively intensive in the use of labour when compared

 to the third, longer-lived operational phase when production and exports increase

 significantly. Of course, as extra capacity is brought on stream around the

 world, the terms of trade would be expected to gradually decline.
Exactly how the economy responds to these driving forces will depend on the response

 of the exchange rate, interest rates, wages and prices. This will depend in

 part on the degree of substitutability of labour across the different sectors,

 as well as the substitutability between tradables and non-tradables in consumption.

 In what follows, we assume that nominal wages are quite sticky downwards (that

 is, it takes relatively high levels of unemployment to bring down nominal wages),

 and there is some substitutability across sectors, but it may not be not perfect,

 in which case relative wages across the different sectors might change over

 time. Similarly, we assume that tradable and non-tradable goods and services

 are substitutable but not perfectly so. Finally, we assume that prices adjust

 gradually, at least in comparison to the nominal exchange rate in the case

 where the latter is flexible.
There is a long history of research on how a small open economy adjusts to a boom

 in its resource sector. The canonical model, which divides the economy into

 a tradable and non-tradable goods sector, was first described by the Australian

 economists Salter (1959) and Swan (1960). This model was later extended to

 include three
sectors – a
non-tradable sector, a booming tradable sector, and

 a lagging tradable sector – in the
so-called ‘Dutch Disease
models’ (Gregory 1976, Corden and

 Neary 1982 and Corden 1982, 1984). The development of these models was motivated

 by the need to better understand the linkages between structural changes that

 were taking place in Australia and a number of other countries in the 1960s

 and 1970s and the development of the resource export

 sector.
[3]
The theories continue to be relevant today, with a number of commentators drawing

 on their predictions to explain the adjustments that the economy is currently

 going through (see, for example, Henry 2006, 2008, Gruen 2006, 2011, Banks

 2011, Connolly and Orsmond 2011). The contribution of the present study is

 not to ‘reinvent the wheel’, but rather to outline the various

 adjustments that are taking place in Australia, both from a theoretical and

 empirical standpoint, and to consider the likely transition path of the economy

 once the ‘investment phase’ of the boom peaks and the economy moves

 into the ‘production phase’ of the boom.
2.2 The Adjustment to the Shock
To think about how the economy responds to the terms of trade shock, it is helpful

 to start by considering the forces acting on the various ‘prices’

 in the economy (that is, consumer prices, wages, the interest rate and the

 exchange rate) at the onset of the shock. This provides a guide as to how these

 price variables will need to adjust (relative to their baseline paths) to bring

 about equilibrium.
The positive shock to the terms of trade, resulting from a rise in commodity prices,

 increases income accruing to the resource sector and increases that sector's

 demand for productive inputs. Both of these exert a measure of inflationary

 pressure. This implies that:
At initial wages, there will be excess demand for labour emanating from the resource

 sector. Assuming that the economy begins the adjustment close to a position

 of full employment, this will put upward pressure on wages, as the resource

 sector seeks to draw in labour from elsewhere in the economy.
Similarly, at the initial exchange rate, there will be an excess demand for Australian

 dollars, reflecting an increase in the overall demand for Australian assets

 that will begin to generate a higher return. The pressure for the appreciation

 can also be viewed as a forward-looking response to the demand for offshore

 funds that will be needed to help finance investment in the resource sector.
At initial prices of goods and services, extra income associated with the terms of

 trade shock implies an excess demand for the output of the non-tradable sector,

 which will tend to put upward pressure on prices and wages in that sector.

 This pressure may be reduced though to the extent that the exchange rate appreciates,

 exerting downward pressure on the prices of imported goods and services, which

 allows for a substitution effect that works in the opposite direction to the

 income effect. In other words, the nominal exchange rate appreciation leads

 consumers to switch towards tradable goods; the net outcome for demand in

 the non-tradable sector is not clear
a priori
. Upward

 pressure on prices will also be reduced to the extent that profits associated

 with the terms of trade shock accrue to foreigners.
Upward pressures on wages and prices associated with demand from the resource sector,

 and any excess demand in the non-tradable sector, might require an increase

 in interest rates in order to contain inflation; this will depend in part

 on the extent of the exchange rate appreciation. Also, the need for interest

 rates to rise will be lessened to the extent that inflation expectations remain

 well anchored and wage pressures in stronger parts of the economy do not spill

 over to other parts.
Pulling all of this together implies the following. The positive terms of trade shock

 will cause the nominal exchange rate to appreciate. By itself this pushes up

 Australian wages in foreign currency terms and thereby frees up labour from

 the (non-resource) tradable sector – that is, the rise in wages in foreign

 currency terms represents a loss of competitiveness for this sector. What happens

 to wages in Australian dollar terms will depend on the extent of the nominal

 exchange rate appreciation, whether demand for non-tradable goods and services

 rises or falls, and the substitutability of labour across sectors. It is possible

 that wages in Australian dollar terms will rise in the resource and non-tradable

 sectors relative to the other tradable sector. To the extent that wages in

 Australian dollar terms rise overall (again, relative to the baseline), the

 real exchange rate appreciates further than is implied by the nominal exchange

 rate appreciation alone. In any case, there is a clear signal for labour to

 leave the other tradable goods sector and move towards the resource sector

 (and possibly the non-tradable sector if its demand also rises).
In theory at least, at the time of the terms of trade shock, the nominal exchange

 rate will jump higher and interest rates will rise. The interest rate differential

 (
vis-à-vis
the rest of the world) means that the exchange rate

 can then be expected to depreciate in a smooth fashion along the path of adjustment.

 This is because arbitrage in the foreign exchange market requires the expected

 return on holding Australian dollar assets to be equal to the expected return

 on foreign currency

 assets.
[4]
The higher interest rate during the course of adjustment will also discourage

 some investment outside of the resource sector.
What can we say about prices? Domestic inflationary pressures, associated with higher

 wages and incomes, will lead to higher inflation for non-tradable goods and

 services but, at the same time, the gradual pass through of the initial exchange

 rate appreciation will lead to lower inflation for tradable goods and services

 (whose prices in foreign currency terms depend to a significant extent on global

 considerations). In this way, the appreciation of the exchange rate helps to

 offset the inflationary impulse from the terms of trade shock, and assists

 in maintaining inflation in line with the inflation target.
These changes will unwind to some extent as the adjustment process runs its course.

 As the capital stock in the resource sector reaches its new equilibrium level,

 demand for labour in the resource sector overall will decline as the relatively

 labour-intensive investment there declines. Even so, labour demand in the resource

 sector will still remain somewhat higher than it was prior to the terms of

 trade shock given the operational needs associated with producing more output.

 The net reduction in labour demand in the resource sector when moving from

 the investment to the operational phase of the boom implies that labour needs

 to be reabsorbed into the non-resource sectors. This will tend to put some

 downward pressure on wage growth. This effect will tend to be mitigated somewhat

 to the extent that the demand for non-tradable goods has increased since the

 onset of the terms of trade shock (that is, if the income effect has outweighed

 the substitution effect). The reduction in wage growth that does occur, when

 coupled with some improvement in the competitiveness of the tradable sector

 due to the exchange rate depreciation (that begins in theory immediately after

 the unexpected boom to the terms of trade), will help that sector to absorb

 the labour being shed by companies that undertook the resource investment.
The price changes seen during the investment phase of the boom will be at least partly

 reversed during the operational phase of the boom. In particular, the depreciation

 will put upward pressure on tradable inflation while a reduction in wage growth

 will put downward pressure on non-tradable inflation. These opposing effects

 may result in little net change to overall inflation. In this case, inflation

 can again remain in line with the target and the interest rate can return to

 its neutral level. Within this framework, Figure 3 depicts how key variables

 might respond to a positive shock to global commodity prices.
Figure 3
In reality, there are a number of reasons why an economy might not adjust in accordance

 with the theory outlined above; for example, households, firms and authorities

 do not have perfect knowledge of the timing and magnitude of the terms of trade

 boom at the outset, and it takes time for firms to adjust to changing circumstances.

 There are also many forces affecting the economy at a given point in time,

 making it difficult to isolate the impact of a single shock. Nonetheless, the

 theory provides a useful heuristic framework for analysing the response of

 the Australian economy to the terms of trade boom.
3. The Terms of Trade Boom and Structural Change in Australia
Developments in the Australian economy since the onset of the terms of trade boom

 have been broadly consistent with the stylised framework outlined in
Section 2
. In response to the large increase in commodity

 prices and the terms of trade, investment and employment in the resource sector

 have grown strongly, placing upward pressure on prices and wages. This has

 been offset to some extent by the appreciation of the exchange rate, which

 has led to a loss of competitiveness and downward pressure on prices in other

 industries, particularly those exposed to foreign trade.
This section examines these developments in more detail, by considering the three

 (overlapping) phases of the boom. To be clear, these are:
Phase I: The rapid increase in commodity prices, and hence the terms of trade, and

 the appreciation of the exchange rate;
Phase II: The mining investment boom; and
Phase III: The mining production and export phase.
We look at how key variables in the resource, other tradable and non-tradable sectors

 have evolved over recent years, while also noting some important ways in which

 developments in the Australian economy are not well represented by the theoretical

 framework presented in
Section 2
.
In what follows, the ‘resource sector’ is defined broadly to include

 both resource extraction and resource-related activity:
Resource extraction
includes mineral and gas extraction,

 and also resource-specific manufacturing (such as the production of metals

 and refined petroleum). Hereafter, resource extraction is sometimes referred

 to loosely as mining.
Resource-related activity
includes resource investment that

 supports future production of resources and the provision of intermediate

 inputs in support of the current production of resources. In other words,

 it captures activities that are directly connected to resource extraction,

 such as constructing mines and associated infrastructure, and transporting

 inputs to, and taking extracted resources away from, mines. It also captures

 some activities less obviously connected to resource extraction, such as engineering

 and other professional services (legal and accounting work, for

 example).
[5]
Non-resource activity includes everything else in the economy that does not have

 a direct relationship to the production of resources. Non-resource activity

 can be broken down further, at least conceptually, into tradable and non-tradable

 activity. The literature proposes several methods for creating this division

 in practice (see Dwyer and Groeger (1994) for a review). For simplicity, this

 paper uses the agriculture, manufacturing and tourism (that is, transport and

 accommodation & food services) industries as a proxy for the non-resource

 tradable sector.
[6]
This ‘rule-of-thumb’ allocation is consistent with a ‘threshold’

 approach, in which industries are allocated to the tradable sector if either

 their exports or competing imports are greater than a certain share of their
gross output
(generally 10 per cent; see Table B1 in
Appendix

 B
).
[7]
The remaining

 non-tradable, non-resource industries comprise the various utilities and services.
The key prices and quantities of interest are shown in Table 1, which compares the

 inflation-targeting period prior to 2003/04 with the period of the rapidly

 rising terms of trade thereafter.
Table 1: Key Prices and Quantities
Annual average growth, per cent
Pre terms of trade
boom
(1992/93 –
2002/03)
Terms of trade
boom
(2003/04 –
2011/12)
1
Terms of trade
½
7¼
Nominal TWI
−¾
4
Real TWI
−1
5¼
Borrowing rates (housing)
2
8
7
Borrowing rates (business)
2
8¼
7¼
Consumer price index
3
2½
2¾
Tradable
2
1½
Non-tradable
2¾
4
Wage price index
4
3¼
3¾
Resource/mining
3
4¾
Other tradable
3
3½
Non-tradable
3¼
3¾
Real investment
6¼
6¼
Resource/mining
5¼
22¼
Other tradable
5¼
3½
Non-tradable
7
5
Employment (heads)
2
2¼
Resource
½
11¼
Other tradable
¼
−1¼
Non-tradable
2½
2¼
Real output
3¾
3
Resource
3½
6¾
Other tradable
2½
¾
Non-tradable
4½
3
Real exports
6
3
Resource
5½
3½
Other
6¼
2
1 Sectoral investment and output data for 2011/12 are RBA estimates.
2 Average of nominal interest rates on outstanding loans (fixed

 and variable).
3 Consumer price data exclude interest charges prior

 to September 1998 and deposit & loan facilities, and are adjusted for

 the tax changes of 1999–2000.
4 Pre terms of trade boom average

 for wage price index is 1997/98–2002/03.
Sources: ABS; APRA; RBA; Perpetual
3.1 Phase I: The Rise in Commodity Prices, the Terms of Trade and the Exchange Rate
The rapid urbanisation and industrialisation of emerging economies in Asia –

 particularly China – has led to a dramatic increase in the global demand

 for commodities used in steel and energy production. With global supply responding

 only gradually to the surge in demand, this has led to sharp increases in the

 prices of commodities of which Australia has significant endowments. Consequently,

 Australia has experienced a rapid increase in its terms of trade, by 85 per

 cent from 2003/04 to September 2011, to their highest level on record; they

 have subsequently declined by around 9 per cent.
[8]
This run-up in the terms of trade has provided a significant boost to the real purchasing

 power of domestic production. For example, Stevens (2010) noted that, prior

 to the terms of trade boom, a ship load of iron ore was worth about 2,200 flat

 screen television sets. In 2010 it was worth about 22,000 flat screen television

 sets. This is akin to saying that Australians have received a transfer of income

 from the rest of the world. A simple estimate that compares real GDP to a measure

 of production that adjusts for changes in purchasing power due to the terms

 of trade, suggests that Australians could be up to 10–15 per cent ‘better

 off’, in terms of their command over global production, as a direct result

 of the higher terms of trade. However, the benefit accruing to Australian residents

 will be less than this, to the extent that part of the resource sector is foreign

 owned.
[9]
The distribution of these real income gains across the economy depends, crucially,

 on how much the exchange rate appreciates in response to the positive shock

 to world commodity prices (RBA 2005). An appreciation of the exchange rate

 means that: the increase in the domestic currency price of commodity exports

 will be less than the increase in world commodity prices; the income of the

 other tradable sector will fall; and real income gains flow to the broader

 economy via the associated decline in the price of imports. This is the key

 mechanism by which households, and other buyers of imported products, have

 benefited from the first phase of the resource boom.
The exchange rate has played a particularly important role in smoothing the effects

 of terms of trade shocks in Australia over this phase of the

 boom.
[10]
Since the terms of trade started to rise in 2003/04, the nominal exchange rate

 has appreciated by around 25 per cent in trade-weighted terms. Thus, as described

 in
Blundell-Wignall
and Gregory (1990), most of the real exchange rate

 appreciation necessary to maintain internal balance following the terms of

 trade shock has been achieved by an appreciation of the nominal exchange rate.

 This has not been the case in much earlier terms of trade booms in Australia,

 during which the exchange rate was either fixed or heavily managed, when much

 of the adjustment to the real exchange rate was achieved via higher inflation

 (see
Appendix A
).
However, the nature of the increase in commodity prices and the terms of trade, and

 the exchange rate appreciation, demonstrates a clear distinction between the

 theory presented in
Section 2
and the reality of the current boom. In particular,

 the large rise in the terms of trade occurred over a number of years, rather

 than a once-off jump, and the extent of the rise was largely unexpected. This

 reflects the fact that the pace of development in emerging Asia consistently

 exceeded expectations (Figure 4). As a result, analysts (including official

 forecasters) under-predicted the extent of the increase in commodity prices,

 and therefore the terms of trade, and the associated exchange rate appreciation,

 which also occurred over a number of years.
Figure 4
3.2 Phase II: The Mining Investment Boom
3.2.1 Investment
The resource sector globally has responded to the large rise in commodity prices

 by expanding its productive capacity. This has occurred gradually over a number

 of years, reflecting the unforeseen magnitude of the increase in commodity

 prices and the time frame required to plan for, approve and then complete large

 investment projects. In Australia, over recent years, the growth in investment

 in the extraction of iron ore, coal and liquefied natural gas (LNG) has been

 exceptionally strong (Figure 5). Indeed, the net capital stock of the

 resource sector has more than doubled since 2004, and is expected to continue

 to grow rapidly over the next few years, particularly in the LNG sector. At

 the time of the Bank's August 2012
Statement on Monetary Policy
(SMP), the central forecasts for growth

 embodied the expectation that investment in the resource sector would peak

 at around 9 per cent of GDP in 2013/14, compared to its average of 2 per cent

 of GDP over the
past half
century.
[11]
Figure 5
The effect of this investment on GDP is reduced to the extent that a significant

 share of the investment is imported. It appears that around half of the value

 of these resource investment projects is imported – with the remaining

 half being sourced domestically – although this varies somewhat depending

 on the nature of the project. LNG projects, for example, typically involve

 higher shares of imported capital inputs. (The estimates of resource output

 presented in this paper have adjusted the value of mining investment for its

 estimated import content.)
The high level of the exchange rate appears to have had a dampening effect on investment

 in the rest of the tradable sector. The average growth rate of real investment

 in the ‘other’ tradable sector was lower over the period since

 the terms of trade moved higher (Table 1 and Figure 5). More recently,

 real investment actually declined in this sector. Similarly, non-tradable capacity

 has expanded at a slower rate over this period, although this may reflect other

 forces acting on demand in this sector (see below).
3.2.2 The impact of the mining investment boom on output in other sectors
As the mining investment boom has gathered pace, the output of the broader resource-related

 sector, as measured by its total gross value added, has risen strongly (Figure

 6 and Figure 7). This is particularly true for the resource-related construction

 and business services industries, which supply a large quantity of inputs required

 for resource investment (and resource extraction). Note, however, that there

 has not yet been a commensurate pick-up in resource extraction, although this

 is expected in coming years as the large projects come
on line
(see
Section 3.3.1
).
Figure 6
Figure 7
To sustain the growth in the resource-related sector, factors of production have

 been directed away from the other tradable and non-tradable sectors, and output

 growth in those sectors has slowed. In the case of the other tradable sector,

 total production has grown quite slowly and even declined in some years. Weakness

 has been notable in parts of manufacturing not exposed to the resource sector,

 such as textiles, clothing & footwear and wood & paper manufacturing.

 Output of the non-tradable sector has also slowed, but by less than the other

 tradable sector, given that it is not as exposed to currency movements and

 has benefited from ‘income effects’ from the higher terms of trade.

 This slowing in non-tradable output has been broadly based across industries,

 though some sectors, such as health services, have performed strongly.
It should also be noted that there have been other factors, outside of Asian development

 and the associated large increase in commodity prices and the exchange rate,

 that have had an effect on economic activity in Australia. The global financial

 crisis caused significant disruption to financial markets and economic activity,

 albeit to a much lesser extent in Australia than in the north Atlantic economies.

 There has subsequently been an increase in the rate of household saving and

 slower credit growth, and the transition to more stable levels of indebtedness

 and house prices (relative to incomes) has continued. In addition to its direct

 impact on financial sector output, this has contributed to weakness in non-mining

 construction and property turnover, as well as slower growth of retail spending

 (Lowe 2012 and Stevens 2012). Furthermore, there has been a relatively broad-based

 slowing in Australia's productivity growth since the early 2000s; some,

 but certainly not all of this can be explained by developments in the resource

 sector (D'Arcy and Gustafsson 2012).
3.2.3 Employment
Aggregate employment has grown at an above-trend pace since the onset of the terms

 of trade boom. Over this period, the composition of employment growth has changed

 significantly (Figure 8 and Figure 9). The share of total employment accounted

 for by the resource sector (including both extraction and resource-related

 activity) has doubled since the mid 2000s, to be around 10 per

 cent.
[12]
A substantial part of this growth reflects the expansion in resource investment,

 which has increased demand for labour in resource-related construction and

 other industries that provide inputs to these investment projects (such as

 types of machinery manufacturing and engineering services). The share of workers

 employed in the resource extraction industry – in other words, the ABS

 definition of ‘mining’ – has accounted for only about one-fifth

 of the overall increase in the resource sector's share of employment since

 2004. Once the peak in mining investment spending has passed, and the resource

 boom enters its production phase, the share of labour employed in the more

 labor-intensive resource-related sector is likely to decline and the share

 employed in less labor-intensive resource extraction sector is likely to rise.

 The net effect though will be a decline in labour demand in the resource economy

 in the production phase. Based on the Bank's industry liaison, the ratio

 of workers required in the ‘mining investment’ phase relative to

 the ‘mining production’ phase is estimated to be around 4:1 in

 the case of iron ore, and substantially higher than this in the case of LNG

 (around 15–20:1).
Figure 8
Figure 9
In contrast to the strong employment growth in the resource sector, employment growth

 has slowed significantly in the non-tradable sector (particularly in retail

 and the parts of construction not exposed to the resource sector) and has contracted

 in the other tradable sector (Figure 9). This is consistent with labour

 moving from the non-resource sector to the resource sector in response to the

 higher relative wages on offer in the
latter (see below),
but could also reflect other factors such as the

 rise in the household saving rate and weakness in the housing sector.
It is worth noting, however, that the recent decline in the other tradable sector's

 share of total employment is a continuation of a longer-run structural shift

 since the 1960s. As real incomes have risen, consumer demand has shifted increasingly

 toward services, and this, combined with deregulation and privatisation of

 a range of services industries and the reduction in the level of trade protection

 provided to goods-producing industries has seen the tradable sector decline

 as a share of employment, and the non-tradable (service) sector

 rise.
[13]
The share of labour resources employed in the non-tradable sector has plateaued since

 around 2004, and is in line with the relatively stable share of non-tradable

 goods and services in production. This is consistent with the ‘income

 effect’ of the higher terms of trade having broadly offset the ‘substitution

 effect’ induced by the higher relative price of non-tradable goods (see
section 3.2.5
). However, as noted above, other developments

 largely unrelated to the high level of the terms of trade and the exchange

 rate are likely to have played a role in the stabilisation of the share of

 employment and output in the non-tradable sector. Most obvious is the weakness

 in the housing market; as a share of nominal GDP, dwelling investment peaked

 in 2003 at about 6½ per cent and has trended down to be a little under

 5 per cent in early 2012.
3.2.4 Wages
The pace of aggregate wage growth picked up from 2003 until 2008. In the period immediately

 prior to the global financial crisis, the unemployment rate in Australia had

 fallen to its lowest level in more than three decades and there was considerable

 pressure on capacity in the economy. This resulted in a pick-up in both wage

 and price inflation. When the slowdown associated with the global financial

 crisis occurred, these pressures on capacity eased and there was a significant

 moderation in wage growth. Aggregate wage pressures have since firmed, particularly

 in the private sector, although wage growth remains below its immediate pre-crisis

 levels (Figure 10).
Figure 10
In terms of wage relativities, wages have risen more rapidly in the mining sector

 than in the rest of the economy since the beginning of the resource boom, with

 much of this adjustment occurring between 2005 and 2009
(Figure 11)
. As a result, the relative wage in mining – that

 is, resource extraction – has risen by about 10 per cent (by far the

 largest increase of any single industry), after having trended lower over the

 decade leading up to the boom (Figure 12). It also appears that relative

 wages have risen in sectors complementary to resource extraction, principally

 mining construction, mining services and mining-related

 manufacturing.
[14]
Figure 11
Figure 12
There has been very little movement in the relative wage in the non-tradable sector

 overall and a decline in the other tradable sector. This has been a key mechanism

 facilitating the sectoral reallocation of labour: the sectors benefiting from

 output price increases – which can afford to pay the higher wage rate

 – draw labour away from other sectors.
It is important to note, however, that even though the adjustment to the
absolute
level of wages overall has been smaller than in previous

 terms of trade booms, such as the early 1970s energy boom (Figure 13),

 the adjustment in relative wages over the most recent boom has been substantial.

 This change in relative wages and the relatively modest adjustment in overall

 wages have been helped by the combination of well-anchored inflation expectations

 and a more flexible labour market, particularly in comparison to earlier terms

 of trade booms. During these earlier booms, inflation had been more variable

 and Australia's centralised wage-setting system had the effect of spreading

 wage increases across the economy, to occupational categories for which the

 value of marginal product had not increased. Not surprisingly then, the result

 was a rise in inflation and unemployment (Gruen 2006, Battellino 2010 and Banks

 2011). It is also important to note that at the beginning of the current boom,

 the unemployment rate was around 6 per cent, suggesting that there was some

 excess capacity in the labour market at the outset of the adjustment to the

 mining investment boom (this is another point of departure from the theory

 presented in
Section 2
, which assumes that the economy is

 in equilibrium prior to the boom). The need for relative wages to adjust may

 also have been lessened by adjustment in participation rates across different

 regions and the utilisation of skilled labour brought from offshore by the

 resource sector (for example,
via 457 visas)
.
Figure 13
Another aspect to flexibility is the geographic mobility of labour within Australia.

 Interstate migration has played a limited role in the adjustment to the resource

 boom so far. For example, Western Australia has recorded modest net inflows

 of residents from other states, which has added around 35,000 to its population

 in cumulative terms since the onset of the terms of trade boom. If a similar

 proportion of interstate migrants are employed as existing residents, then

 these interstate flows would have contributed less than one-tenth to total

 employment growth in Western Australia on average since the start of the resource

 boom, compared with a contribution of around one-half from net overseas

 migration.
[15]
To supplement these more permanent population shifts, many resource firms have been

 employing workers on a ‘fly-in-fly-out’ (FIFO) basis. Recently

 released data from the 2011 Census suggest that mining-focused areas such as

 the Pilbara in Western Australia and the Bowen Basin in Queensland have a much

 higher proportion of FIFO workers, and a much smaller share of permanent residents,

 than other townships (and capital cities) in
Australia.
[16]
The data suggest a little more than 30 per cent of all people in these ‘mining

 areas’ on Census night were FIFO workers, compared with about 15 per

 cent in 2006, and 4–5 per cent in other towns. Once the mining investment

 phase comes to an end, the utilisation of FIFO labour is likely to fall as

 labour demand in these areas declines. To the extent that much of the extra

 demand for labour in remote locations is temporary, an advantage of FIFO arrangements

 is that they can help limit the extent of housing and infrastructure required

 to service the workforce, and therefore reduce the extent of unused capacity

 when the boom ultimately passes.
3.2.5 Prices
Consumer price inflation has averaged around 2¾ per cent since the mid 2000s

 (Figure 14). This was higher than the average inflation rate in the preceding

 decade, of 2½ per cent, but within the official inflation target of
2–3 per cent
on average over the economic cycle. This has been

 a remarkable outcome, given the sheer magnitude of the shock to the terms of

 trade (and hence, incomes), and also relative to the higher inflation outcomes

 of previous terms of trade booms in Australia.
Figure 14
There have, however, been large shifts in relative consumer prices. Non-tradables

 inflation has been stronger throughout the period of the terms of trade boom,

 as higher domestic cost pressures have fed through to prices. Other factors

 less directly related to the mining investment boom have also contributed to

 higher non-tradables inflation in recent years. For example, utilities price

 inflation picked up significantly from 2007, reflecting the move towards cost-based

 pricing, the replacement and expansion of infrastructure to meet demand, and

 rising input costs (Plumb and Davis 2010). Productivity growth has also slowed

 since the early 2000s.
At the same time, the higher exchange rate contributed to a noticeable decline in

 tradables inflation. These developments imply that the ratio of non-tradable

 to tradable prices rose much more rapidly after 2003 compared to the trend

 of the previous two decades

 (Figure 15).
[17]
This earlier underlying trend reflects the
Balassa-Samuelson
effect (that is, productivity tends to rise more rapidly

 in the tradable sector than the non-tradable sector, so even though wages will

 tend to be equalised across sectors over the longer run, unit labour costs

 will rise more rapidly in the non-tradable

 sector).
[18]
The fact that the ratio of non-tradable prices to tradable prices has risen

 faster than this earlier trend is consistent with the theory outlined in
Section 2
.
Figure 15
3.2.6 Interest rates
Interest rates rose over the first part of the mining boom, from a bit below to a

 bit above their average over the post-1996 period (Figure 16). In part

 this increase was due to an increase in the cash rate in light of inflationary

 pressures building on the back of the boom in the resource sector, as well

 as reflecting the increasing return to capital in Australia at that time; thereafter,

 interest rates declined sharply in response to the global financial crisis.

 There has been considerably less adjustment of interest rates in the current

 episode, however, relative to earlier commodity price booms; for example, the

 energy boom in the late 1970s/early 1980s, which was smaller than the current

 resource boom. One reason is that the flexible exchange rate provides a considerable

 buffer against external shocks, such that less adjustment of interest rates

 is required to manage domestic monetary conditions. In other words, the flexible

 exchange rate has contributed to less volatility in interest rates (Figure

 17 and
Figure 18;
Debelle and Plumb 2006).
Figure 16
Figure 17
Figure 18
3.3 Phase III: Mining Production and Exports
3.3.1 Mining production and exports
The response of resource production and exports to an increase in prices is typically

 delayed, reflecting the time needed to plan, gain approval for, and reallocate

 scarce productive inputs to enable construction of new

 infrastructure.
[19]
For some commodities, there has already been a significant pick-up in output

 and exports. Since the onset of the terms of trade boom, the volume of iron

 ore extracted and exported has risen at an annual rate of 11¼ per cent,

 reflecting both capacity expansion and increased utilisation of existing capacity

 (Figure 19). LNG production has also risen strongly. Coal production has

 expanded, but at a broadly similar pace to its pre-boom average, reflecting

 a sluggish recovery in coal production from the floods in early 2011 and ongoing

 infrastructure bottlenecks and congestion along the coal production chain.
Figure 19
Given the significant expansions in capacity in the resource sector over recent years,

 and the lag between investment and the corresponding output, the production

 phase of the resource boom is expected to gather momentum over the next couple

 of years.
[20]
In its projections published in July 2012, the Bureau of Resources and Energy

 Economics anticipated strong growth in iron ore and coal exports over the next

 half decade, of around 9–10 per cent per year

 (Figure 19).
[21]
Growth in exports of LNG is expected to be even stronger, and this could see

 Australia emerge as the second largest global supplier of LNG in coming years

 (Jacobs 2011). Of course, with the terms of trade forecast to trend lower over

 time, it is likely that the growth in the
value
of these exports will

 be less than the growth in the volumes.
The strong growth in production and exports of these commodities over recent years

 has been offset, to a large extent, by weaker performance in other resource

 commodities. Most notably, oil production peaked in 2000, and since then has

 fallen by around 45 per cent as a result of the exhaustion of several of Australia's

 major oil basins. The extraction of other ores – such as bauxite, copper,

 gold, lead, nickel and zinc – has also declined in volumes terms over

 the past decade as has the export volume of processed metals (Connolly and

 Orsmond 2011).
Reflecting these offsetting developments, the volume of Australia's total resource

 exports has risen at an annual rate of 3 ½ per cent over the course

 of the terms of trade boom (Table 1; Figure 20). This is a notable slowing

 from its 1993–2003 average of 5½ per cent, notwithstanding a more

 than doubling of the capital stock and employment in the resource extraction

 sector. However, the volume of Australia's resource exports is expected

 to increase at a faster pace in coming years.
Figure 20
3.3.2 Non-resource exports
The high level of the exchange rate and the impact of the global financial crisis

 on external demand have weighed on exports of non-resource goods and services.

 Exports of manufactured products from Australia remain well below their 2008

 peak, even though the volume of global trade has surpassed its 2008 level (Figure 21).

 In particular, some of Australia's more traditional manufacturing export

 sectors, such as construction materials and road vehicles, are well down on

 their earlier levels. That said, there has been growth in some categories of

 manufactured exports, including specialised industrial machinery and professional

 and
scientific instruments
(Lowe 2012).
Figure 21
Exports of services have also declined significantly over the past 3–4 years

 – reflecting the ongoing high level of the exchange rate and the tightening

 of conditions for obtaining student visas – though there are tentative

 signs that the volume of service exports has stabilised recently. In contrast

 to the softness in manufactured and services exports over recent years, rural

 exports have grown strongly, helped by improved rainfall and relatively high

 prices for many rural commodities.
The relatively strong growth in Asia is clearly evident in the shares of Australian

 exports by destination. In 2011, Asian economies (excluding Japan) accounted

 for half of Australia's rural exports, compared to around one-third in

 2000, and over 30 per cent of manufactured exports

 (Figure 22).
[22]
The share of Australia's services exports to non-Japan Asia has also increased,

 underpinned by strong growth in exports of education services. Also, short-term

 arrivals from China have been increasing rapidly – by around 13 per cent

 per annum over the
past five years
to be the second most important source of short-term

 arrivals (after New Zealand).
Figure 22
3.4 Beyond the Resource Investment Boom
At this stage the economy is only part of the way through the current mining boom.

 The phase of rapidly increasing commodity prices has, by all indications, now

 passed. The economy is still in the midst of the boom in resource investment,

 and although this investment is still expected to rise from here, prospects

 are that it will peak sometime in the next year or so. So it is important to

 consider how the broader economy might evolve as the resource sector transitions

 from the investment phase to the production phase of the boom.
The stylised framework of
Section 2
can help us think about the evolution of the economy

 as the mining boom moves through the investment phase to the production phase.

 An efficient, forward-looking exchange rate market should already have factored

 in the expected decline in commodity prices associated with the gradual increase

 in global supply. As
Section 2
suggested, in theory, some

 expected exchange rate depreciation may reflect any interest rate differential

 along the adjustment path following the initial positive shock to the terms

 of trade. However, changes in the terms of trade are difficult to anticipate

 with certainty. To the extent commodity prices and the terms of trade decline

 by more than anticipated, this would be expected to lead to a depreciation

 of the exchange rate as the demand for capital and imported inputs recedes.

 Even if this were not the case, with the mining production phase less labour

 intensive than mining investment, this should free up some labour in the resource

 sector to move back into the other tradable and non-tradable sectors, and be

 accompanied by a reduction in wages in the resource sector, at least relative

 to other sectors. This could lead to a reduction in domestically sourced cost

 pressures, although these will be offset to some extent by greater imported

 cost pressures arising from any exchange rate depreciation. While the reduction

 in demand for labour and capital in the resource sector frees up resources

 for the other tradable and non-tradable sectors, any depreciation of the exchange

 rate will also provide stimulus to the other tradable sector by improving its

 international competitiveness.
In terms of how this translates to recent and expected developments in the Australian

 economy, we have already witnessed a decline in the terms of trade, which up

 to June 2012 had decreased by around 9 per cent from the peak in September

 2011. Subsequent sharp falls in the spot prices for iron ore and coking coal,

 to the extent that they are sustained, would lead the terms of trade to fall

 further than had earlier been expected.
Looking ahead, current forecasts suggest that the terms of trade will remain high

 in comparison to pre-boom levels. While it is impossible to be precise about

 the magnitude or the timing of near-term movements in commodity prices, this

 assumption seems reasonable on the grounds that industrialisation and urbanisation

 in China still has some way to run. For example, some estimates suggest that

 Chinese demand for steel used in residential construction will not peak until

 2024 (Berkelmans and Wang 2012) – and countries such as India, Indonesia

 and Vietnam continue to develop. From Australia's perspective, there has

 been a large positive global demand shock in the resource sector over recent

 years that is likely to persist over the medium term.
However, while the terms of trade have declined from their peak in late 2011, the

 Australian dollar remains at a high level by historical standards, with the

 nominal trade-weighted index only a little below the multi-decade high recorded

 in early March 2012. One interpretation is that the recent decline in the terms

 of trade from their peak was anticipated and therefore already ‘priced

 in’ to the level of the exchange rate, but this ignores the unanticipated

 deterioration in the global economic outlook, fragile global financial sentiment

 and the speed of the decline in key commodity prices over this period. Ongoing

 strong foreign demand for
Commonwealth Government
Securities (CGS) is also likely to have been

 a factor supporting the Australian dollar. To the extent that the nominal exchange

 rate does not depreciate in line with unanticipated declines in commodity prices

 and the terms of trade, this will affect the adjustment in other sectors of

 the economy, particularly in the other tradable sector. Industries that have

 been most adversely affected by the high exchange rate, such as non-resource

 manufacturing, tourism and education, would also be the industries that would

 benefit most from any depreciation of the exchange rate.
If the resource investment profile described above is realised, then overall demand

 for labour in the resource sector may begin to ease at some point. So while

 employment and wage growth in the resource sector is presently robust, it is

 possible that this may start to reverse in the next couple of years. This suggests

 that some of the inflationary pressures in the non-tradable sector could moderate.

 Conversely, inflationary pressures in the tradable sector will be generated

 by any depreciation of the exchange rate, although it can take some time for

 currency movements to be reflected fully in the prices of imported consumer

 goods and services (Chung, Kohler and Lewis 2011).
Looking even further ahead, as Asian economies continue to develop and incomes rise,

 history suggests that demand will broaden beyond resources to other goods and

 services. For example, rising income per capita is typically associated with

 an increased share of consumption being directed towards services (Kuznets

 1973). Given the population of developing Asia, the Asian market is large and

 is expected to get much larger still; by 2020, more than half the world's

 ‘middle class’ could be in Asia (Kharas 2010). From Australia's

 perspective, this could result in rising Asian demand for industries such as

 tourism, education, financial and other professional services, food and agribusiness,

 and specialised manufacturing, particularly related to agriculture and mining.

 As noted above, there is some evidence that this is already occurring.
Another important feature of emerging Asian economies that will have implications

 for Australia is the continued development and integration of Asian financial

 markets. While the economies of Asia are highly integrated into the global

 trading system for goods and services, this is less true of financial systems

 in general
across Asia
(Lowe 2009). For example, private gross cross-border capital

 flows as a share of GDP have typically been much smaller in emerging Asia compared

 to developed economies. Even though saving ratios have been higher than investment

 ratios in emerging Asia in recent years – particularly in China –

 these ‘excess savings’ have predominantly been channelled to the

 rest of the world by the public sector in the form of authorities such as central

 banks buying foreign assets. While investment in Australia from emerging Asian

 economies has grown in recent years, it still represents only a small share

 of total foreign investment in Australia. For example, Chinese investment in

 Australia has increased rapidly since the mid 2000s – driven by strong

 foreign direct investment, particularly in the Australian resource sector –

 but still represented only 1 per cent of total foreign investment in Australia

 at the end of 2011 (US investment in Australia was 27 per cent of the total).
4. Conclusion
Strong growth in Asia will continue to provide significant benefits for the Australian

 economy. Most notable so far has been the boom in the resource sector. This

 boom has three overlapping phases. The first has seen commodity prices and

 hence Australia's terms of trade rising significantly over a period of

 a number of years. This has been accompanied by a sizeable appreciation of

 the exchange rate. The phase of strongly rising commodity prices appears to

 have passed, with the terms of trade having peaked late last year, although

 they remain at a high level historically. The second phase of investment in

 the resource sector has been in progress for some years and still has some

 way to run, with resource investment expected to peak as a share of GDP sometime

 over the course of the next year or so. The third phase of increased production

 and export of resources has also commenced but has much further to run, especially

 in the case of LNG, for which investment takes place over a number of years

 before production comes on stream.
The pattern of structural adjustment to this positive shock to the terms of trade

 has, to date, proceeded broadly in line with that suggested by a simple theoretical

 model that distinguishes between three sectors: resource; other tradables;

 and non-tradables. In particular, relative wages and prices have adjusted in

 a way that has facilitated the reallocation of productive resources towards

 the resource sector. While not all parts of the economy have benefited equally,

 the process of structural adjustment has occurred relatively smoothly overall;

 output has grown at close to trend rates, unemployment has remained relatively

 low and inflation has been close to target. This stands in stark contrast to

 some earlier episodes of commodity price booms in Australia. One critical element

 to the adjustment this time around has been the timely appreciation of the

 exchange rate as the terms of trade consistently exceeded earlier expectations.

 The adjustment has also been helped by the anchoring of inflation expectations

 and the operation of the labour market, whereby wage pressures in industries

 or regions experiencing strong conditions associated with the boom in resource

 investment have not spilled over to parts of the economy experiencing weaker

 conditions.
Much of the employment growth in the resource sector over recent years has been driven

 by the relatively more labour intensive resource-related activities associated

 with resource investment. Once resource investment peaks, this suggests that

 demand for labour in the resource sector could decline and the contribution

 of resource investment to output growth will turn around. Part of this will

 be replaced by strong production and export of resources. The extent to which

 a pick-up in other activity requires a shift in relative prices, including

 through the exchange rate, remains to be seen.
Looking further ahead, there will come a time when the demand for commodities will

 ease as development of economies in the Asian region proceeds and the focus

 of consumption shifts away from goods and towards services. Such a transformation

 might appear to be disadvantageous for economies such as Australia that have

 hitherto been focused on supplying these economies with commodities. However,

 some Australian service industries, such as education, and parts of the rural

 sector have already experienced a significant increase in demand from Asia,

 notwithstanding the high level of the exchange rate. Rising demand for household,

 business and financial services more generally in this large part of the global

 economy is relatively advantageous for the Australian economy, in part because

 it is closer to this region than it is to most advanced economies, but also

 because of its well-developed and relatively open services sector.
Appendix A: Adjustment Under a Fixed Exchange Rate Regime
In a fixed exchange rate regime, the real exchange rate appreciation that is the

 key part of the adjustment to a rise in the terms of trade must occur via

 higher overall wage and, therefore, price inflation. With no change in the

 nominal exchange rate, wages need to rise to force labour to move away from

 the other tradable sector and into the resource and non-tradable sectors.

 Relative wages across sectors can still adjust though as per the flexible

 exchange rate regime case. Higher wages in the non-tradable sector imply

 higher non-tradable prices, with no offset to demand for non-tradable goods

 and services coming from lower tradable prices.
Interest rates are fixed to those prevailing in the rest of the world in the fixed

 exchange rate regime, if we assume that capital markets are closely integrated

 (although this was not true during the 1950s Korean War wool boom episode).
Following the peak in demand for labour during the course of the investment boom,

 the economy is left with a difficult adjustment because it takes time for

 the rise in wages to be unwound (assuming that wages are sticky downwards).

 This implies a period of unemployment to put downward pressure on wages in

 Australian dollar terms.
Australia's earlier experience of terms of trade booms under a fixed exchange

 rate regime broadly followed this story (Gruen 2006, Battellino 2010 and

 Banks 2011). Under the fixed exchange rate regime, the relationship between

 the terms of trade and the nominal exchange rate was nowhere near as close,

 although the trends over a long horizon were similar. The authorities tried

 to accommodate terms of trade shocks by occasional realignments of the exchange

 rate. But, invariably, these were too little and too late. Thus, the nominal

 exchange rate did not act as a sufficient buffer against the swings in the

 terms of trade. To illustrate, consider the terms of trade boom associated

 with the Korean War wool boom. The terms of trade almost tripled over the

 period 1943/44–1950/51, underpinned by an increase in the price of

 wool exports resulting from the Korean war (wool accounted for about half

 of export revenues in the late

 1940s).
[23]
After peaking in 1950/51, wool prices fell sharply and continued to trend

 lower up until the early 1970s. In addition, mining and agriculture export

 prices both experienced a sharp increase and subsequent collapse, broadly

 in line with the wool price cycle.
This run-up in the prices of wool and other commodities provided a significant boost

 to national income, which in turn led to an expansion in aggregate demand.

 In a flexible exchange rate regime, the nominal exchange rate would generally

 be expected to appreciate in such an environment, but this was not the institutional

 framework in place at the time. Instead, the Australian dollar remained pegged

 to the British pound sterling, which had been
devalued
relative to the US dollar twice in the 1940s; by 14 per

 cent at the start of World War II and by
30 per cent
in September 1949. Without the stabilising effect provided

 by a nominal exchange rate appreciation, the outcome was a marked pick-up

 in inflation, which peaked in 1950/51 in excess of 20 per cent; the highest

 annual rate of inflation recorded in the 20th century
(Figure

 A1).
[24]
Figure A1
The labour market institutions in place in the 1940s and early 1950s, which were

 built around a federal ‘basic wage’ and the idea of comparative

 wage justice, contributed to this inflationary pressure. The federal minimum

 wage, which was indexed to inflation, was raised by 20 per cent in both 1950

 and 1951. This system of wage setting not only muddied the price signals

 needed to reallocate resources across the economy, but also contributed to

 higher overall inflation via a ‘wage-price

 spiral’.
[25]
With the nominal exchange rate unchanged, this pick-up in inflation meant that the

 adjustment to the higher terms of trade came about through real appreciation;

 on a real trade-weighted basis, the exchange rate appreciated by about 25

 per cent between 1950 and 1953 (Figure 1). This reduced the competitiveness

 of the exporting and import competing sectors and facilitated the reallocation

 of factors of production. The high level of the real exchange rate persisted

 for around a decade after the collapse in the terms of trade. Some commentators

 have postulated that the real exchange rate may have been at a disequilibrium

 level over the 1950s, persistently overvalued because domestic costs were

 sticky downwards and the nominal exchange rate was fixed (McKenzie

 1986).
[26]
This serves to highlight the important stabilising role that a flexible exchange

 rate can play during an upswing and a subsequent downswing in the terms of

 trade.
When the terms of trade fell by more than 35 per cent in 1951/52, the decline in

 incomes was associated with a slowing in real GDP growth in that year and

 a contraction in the economy in the year after. The unemployment rate also

 moved higher, albeit remaining at low levels overall. Nevertheless, the impact

 of the terms of trade collapse on economic growth appeared to be short-lived.

 The collapse of export prices and the associated contraction in output also

 resulted in a significant moderation in inflation (Figure A1).
How does this experience compare to the current episode? Inflation in consumer prices

 has remained within the official target, on average, and growth has remained

 not far from trend. Unemployment has remained generally low and stable, aside

 from the modest increase during global financial crisis. The key difference

 this time around is that the nominal exchange rate has been free to appreciate,

 and nominal wages free to adjust at different rates in different sectors

 of the economy. This is despite the current terms of trade boom being more

 persistent, having already lasted far longer than the Korean war episode,

 which implies the need for some comparatively larger structural adjustments

 to the economy.
Another key difference between the early 1950s terms of trade boom and current boom

 is the ownership structure of the resource sector (or, in the case of the

 1950s boom, the agricultural sector). The proceeds from the Korean war boom

 accrued predominantly to Australian farmers. In contrast, a large share of

 the proceeds from the current terms of trade boom accrue to foreign-owned

 mining companies which, if they are not reinvested, are not likely to be

 spent on Australian goods and services.
Appendix B: Data
Table B1 presents the import penetration ratio and export propensity for each of

 the 19 ABS industry divisions in 2007/08.
Table B1: Sector Definitions and Trade Exposure
2007/08, per cent
Import
penetration
1
Export
propensity
2
Mining
16½
50¾
Other tradable sector
24
19¼
Agriculture, forestry & fishing
2
13¼
Manufacturing
32½
22
Accommodation & food services
8¼
10½
Transport, postal & warehousing
9
18
Non-tradable sector
1½
2¼
Electricity, gas, water and waste
0
¼
Construction
0
¼
Wholesale trade
0
9
Retail trade
0
2¾
Information, media & telecommunications
8
2¾
Finance & insurance
1¼
1
Rental, hiring & real estate
1¾
¾
Professional, scientific & technical
3¼
4½
Administrative & support services
1½
1¾
Public administration & safety
0
¼
Education & training
2¾
8
Health care & social assistance
¾
½
Arts & recreation services
3
4
Other services
¼
¼
Total
10
10
1 Import penetration equals competing imports (indirectly allocated) as

 a share of the total supply of the corresponding domestic industry.
2 Export propensity equals exports as a share of total production

 in each industry.
Sources: ABS; RBA
Endnotes
This paper was prepared by James Bishop, Christopher Kent and Michael Plumb for the
Structural Change and the Rise of Asia
Conference, jointly hosted by the International Monetary Fund, the Australian Treasury

 and the Reserve Bank of Australia in Canberra. Views expressed in this paper

 are those of the authors and not necessarily those of the Reserve Bank.
[*]
The purchasing power of the average wage is calculated by deflating average weekly

 earnings by the household final consumption deflator.
[1]
See, for example, Berkelmans and Wang (2012).
[2]
As Gregory (2011) has noted, the other purpose of these models was to increase understanding

 of the potential effects of two policy instruments that had not generally

 been used in Australia – a large across-the-board tariff cut and changes

 in the nominal exchange rate.
[3]
The theory of uncovered interest parity (UIP), which connects expected changes in

 the exchange rate to interest differentials, is central to many international

 macroeconomic models. Yet empirically, UIP is consistently found not to hold

 (for a survey, see Engel 1996).
[4]
Measuring resource extraction activity is relatively straightforward: it simply adds

 Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) data on the ‘mining’ industry

 to the relevant subdivisions of the ‘manufacturing’ industry.

 Measuring resource-related activity is more complex. The approach followed

 in this paper is to use the input-output tables produced by the ABS. These

 tables document the average share of inputs used by a given industry that

 come from every other industry (and equivalently the share of an industry's

 output that is used by every other industry). These tables make it possible

 to identify those industries that supply inputs into the
resource sector (including
for resource investment). A detailed description

 of this methodology, and its limitations, is provided in Rayner and Bishop

 (forthcoming).
[5]
Agriculture, manufacturing and transport activity that has been attributed to the
resource sector
(as inputs into resource production and investment) is subtracted from the non-resource

 tradable sector. Similarly for non-tradables. Due to data limitations, accommodation

 & food services is included in the non-tradable sector for gross value

 added and employment.
[6]
More precisely, an industry is classified as ‘tradable’ if at least 10

 per cent of its total
production
is exported, or if at least 10 per cent of its total
supply
is made up of competing imports.
[7]
This is up to the June quarter of 2012. Other things equal, subsequent declines in

 spot prices for iron ore and coking coal would, if sustained, see the terms

 of trade fall further over the
next few quarters
.
[8]
This adjustment to real GDP for changes in the terms of trade is based on the published

 measure of real gross domestic income (real GDI). Due to the high share of

 foreign ownership of the mining sector, it may also be appropriate to adjust

 for the income flows that accrue to foreigners (such as by using real gross

 national income (real GNI) in place of real GDI). However, as noted by
Gregory (2011),
the ABS estimate of ‘real incomes payable and

 receivable from the rest of the world’ is not a suitable measure for

 these purposes.
[9]
See Blundell-Wignall and Gregory (1990), Gruen and Wilkinson (1994) and Debelle and
Plumb (2006)
for a discussion of episodes following the floating of the Australian dollar in 1983.
[10]
Since then, in the context of sharp declines in the spot prices for iron ore and

 coking coal, a number of mining companies have signalled their intention

 to delay final decisions regarding investment projects under consideration,

 or review projects for which they had earlier made commitments to proceed.

 It is beyond the scope of this paper to consider the implications of these

 developments for the forecasts of mining investment and production. Of course,

 this sort of uncertainty is relevant to the question of the role of the exchange

 rate in adjusting to terms of trade shocks.
[11]
These estimates for employment assume that the productivity of a worker will be the

 same if they supply their labour to the resource or non-resource sectors

 of the economy (see Rayner and
Bishop (forthcoming))
.
[12]
This structural trend is particularly evident for manufacturing, whose share of employment

 fell from one-quarter in the 1960s to less than one-tenth in 2011.
[13]
Relative wages in construction and professional services have increased strongly

 since 2004. However, these data mask potentially stronger growth in mining

 construction and mining services and relatively weaker outcomes in construction

 and services not exposed to mining. This is consistent with the Bank's

 liaison.
[14]
The aggregate rate of interstate migration in Australia – calculated as gross

 interstate flows scaled to the population – has also been in decline

 since the early 2000s.
[15]
While the Census does not identify FIFO workers specifically, we have assumed that

 all ‘visitors’ to a given area on Census night aged 25–54

 years are FIFO labour, as in most regions only about
5 per cent
of the total counted on Census night are visitors. A ‘visitor’ is any

 person who indicates that they are a visitor from another area on their Census

 form. This methodology clearly overstates the number of such workers present

 on Census night, in both mining areas and elsewhere, but is likely to provide

 a reasonable indicator. Note that these ‘mining areas’ are not

 tourist areas, and are defined to include the following statistical areas:

 the Pilbara (in Western Australia),
Bowen Basin North
(in Queensland) and Isaac (in Queensland). We have

 excluded the
Hunter Valley (in New
South Wales), which has a similar visitor-to-population

 ratio to the broader population, and liaison contacts and other sources indicate

 there is minimal FIFO in this region. Note also that FIFO workers not at

 their place of work on Census night are not captured in this measure.
[16]
The picture is similar if utility prices are excluded from the calculation.
[17]
See Balassa (1964) and Samuelson (1964).
[18]
Indeed, these delays are one reason why world prices had remained high.
[19]
The Productivity Commission (2008) estimate that the average lag between the time

 of initial commencement of new mining projects and the time it takes output

 from those projects to approach normal capacity to be between two and three

 years.
[20]
The BREE projections for 2012 and 2013 were updated on 18 September 2012, with minor

 downward revisions to these export volumes in 2012 and 2013.
[21]
In this section, Asian economies include China, India, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Korea,

 Malaysia, the Philippines, Singapore, Taiwan, Thailand and Vietnam.
[22]
The Korean war itself stretched between June 1950 and July 1953, but we include the

 run-up in the late 1940s in the phrase ‘Korean war episode’.
[23]
Another factor contributing to inflation over this period was the gradual removal

 of the price controls that had been put into place during the Second World

 War.
[24]
Automatic indexation of the basic wage was abandoned in 1953, and a system of national

 wage cases was substituted that took account, in some unspecified mix, of

 a range of economic and industrial relations factors.
[25]
Another explanation for the high real exchange rate is a broad concurrent upsurge

 in foreign direct investment in import-competing manufacturing. The stringent

 import licensing measures introduced in 1952 and lasting until 1960 may have

 served to counter the effect of real exchange rate overvaluation on the trade

 account.
[26]
References
Balassa B (1964), ‘The Purchasing Power Parity Doctrine: A Reappraisal’,
Journal of Political Economy
, 72,
pp 584–596
.
Banks G (2011), ‘Australia's Mining Boom: What's the Problem?’,

 Paper presented to the Melbourne Institute and
The Australian
Economic and Social Outlook Conference 2011 ‘Growth

 Challenge: Riding the Resources Boom to Lasting Prosperity’, Melbourne,

 30 June–1 July.
Battellino R (2010), ‘
Mining Booms and the Australian Economy
’,

 RBA
Bulletin
, March, pp 63–69.
Berkelmans L and H Wang (2012), ‘
Chinese Urban Residential Construction to 2040
’,

 RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2012-04.
Blundell-Wignall A and R Gregory (1990), ‘Exchange Rate Policy in Advanced

 Commodity-Exporting Countries: The Case of Australia and New Zealand’,

 OECD Economics Department Working Papers No 83.
Chung E, M Kohler and C Lewis (2011), ‘
The Exchange Rate and Consumer Prices
’,

 RBA
Bulletin
, September,
pp 9–16
.
Connolly E and Orsmond D (2011), ‘
The Mining Industry: From Bust to Boom
’,

 RBA Research Discussion
Paper No 2011-08
.
Corden WM (1982), ‘Exchange Rate Policy and the Resources Boom’,
Economic Record
, 58(1), pp 18–31.
Corden WM (1984), ‘Booming Sector and Dutch Disease Economics: Survey and Consolidation’,
Oxford Economic Papers
, 36(3), pp 359–380.
Corden WM and JP Neary (1982), ‘Booming Sector and De-industrialisation in

 a Small Open Economy’,
The Economic Journal
, 92(368), pp 825–848.
D'Arcy P and L Gustafsson (2012), ‘
Australia's Productivity Performance and Real Incomes
’,

 RBA
Bulletin
, June,
pp 23–36
.
Debelle G and M Plumb (2006), ‘The Evolution of Exchange Rate Policy and Capital

 Controls in Australia’,
Asian Economic Papers
, MIT Press, 5(2), pp 7–29.
Dwyer J and C Groeger (1994), ‘
Resource Flows to the Traded Goods Sector
’,

 RBA Research Discussion
Paper No 9401
.
Engel C (1996), ‘The Forward Discount Anomaly and the Risk Premium: a Survey

 of Recent Evidence’,
Journal of Empirical Finance
, 3(2), pp 123–192.
Gillitzer C and J Kearns (2005), ‘
Long-term Patterns in Australia's Terms of Trade
’,

 RBA Research Discussion
Paper No 2005-01
.
Gregory RG (1976), ‘Some Implications of the Growth of the Mineral Sector’,
The Australian Journal of Agricultural Economics
, 20(2), pp 71–91.
Gregory R (2011), ‘Living Standards, Terms of Trade and Foreign Ownership:

 Reflections on the Australian Mining Boom’, The Australian National

 University Discussion Paper No 656.
Gruen D and J Wilkinson (1994), ‘Australia's Real Exchange Rate –

 Is it explained by the Terms of Trade or by Real Interest Differentials’,
Economic Record
, 70(209), pp 204–219.
Gruen D (2006), ‘A Tale of Two Terms-of-Trade Booms’, Address to Australian

 Industry Group's Economy 2006 Forum, Melbourne, 1 March.
Gruen D (2011), ‘The Resources Boom and Structural Change in the Australian

 Economy’, Address to the Committee for Economic Development of Australia

 Economic and Political Overview, Melbourne, 24 February.
Henry K (2006), ‘Implications of China's Re-emergence for the Fiscal and

 Economic Outlook’, Address to the Australian Business Economists, Sydney,

 16 May.
Henry K (2008), ‘Revisiting the Policy Requirements of the Terms-of-Trade Boom’,

 Address to the Australian Business Economists, Sydney, 20 May.
Jacobs D (2011), ‘
The Global Market for Liquefied Natural Gas
’,

 RBA
Bulletin
, September, pp 17–28.
Kharas H (2010), ‘The Emerging Middle Class in Developing Countries’,

 OECD Development Centre W Working Paper No 285.
Kuznets S (1973), ‘Modern Economic Growth: Findings and Reflections’,
The American Economic Review
, 63(3), pp 247–258.
Lowe P (2009), ‘The Development and Resilience of Financial Systems in Asia’,

 Remarks at In the Zone Conference, University of Western Australia, 7 November.
Lowe P (2012), ‘
The Changing Structure of the Australian Economy and Monetary Policy
’,

 Address to the Australian Industry Group 12th Annual Economic Forum, Sydney,

 7 March.
McKenzie I (1986), ‘Australia's Real Exchange Rate during the Twentieth

 Century’,
The Economic Record
, Supplement, pp 69–78.
Plumb M and K Davis (2010), ‘
Developments in Utilities Prices
’,

 RBA
Bulletin
, December, pp 9–18.
Productivity Commission (2008), ‘Productivity in the Mining Industry: Measurement

 and Interpretation’, Working Paper, December.
Rayner V and J Bishop (forthcoming), ‘Measuring the Resource Economy’,

 RBA Research Discussion Paper.
Reserve Bank of Australia (2005), ‘
Commodity Prices and the Terms of Trade
’,

 RBA
Bulletin
, April, pp 1–7.
Salter WEG (1959), ‘Internal and External Balance: The Role of Price and Expenditure

 Effects’,
Economic Record
, 35(71), August, pp 226–238.
Samuelson P (1964), ‘Theoretical Notes on Trade Problems’,
Review of Economics and Statistics
, 23, pp 1–60.
Stevens G (2010), ‘
The Challenge of Prosperity
’,

 Address to the Committee for Economic Development of Australia (CEDA) Annual

 Dinner, Melbourne, 29 November.
Stevens G (2012), ‘
The Glass Half Full
’,

 Address to the American Chamber of Commerce (SA) AMCHAM Internode Business

 Lunch, Adelaide, 8 June.
Swan TW (1960), ‘Economic Control in a Dependent Economy’,
Economic Record
, 36(73), March, pp 51–66.
