BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Macroprudential Policy: A Suite of Tools or a State of Mind? – Sydney
DATE: 11/10/2012
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2012/sp-so-111012.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Macroprudential Policy: A Suite of Tools or a State of Mind?
Luci Ellis
[
*
]
Head of Financial Stability Department
Paul Woolley Centre for the Study of Capital Market Dysfunctionality Annual Conference
Sydney
–
11 October 2012
Audio
16.03
MB
regulation
I would like to thank the Paul Woolley Centre for inviting me back to speak to this
 conference. I am particularly grateful to have the opportunity to do so in
 a session chaired by Ian Macfarlane. Ian was instrumental in setting
 the tone for the way we at the Bank think about financial stability policy
 today. His example helped us take the historical insights of authors like
 Charles Kindleberger and transform them into a practical approach to analysis.
The financial crisis has spurred a huge, multifaceted regulatory response. I know
 Jim Murphy is going to talk about some of the reforms that have actually happened
 or are in train. I would like to talk about just one element of that response:
 the calls for a so-called ‘macroprudential policy framework’.
 Development of such a framework is at a rather early stage, but it's attracting
 a lot of attention and energy. For example, following their meeting in Seoul
 in late 2010, G-20 Leaders called on international agencies to do more work
 on the subject, which they have
 done.
[1]
But what is a macroprudential policy framework? Is it separate from financial stability
 policy? Does Australia really need a whole new framework?
As background for the IMF's recent Financial Sector Assessment Program review
 of Australia, APRA and the Bank prepared a paper on how we think about financial
 stability policy and its macroprudential dimension. In essence, we see ‘macroprudential’
 policy as being subsumed within the broader policy framework for promoting
 financial stability. That seems to be something of a minority view internationally.
 So we published the paper last month, after the IMF visits had concluded,
 to put our take on this subject into the public
 domain.
[2]
Today I would like to give a little more detail about our thinking on the issue of
 macroprudential frameworks, as set out in that joint paper. After giving a
 brief history of the term ‘macroprudential’, I will organise my
 remarks around three assertions, which are consciously intended to be a little
 more sceptical about the idea that a whole new framework is needed than some
 international commentary has been. In doing so, I hope to provide a bit
 more clarity about the international policy debate.
First,
macroprudential policy is only a subset of the policies intended to enhance financial stability
.
 For a start, it is not really designed for managing crises when they do occur.
 It does no good to muddy the waters by claiming things as macroprudential
 for the sake of it.
Second,
most supposedly macroprudential policy tools are in fact the usual prudential tools
long used by ostensibly ‘micro’ prudential supervisors. What is ‘new’
 is the motivation behind their use. Even that is not particularly new in many
 countries, including Australia.
Third,
the build-up to the recent crisis resulted more from a microprudential failure than a macroprudential one
.
 The easing in US mortgage lending standards, the growing reliance on short-term
 wholesale funding, the low risk weights applied to complex and highly leveraged
 structured securities were all things that an avowedly microprudential supervisor
 could have – and arguably should have – noticed and responded
 to.
Certainly, a more holistic, or system-wide, perspective could help supervisors see
 if risks are building up. This could happen because many individual institutions
 are doing the same risky things. Or it could happen because particular risks
 have become concentrated in a few institutions. But that macro perspective
 does not necessarily require a whole new institutional or policy framework
 for regulation. It possibly might not even require new policy tools. I would
 argue that macroprudential policy is indeed more of a state of mind than a
 suite of tools. I think it would be a mistake if a focus on macroprudential
 frameworks were to occur at the expense of much-needed reforms to normal prudential
 policy arrangements, both at the international level and in some of the jurisdictions
 overseas where the crisis began.
It would also be a pity if a false dichotomy between macroprudential and microprudential
 supervision were to be drawn. The two perspectives do not need to be pitted
 against each other. They can both be parts of one, holistic, view of financial
 regulation and supervision, which is how we see it in Australia.
What is Macroprudential Policy?
The term ‘macroprudential’ first appeared in internal documents of the
 precursor to the Basel Committee in the late
 1970s.
[3]
The BIS and others started using it publicly by the mid 1980s. It isn't a new
 term; neither are the concerns behind it. The underlying idea was that prudential
 supervisors should take a system-wide view in the way they supervise. They
 should recognise that the actions of individual firms can collectively generate
 systemic risk, even if those actions are individually rational. They should
 recognise that risk can build over time, and that the distribution of risk
 can matter. And according to this view, they should avoid focusing narrowly
 on the safety of individual institutions without regard to the feedback from
 those institutions' behaviour to the wider system.
So the original idea behind ‘macroprudential’ policy was a sensible one.
 It was about how prudential supervisors should do their job and the perspectives
 they should have. The policy tools are the tools of prudential regulation
 and supervision. I would go as far to say that what others think of as macroprudential
 supervision, the Australian authorities consider simply to be competent supervision.
Not all Financial Stability Policies are Macroprudential
Not every policy that helps financial stability can be reasonably labelled macroprudential.
 It would be needlessly confusing to shovel everything into that category.
 Why not just call it financial stability policy, after all? For example, central
 banks' provision of liquidity to the market is as old as central banking
 itself. It is clearly helpful for financial stability, both before and during
 a crisis. But is it macroprudential? I have heard some claim so, but I don't
 see it that way.
We should also remember that not every policy that helps financial stability was
 necessarily enacted with that purpose in mind. Sometimes, policies are worthwhile
 for completely different reasons, but happen to be helpful for financial stability
 as well. A good example of this is consumer protection regulation around the
 provision of credit. Consumers generally have less information and expertise
 in financial matters than the firms that lend to them. Regulators try to redress
 this imbalance in regulation. For example, they might specify what lenders
 must tell consumers about the loans they offer, or impose more general requirements
 that the loan product must be suitable for the borrower. This is seen as worthwhile
 because it prevents possibly vulnerable people from being ripped off or simply
 from unwittingly making a decision that is not in their interest.
A well-designed consumer protection regime can be very useful for financial stability,
 even though that is not its primary intention. Australia's National Consumer
 Credit Code requires that the lender must be able to show that the consumer
 can be reasonably expected to repay the loan from their own resources, without
 having to sell the collateral. (So did the state-level Uniform Consumer Credit
 Code that preceded it.) If not, the loan can be modified or even set aside
 by the courts. Lenders then have incentives to extend credit responsibly.
 They should especially want to avoid the asset-based lending and ‘no-doc’
 lending that caused so many problems in the United States in the lead-up to
 the crisis. It's no surprise that the US regulation was not uniform,
 and did not cover all borrowers.
Macroprudential Tools are Prudential Tools
As I mentioned before, the original idea behind macroprudential policy is that it
 is, in essence, prudential policy. Many of the so-called macroprudential tools
 currently being discussed in international forums are the usual tools available
 to a prudential supervisor – liquidity rules, risk weights, capital
 standards, large exposure limits and so on. They might be calibrated differently,
 and the reasons motivating their use might differ. It is in this sense that
 macroprudential policy seems new. But in most cases they are the same old
 policy tools, just as the original proponents at the BIS intended.
Part of the confusion in recent international discussions seems to lie in how some
 observers think prudential supervisors operate. It has become common for observers
 overseas to refer to bank supervisors like APRA as ‘microprudential’
 regulators. A distorted view of how supervisors do their work has arisen,
 one I consider quite unhelpful. The misconception is that supervisors charged
 with ensuring the safety and soundness of banks are thought incapable of looking
 beyond the individual bank they supervise. It's such a caricature of prudential
 supervisors that the best way I can think of to explain why it's a misconception
 is to show you a cartoon (Figure 1).
The view of some observers seems to be that a ‘microprudential’ supervisor
 is like this self-satisfied looking fellow, complete with a capital adequacy
 report on his desk. He is saying, ‘The bank I supervise is well capitalised,
 and that's all I have to care about!’
Figure 1: The Microprudential ‘Nutter’
Image: RetroClipArt/Shutterstock.com
It might well be that there are supervisors who think in this narrow way. But I labelled
 the cartoon as the ‘microprudential nutter’ because it reminds
 me so much of a concept popularised by Sir Mervyn King (King 1997). He made
 the point that even if a monetary policymaker cared only about inflation –
 an inflation ‘nutter’, as he put it – monetary policy would
 still respond to output, because output tells you something about future inflation.
 Likewise, any sensible prudential supervisor knows that the number one cause
 of bank failure is a systemic crisis, and that the safety of the bank they
 supervise depends on the environment around it. Even a microprudential ‘nutter’
 would look at the big picture. So I think a better cartoon version of a good
 prudential supervisor looks something like Figure 2.
Figure 2: ‘Holistic’ (Micro)prudential Analysis
Image: RetroClipArt/Shutterstock.com
It is in this sense that I would argue that macroprudential policy really is about
 the state of mind, not the suite of tools. The tools are already there. It
 is in how they are meant to be employed that the differences between micro
 and macro arise.
In fact, I would dispute that there is much different in macroprudential policy from
 supervision as it is currently practised in many
 countries.
[4]
Like the old joke about people discovering that all these years they had been writing
 prose, I suspect that a lot of bank supervisors are discovering that they
 are really macroprudential, and have been all along.
For this reason, I would caution against efforts to invent too many ‘new’
 and untried tools, particularly ones designed to be manipulated over the cycle,
 much like monetary policy. One such tool we've been hearing about from
 other jurisdictions lately is to set a cap on loan-to-valuation ratios (LVRs)
 for mortgages, and then vary that cap from time to time. Obviously it is prudent
 to have some sort of limit to the leverage in collateralised loans such as
 mortgages. The alternative would be the situation in the United Kingdom or
 the Netherlands, where one could borrow as much as 125 per cent
 of valuation and, more importantly, where many people actually did so, not
 just a small fringe. I don't think that is good practice. People need
 to provide some deposit when they buy a home. It protects them if something
 goes wrong for them, like a job loss or illness, especially if it happens
 at the same time that housing prices are falling.
The question is whether policymakers should go further and set maximum ratios well
 below 100 per cent, and whether that maximum should be varied periodically.
 This might be sensible for the jurisdictions that have adopted such a policy.
 For some of them, their exchange rate regimes constrain them from raising
 interest rates instead. But that is not relevant in Australia. I also have
 a number of conceptual reservations about an LVR cap. These lead me to question
 whether this kind of product regulation is a suitable prudential tool in the
 Australian environment.
The first issue is that this kind of policy is only relevant for home mortgages.
 Business lending can be more easily structured around such a restriction,
 especially the property development loans, which are particularly risky. And
 for unsecured lending, it's not even relevant. In any case, high LVR loans
 are still available to at least some borrowers in jurisdictions that set this
 cap. In Hong Kong, the excess over the cap is covered by the government-sponsored
 mortgage insurer. This is not so different from Australia's prudential
 framework, which requires higher risk weights on high LVR loans, especially
 those that are not insured.
The second issue is that the cap would have to be set very low to be binding on existing
 home buyers who are trading up. First home buyers would be squeezed out, but
 most buyers would be little affected. Third, the cap would not prevent boom-bust
 cycles in housing prices. The evidence from overseas is that it instead limits
 the increase in arrears rates that occurs when the bust
 comes.
[5]
That is because the borrowers who get into difficulty are more likely to have some
 equity, even if prices fall. They can therefore sell rather than default.
 That's not a bad thing, but in the end our responsibility for financial
 stability is about protecting the real economy. Protecting the banks
from
the real economy is not the ultimate goal.
I also worry that focusing too much on the LVR would be a mistake. Lenders that do
 that are engaged in asset-based lending, which is exactly the kind of practice
 we would want to avoid. There are many other dimensions of lending standards
 beyond
 LVRs.
[6]
In my view, the borrower's ability to repay is more important than the collateral.
 Lenders also need to think about how certain they are about the valuation
 in that loan to valuation ratio. One of the things that went wrong in the
 United States during the boom was that the valuations behind the lending decisions
 were often flawed, or even fraudulent.
The Current Crisis Partly Stemmed from a Microprudential Failure
As with many other reforms that have been proposed since the crisis, new macroprudential
 policy frameworks are being advocated with the view that these might help
 prevent similar crises in future. But would they? Well, maybe. I am not convinced
 that they would be the most effective approach. If we think about what went
 wrong in the United States in the lead-up to the crisis, it was in essence
 that a lot of bad assets were created – in this case mortgages and the
 securities based on them – and that these bad assets were distributed
 around the global financial system, primarily to entities that were funding
 themselves at very short terms. How was this possible? Obviously there were
 lapses in risk management and governance at the banks and other firms involved.
 In part, though, it was also a failure of prudential supervision that enabled
 those lapses. Many of the lenders weren't supervised at all. Of those
 that were, many nonetheless were not stopped from making loans of dubious
 quality. That was a microprudential problem.
There was a macro-level element to the boom: those poor-quality loans were packaged
 up and distributed around the world. Each national supervisor thought that
 it was a good idea to transfer the risk out of their system. It could then
 be spread across the world, supposedly more thinly. That showed a lack of
 macro perspective. But it was also a microprudential failure, because banks
 were allowed to buy these securities without holding enough capital to cover
 their risk. Risk capture – getting the risk weights broadly right –
 is very much a micro-level aspect of prudential regulation. Macroprudential
 frameworks would not have solved this problem.
Nor was a macroprudential institutional framework strictly necessary to avoid the
 liquidity problems brought about by short-term funding of these security holdings.
 Funding and liquidity are traditional, micro- or institution-level concerns
 of prudential supervisors. It certainly needed more attention globally in
 the lead-up to the crisis. But this didn't require a new macroprudential
 or systemic risk regulator. It just needed more attention from the supervisors
 and the Basel Committee.
Where Does that Leave Financial Stability Policymakers?
If all of the tools are in the hands of the prudential supervisor, what role does
 the non-supervisory central bank have in financial stability policy? There
 are many things we can do, which we described in the joint RBA-APRA paper.
 Crisis management is one aspect. Liquidity provision is another. And there
 is also the one use of the word macroprudential that I actually feel comfortable
 about: macroprudential
analysis
. This involves identifying the risks in the financial system
 that ostensibly ‘micro’ prudential regulators can respond to.
 This does not mean looking only at macro-level data, by the way; it is usually
 the riskiest banks or borrowers that cause the trouble, not the average ones.
I can perhaps best explain how this works with another cartoon (Figure 3). I'd
 like you to imagine that the supervisor from the previous cartoon –
 I call him ‘Mike Rowe’ – receives a visit from the head
 of the central bank's financial stability department, ‘Prue Denshall’,
 sometimes nicknamed ‘Macro Prue’. Prue has news for Mike: all
 the banks are doing crazy lending – systemic risk is rising. And Mike
 responds: ‘Gosh, thanks, “Macro” Prue! I'll raise their
 Pillar 2 capital add-ons right away!’
Figure 3: Macroprudential Analysis Supporting Prudential Supervision
Image: RetroClipArt/Shutterstock.com
Of course, it's just a cartoon. In reality, if lending standards were imprudent,
 Mike would already know about it. And Pillar 2 capital add-ons aren't
 the only tools at his disposal. That said, I'd like to draw out a few
 points from this picture. The first is the focus on lending standards. Risk-taking,
 here in the form of easier lending standards, is what we are watching for.
 It's about behaviour, not a single number. The second is that a qualitative
 assessment might well be good enough. Prue isn't telling Mike that her
 favoured measure of systemic risk has risen to such and such a level, and
 that this has breached some trigger point. Existing models of systemic risk
 simply aren't good enough to be relied on that way, and they probably
 never will be. But informed judgement is probably good enough in most cases.
The third point to note is that Mike already has the tools at his disposal to respond.
 Prudential supervisors have always had the scope to increase banks' minimum
 capital ratios above the Basel minimum. That is what Pillar 2 of the Basel
 framework is for. Not every supervisor used that power, but it was there.
The fourth and final point about this picture is that Mike believes Prue, and is
 willing to act on it. This is pretty much how it works in Australia. It comes
 down to the relationship between the agencies and the culture of the supervisor
 to create that willingness. There doesn't need to be a so-called systemic
 risk regulator issuing public warnings or directions, telling the supervisor
 what to do. Some jurisdictions might want to set things up that way, but there
 are other ways that might be better here. In Australia, we think that a culture
 of cooperation, dialogue and mutual respect is more important than formalised
 arrangements. The Council of Financial Regulators has proved itself to be
 a low-cost, flexible way of coordinating between agencies, alongside bilateral
 relationships. We think we have the essential elements needed to promote financial
 stability with a holistic frame of mind. In the end, what is needed is the
 wisdom to see the problems and the willingness to act in response. No elaborate
 set of institutional arrangements and rules can manufacture those two things.
Thank you for your time.
Endnotes
Thanks to Sarah-Jane Edis for assistance with graphics formats. I created the cartoons
 in this speech by modifying original royalty-free artwork from RetroClipArt/Shutterstock.com,
 which retains the copyright
(see <http://www.shutterstock.com/licensing.mhtml>).
[*]
See G-20 (2010), ‘Seoul Summit Document’, paragraph 41, available at
 <http://www.g20.utoronto.ca/2010/g20seoul-doc.pdf>, and the resulting
 joint FSB-IMF-BIS progress report to the G-20, ‘Macroprudential Policy
 Tools and Frameworks’, available at <http://www.imf.org/external/np/g20/pdf/102711.pdf>.
[1]
See RBA and APRA (2012), ‘
Macroprudential Analysis and Policy in the Australian Financial Stability Framework
’,
 September, available at <
https://www.rba.gov.au/fin-stability/resources/2012-09-map-aus-fsf/
>.
[2]
See Clement (2010) for a comprehensive review of the history and usage of this word.
[3]
In addition to the RBA-APRA paper released last month, a good description of how
 APRA takes a system-wide view in its supervisory practice can be found in
 Laker (2010).
[4]
See Wong
et al
(2011).
[5]
For more discussion on the different dimensions of lending standards, see Ellis L
 (2012), ‘
Prudent Mortgage Lending Standards Help Ensure Financial Stability
’,
 Address to the Australian Mortgage Conference 2012, Sydney, 23 February,
 available at <
https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2012/sp-so-230212.html
>.
[6]
References
Clement P (2010), ‘The Term “Macroprudential”: Origins and Evolution’,
 BIS
Quarterly Review
, March, pp 59–67.
King M (1997), ‘Changes in UK Monetary Policy: Rules and Discretion in Practice’,
Journal of Monetary Economics
, 39, pp 81–97.
Laker J (2010), ‘Supervisory Lessons from the Global Financial Crisis’,
 AB+F Leaders Lecture, 8 December. Available at <http://www.apra.gov.au/Speeches/Documents/09-ABF-8-December-2010.pdf>.
RBA and APRA (2012), ‘
Macroprudential Analysis and Policy in the Australian Financial Stability Framework
’.
 Available at <
https://www.rba.gov.au/fin-stability/resources/2012-09-map-aus-fsf/
>.
Wong E, T Fong, K-F Li and H Choi (2011), ‘Loan-to-Value Ratio as a Macroprudential
 Tool – Hong Kong's Experience and Cross-country Evidence’,
 Hong Kong Monetary Authority Working Paper 01/2011.
