BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Stability, Efficiency, Diversity: Implications for the Financial Sector and Policy – Sydney
DATE: 18/10/2013
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2013/sp-so-181013.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Stability, Efficiency, Diversity: Implications for the Financial Sector and Policy
Luci Ellis
[
*
]
Head of Financial Stability Department
Address to the Paul Woolley Centre for the Study of
 Capital Market Dysfunctionality Conference
Sydney
–
18 October 2013
Audio
16.77
MB
banking, regulation, risk and uncertainty
Thank you once again to the Paul Woolley Centre for the opportunity to speak to this
 conference. This is the third time I have spoken at this conference. Two years
 ago, I discussed how to identify and communicate about risk. Last year,
 I talked about some policy approaches that might be used to respond to those
 risks. Today, I would like to step back a little and reflect on society's
 tolerance for financial stability risks, what we might or might not give up
 to reduce the risks we face, and how some structural aspects of the financial
 system might affect the risks it poses.
More Stability Is a Choice
The global financial crisis spurred a huge, international effort to reform financial
 regulation.
[1]
That work is ongoing, and will be for some years. I don't think there is any
 doubt about why the crisis spurred such reforms. The events of the crisis
 showed that banks in many jurisdictions needed more capital; that governance
 and risk management needed to improve; and that risks in derivatives markets
 and shadow banking needed closer scrutiny. But at a more fundamental level,
 the crisis showed that the prior settings of regulatory policy in some countries
 had not achieved the degree of financial stability that society actually wanted.
Society has only so much appetite to impose risks on its members. In particular,
 it has only so much appetite to impose risks on people who had little or nothing
 to do with the creation of those risks. We therefore have laws, regulations
 and other measures to reduce the chance that a bad event might happen. Think
 of pool fences, guardrails on the sides of roads, or special car seats for
 children. We also have insurance, welfare systems and tort law to cushion
 the blow if a bad event does happen.
How much of each of these measures we as a society choose depends on how much risk
 we are willing to bear – or to impose on others – as well as on
 the price we are willing to pay to avoid or ameliorate those bad outcomes.
 Different countries make different choices about these issues. That is why
 the Australian authorities have consistently argued that international regulatory
 agreements need to be tailored to national circumstances. The global minimum
 standards, such as the Basel III framework, are just that – minimum
 standards. Countries are within their rights to choose to strengthen the local
 implementation of those minimum standards if need be.
Sometimes some additional conservatism is needed because of particular features of
 each country's financial system. A good example of this is the longstanding
 tighter setting of prudential capital rules on housing loans in Australia,
 relative to what the Basel framework
 requires.
[2]
Housing is a large part of the Australian banking system's asset base. It therefore
 makes sense to allow for that concentration, even though housing loans are
 individually a lower risk than some other things banks could be doing with
 their balance sheets.
In other cases, the authorities might choose to be a bit more conservative to reflect
 that society is a bit more risk averse than in some other countries. As a
 central banker, I am not in the business of claiming to have insights into
 the national psyche. But it seems to me fair to say that Australia is not
 a society that tells people who have suffered misfortune that they are entirely
 on their own. Nor does our society apply the ‘caveat investor’
 principle to all financial dealings. We have consumer and investor protection
 rules to protect non-experts. We also have regulation to reduce various kinds
 of abuse. We are also cognisant that actions that are rational for an individual
 can collectively result in a bad outcome. And that is where financial stability
 mandates become highly relevant.
At the same time, it would not be ideal if people were completely insulated from
 the risks that they knowingly and willingly take on. A financial stability
 mandate does not mean that policymakers should try to ensure that nobody anywhere
 ever loses money. It does not mean that nobody anywhere should ever default
 on their loans. And it certainly does not mean that no individual financial
 institution anywhere should ever fail. What it does mean is that the harm
 done to the real economy, to the innocent bystanders, should be as small as
 can be reasonably managed. That implies that policies to promote financial
 stability should include a mix of pre-emptive measures to head off trouble,
 and post-event responses to deal with trouble when it does occur. In other
 words, the authorities should both ‘lean’ against risk and ‘clean’
 up the mess.
The global regulatory reform program has done a lot on the ‘lean’ phase.
 Banks hold more capital, so they are less likely to fail. Supervision has
 been enhanced in the countries where this was needed. And compensation practices
 in financial firms have been overhauled and attract more scrutiny from regulators.
There is still plenty of work that has been agreed internationally, and is in the
 process of being implemented in each country. Much of this work to be done
 relates to the ‘clean’ phase. For example, a lot is being done
 to ensure that banks, and other important parts of the financial system, can
 be resolved effectively if they do fail.
More Stability Might Not Mean Less Efficiency
As with any major regulatory reform, the reform program spurred by the crisis, especially
 the higher capital requirements, has met with claims that it might harm growth.
 That is, some commentators argue that the reforms are trading off stability
 and efficiency. It is sometimes claimed that requiring banks to hold more
 capital will hold back credit growth, and thus economic growth.
In my view there are a couple of problems with this argument. First, it assumes that
 credit growth causes economic growth. There is some truth to this. If credit
 supply is constrained, for example because the financial sector is weak, that
 can hold back growth. It would be a ‘credit crunch’, of the kind
 described by Chairman Bernanke in his earlier academic
 work.
[3]
There does seem to be some element of a credit crunch in places like the United Kingdom
 and the euro area at the moment. But slow credit growth can also be the result
 of weak demand, not constrained supply. Causation doesn't flow all one
 way.
Second, we should not assume that all financial activity needs encouragement. If
 a certain business line is only economic when too little capital is held to
 cover the risk it entails, it is not a business that should be pursued. For
 all the concerns about the financial system's ability to serve the real
 economy, it must be remembered that banks also have extensive connections
 with other parts of the financial system. That includes their activities in
 plain vanilla wealth management, but also some of the more rarefied segments
 like hedge funds, structured investment vehicles and other parts of the so-called
 ‘shadow banking system’. In the lead-up to the crisis, this part
 of the business became increasingly important for some banks, especially a
 few in major financial centres. Some of this was legitimate redistribution
 of risk to those best placed to bear it, but I question whether it all was.
 Lending to the real economy need not be the business line that is most affected
 by regulatory reform.
Third, the recent crisis has shown how severe the costs of a crisis to the real economy
 can be. There is empirical evidence suggesting that recessions are deeper
 and longer if they are instigated by a banking
 crisis.
[4]
A cost-benefit assessment suggests that society would be willing to pay some price
 to avoid those harms. The best available estimates of that trade-off, uncertain
 as they are, do imply that the regulatory reform program is a net benefit
 to
 society.
[5]
A final point about this issue is that some regulation is essential to create stability.
 There is no trade-off. Society benefits greatly from the existence of a safe,
 liquid asset that people can rely on to make payments, and which they can
 trust will not suddenly decline in nominal
 value.
[6]
But we've learned over the centuries that the private sector cannot produce truly
 safe, truly liquid assets on its own. Without prudential supervision, central
 bank liquidity and some form of depositor protection, the private sector cannot
 offer an asset that is both safe and liquid even in bad times. The recent
 crisis was in part a story of people learning that assets they had been happy
 to treat as safe, weren't completely safe. And they learned that lesson
 over and over in the crisis with repo finance, asset-backed commercial paper,
 super-senior collateralised debt obligation (CDO) tranches, auction rate securities,
 money market funds – the list goes on.
All Creatures Risky and Even Riskier
Another, subtler, critique of financial regulation argues that stability carries
 the seeds of its own destruction. The idea behind this line of argument is
 that imbalances always build up during the good times. So the longer you go
 without a small crisis, the larger the crisis you will have
 eventually.
[7]
Small, regular crises are therefore supposedly helpful and cleansing, and policymakers
 resist them at the economy's peril. Having gone for more than 20 years
 without a serious recession or major banking problem, Australia is going to
 be a good test of this particular hypothesis – though hopefully not
 any time soon!
Underlying this argument must be some kind of model. Usually, it seems to be a metaphor
 as model – that of a forest fire. In a forest, the argument goes, kindling
 builds up over time. If it is not reduced through regular burn outs, expect
 a conflagration eventually.
It's useful to put these kinds of verbal arguments back in terms of the model
 implicitly underlying them. You can then find all the previously unstated
 assumptions, and decide if they are appropriate to the question. In the case
 of the forest fire, I think the metaphor only goes so far, so I'm not
 convinced of the argument. For a start, this model assumes that kindling always
 builds up at the same rate. Is the forest that suffers few fires building
 up more kindling? Or is it just that some kinds of trees are less prone to
 burn? In Australia, we are only too aware that eucalyptus trees are more flammable
 than many other species. Perhaps some kinds of banks are more prone to burst
 into flames – metaphorically, that is – than others.
When we talk about different species of banks and other financial institutions, we
 are really talking about business models. Within the banking industry globally,
 there are many different kinds of banks with different niches, risks and balance
 sheet structures. You can classify them any number of ways, but one useful
 dimension to think about is a spectrum with investment banks at one end, commercial
 or retail banks at the other, and so-called ‘universal’ banks
 in the middle. This graph shows that those labels correspond to different
 balance sheet structures (Graph 1).
Graph 1
Investment banks, like Morgan Stanley as shown here, or Goldman Sachs, have a lot
 more trading assets than banks with different business models. Commercial
 banks like Wells Fargo mainly have loans. Universal banks like JPMorgan or
 Citigroup have a bit of both. You can see the same distinction on the liabilities
 side. Investment banks tend to have more wholesale and repo funding, commercial
 banks less so. Even starker are the differences in off-balance sheet business,
 which aren't shown here. Investment banks tend to have larger and more
 complex derivatives positions than commercial banks, and depending on a country's
 accounting rules, these positions are in some cases not on the balance sheet.
 The larger derivative positions of investment banks arise partly because of
 their own trading business and partly because they intermediate between other
 banks that wish to transfer risk or hedge particular exposures.
This distinction between different business models is a strategic choice, and not
 just an artefact of past restrictions built into the US regulatory structure.
 You can see it in banks around the world. In Australia, the big four banks
 are clearly at the commercial end of the spectrum. Much of their business
 involves servicing household and business customers in Australia and New Zealand.
 As the next graph shows, their trading books and other securities holdings
 are a relatively small part of their business (Graph 2).
Graph 2
What does this mean for financial stability analysis and policy? Certainly different
 business models lead to different balance sheet structures, and therefore
 different risk exposures. Unlike the trees in the forest fire model, these
 differences come from conscious choices, about their business models and strategy.
 Trees don't choose how flammable they are, but banks can choose their
 risk profile. That said, tree species do evolve in response to the environments
 they face, just as individual banks and whole banking systems adjust to the
 incentives they face.
One of the most powerful sets of incentives for banks is, of course, the regulatory
 arrangements they are subject to. This brings me back to the international
 program of post-crisis regulatory reform. In designing these reforms, it has
 been essential to consider how the regulated industries and their counterparties
 will respond. Those responses can change not just financial firms' behaviour
 but sometimes their entire business models.
This isn't simply a concern that the reforms will push business out of the supervised
 banking industry and into the shadow banking system, though that's part
 of the issue. It's also a concern to ensure that the different elements
 of recent reforms are not in conflict with each other. There have been some
 elements that do seem rather at
 odds.
[8]
For example, we want to ensure that financial institutions can absorb losses. Yet
 it would not make sense to demand that ‘bail-in-able’ wholesale
 debt should be so high that funding profiles became less stable. Likewise,
 we want derivatives markets to be safer and more transparent. But we do not
 want to change the incentives so far away from uncleared over-the-counter
 markets that it weakens risk management in other ways. Some risks cannot be
 adequately hedged by a standardised, clearable product. There will still need
 to be bespoke but uncleared transactions that better match those risks. An
 uncleared trade might reduce risk by more than an imperfect hedge, or worse
 still, not hedging the risk at all. There needs to be balance.
There is another issue in the international regulatory reform program that we should
 also be mindful of. The reforms have gone a long way to promote international
 consistency in financial regulation. For example, for the first time, the
 Basel Committee is assessing how faithful each country's reforms have
 been to the agreed Basel III framework. And there will be further work on
 the consistency of risk weights across banks for the same exposure. This is
 important and helpful work. But in ensuring consistency, we do not want to
 create a monoculture, with all its members being vulnerable to the same risks
 because they face the same incentives. There is something to be said for allowing
 some diversity of business models, so the whole system doesn't collapse
 from a particular shock. That is one kind of diversity that I think needs
 more attention. It also needs to be allowed for when we design regulation.
Another important dimension of diversity is that the financial system is made up
 of more than just banks. Insurance firms, pension funds, asset managers and
 financial infrastructure providers are all part of the landscape. They each
 have different capacities and face diverse risks. They, too, need to be regulated
 in ways that are adapted to that diversity.
Economists Are Not the Only
 Fruit
[9]
So far today, I've been talking about risk, regulation and different business
 models. None of that is a typical concern of macroeconomics and monetary policy,
 which are the usual fare at central banks. Macroeconomics doesn't have
 a monopoly on wisdom when it comes to financial stability issues. Banking
 and finance are important sources of insight; so are disciplines like accounting,
 actuarial science, complex systems and industrial organisation. And we should
 never forget the lessons of economic and financial history.
Over the past few years at the Reserve Bank, we have found ourselves delving into
 areas as diverse as the mathematics of networks and the intricacies of tax
 law.
[10]
None of that is taught in a conventional macroeconomics major. The things a financial
 stability policymaker typically needs to know don't look much like conventional
 macro. In financial stability departments, being able to read a balance sheet
 is at least as useful as being able to solve for the rational expectations
 equilibrium of some macroeconomic model.
I don't think there needs to be a special financial stability degree the way
 there are degrees in economics or finance or actuarial studies. Speaking as
 someone who did major in macroeconomics, I've found you can learn a lot
 of what you need on the job. Clearly though, the building blocks of financial
 stability education are already there. There is a lot the world already knows
 about financial analysis, about credit risk, about banking crises. There is
 also a lot already known about financial history, organisational behaviour
 and complex systems. And although it's fair to say that we know rather
 less about asset pricing dynamics and how some of these micro-level behaviours
 build up to macro-level instability, I do believe that academics and practitioners
 can work together to expand the frontier of knowledge here, too.
Central banks need to harness those diverse sources of expertise in their financial
 stability function. That means that the monetary policy function, which naturally
 has an intellectual culture based on macroeconomics, mustn't unduly overshadow
 contributions from other perspectives. Economics as a discipline has a bit
 of a reputation for colonising other domains, but central banks need to give
 space and respect to a range of disciplines.
I can see two ways to avoid problems around this issue, both of which are definitely
 practised here in Australia. One is to ensure that we recruit from a broader
 stream, including but not limited to macroeconomics. The fact that the Reserve
 Bank also has a longstanding policy mandate for payments system stability
 and efficiency helps here: that area needs microeconomists and lawyers as
 well as macro/finance skills.
Another way is to ensure that financial stability policy is a collective endeavour.
 The dominant economics culture of central banks finds a counterpoint in the
 accounting, finance and actuarial cultures of prudential supervisors, and
 in the more legal-oriented cultures of securities regulators. We can learn
 a lot from each other, and gain a lot from working together. Our mandates
 differ somewhat, but they are consistent.
Some diversity, with overall consistency. That sounds like something that would make
 a financial system, and the regulation that shapes it, strong enough to achieve
 stability.
Thank you for your time.
Endnotes
Thanks to Elliott James and Rachel Adeney for their assistance in preparing this
 talk.
[*]
See Schwartz C (2013), ‘
G20 Financial Regulatory Reforms and Australia
’,
 RBA Bulletin, September, pp 77–85.
[1]
Without getting into the details, there are two main elements to this more conservative
 setting. Banks and other lenders in Australia using the ‘standardised’
 approach to capital adequacy are required to hold more capital against higher-risk
 mortgages, such as low-doc loans or loans with high initial loan-to-valuation
 ratios, than the Basel framework requires. Banks using the ‘advanced’
 approach must assume a minimum 20 per cent loss given default on mortgages
 in their risk models, compared with the 10 per cent minimum required in
 the Basel framework. The latter measure acts as a substitute for a major
 housing downturn. Because Australia hasn't had a severe housing downturn
 in many decades – the 1890s comes closest – banks do not have
 severe enough data to put into their models. These capital rules are designed
 to ensure that banks and other deposit-takers hold enough capital to withstand
 a severe housing downturn.
[2]
See Bernanke B and CS Lown (1991), ‘The Credit Crunch’, Brookings Papers
 on Economic Activity, 22(2), pp 205–248.
[3]
See Cerra V and S Saxena (2008), ‘Growth Dynamics: The Myth of Economic Recovery’,
 American Economic Review, 98(1), pp 439–457.
[4]
See Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (2010), ‘An Assessment of the Long-term
 Economic Impact of Stronger Capital and Liquidity Requirements’, August.
 Available at <http://www.bis.org/publ/bcbs173.pdf>. This academic
 audience might recall James Tobin's quip about this issue: ‘It
 takes a lot of Harberger triangles to fill an Okun gap’. See Tobin
 J (1977), ‘How Dead is Keynes?’, Economic Inquiry, 15(4), pp 459–468.
[5]
Gary B Gorton describes this type of safe asset as ‘information insensitive’.
 See Gorton GC (2010), Slapped by the Invisible Hand: The Panic of 2007,
 Oxford University Press, Oxford.
[6]
This is, of course, a version of Hyman Minsky's ‘financial instability
 hypothesis’. See Minsky H (1982), ‘The Financial-Instability
 Hypothesis: Capitalist Processes and the Behavior of the Economy’,
 in C Kindleberger and J-P Laffargue (eds), Financial Crises: Theory,
 History and Policy, Cambridge University Press, Cambridge.
[7]
See Lowe P (2013), ‘
Some Tensions in Financial Regulation
’,
 Address to the Institute of Global Finance Second Conference on Global Financial
 Stability and Prosperity, Sydney, 4 July.
[8]
With apologies to Jeanette Winterson.
[9]
See Tellez E (2013), ‘
Mapping the Australian Banking System Network
’,
 RBA Bulletin, June, pp 45–53, and RBA (2013), ‘
Box D: Self-managed Superannuation Funds
’,
 Financial Stability Review, September, pp 54–57.
[10]
