BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Developments in Secured Issuance and RBA Reporting Initiatives – Sydney
DATE: 11/11/2013
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2013/sp-so-111113.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Developments in Secured Issuance and RBA Reporting Initiatives
Chris Aylmer
[
*
]
Head of Domestic Markets Department
Address to the Australian Securitisation Forum
Sydney
–
11 November 2013
Audio
12.82
MB
Thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak at this forum. Today I would

 like to do two things. Firstly, I will take the opportunity to reflect on developments

 in secured issuance in recent years. And secondly, I will speak a little about

 the Reserve Bank's reporting initiatives in this area.
Two Years of Covered Bonds
It is almost two years to the day since the first covered bond was issued by

 an Australian bank. It was not an easy time for new issuers. Financial markets

 were volatile, and the US Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank and the

 Bank of England had all announced non-conventional policies towards the end

 of 2011. The covered bonds that were issued – AAA rated 5-year securities

 – were sold at spreads to Commonwealth Government Securities of more

 than 220 basis points.
Ultimately, conditions improved. Over the two years since the passage of enabling

 legislation, covered bonds have proven to be a useful source of funding for

 Australian banks, notwithstanding the fact that they have brought about some

 subordination of unsecured debtholders. About A$57 billion has been raised,

 predominantly in offshore markets (Graph 1). This represents just over

 one-quarter of the banks' long-term debt issuance over this period, although

 the pattern of issuance has evolved with financial market conditions.
[1]
In particular, covered bonds have proven useful as a wholesale funding source

 that is less sensitive to global risk events than traditional unsecured funding.

 This was evident in the banks' issuance of predominantly covered bonds

 in early 2012 as conditions in funding markets deteriorated because of sovereign

 debt concerns, particularly in Europe.
Around that time, the Reserve Bank noted that the delineation between secured

 and unsecured funding for the banking system was perhaps not as stark as market

 conditions implied.
[2]
As it turned out, conditions in global unsecured funding markets improved from

 mid 2012, and Australian banks returned to what might be considered more typical

 patterns of issuance – raising the majority of their wholesale funding

 via unsecured bonds.
Graph 1
Importantly, covered bonds have enabled banks to diversify their investor base

 and reduce their funding risk. Australian banks' covered bonds have consistently

 been rated AAA, which has allowed the banks to attract new funding from investors

 with AAA mandates. This may also have assisted those banks repurchasing their

 government-guaranteed debt, as the banks were able to offer investors an alternative

 AAA asset to invest in.
There is also some evidence of a broadening in banks' investor base along

 the geographical dimension, with regional central banks among the buyers of

 Australian banks' covered bonds. European investors have also provided

 demand for these instruments, reflecting their familiarity with the asset class.

 This has contributed to the banks issuing wholesale debt across a broader range

 of currencies in the past two years, compared with their issuance patterns

 prior to the introduction of covered bonds. In particular, a larger share of

 banks' bond funding has been raised in euros, notwithstanding the ructions

 in European markets at times. The increase in the share of euro-denominated

 issuance has been entirely due to covered issuance. Moreover, Australian banks

 have issued covered bonds in Swiss francs and Norwegian krone, currencies that

 had been scarcely used for unsecured issuance.
Covered bonds have also enabled the banks to increase the tenor of their issuance,

 which has helped to smooth the maturity profile of their outstanding debt.

 The banks have typically issued covered bonds at tenors of 5 to 10 years, compared

 with a norm of 3 to 5 years for their unsecured issuance (Graph 2). More

 strikingly, the banks have issued covered bonds at very long tenors, sometimes

 exceeding 15 years.
Graph 2
With the Australian banks supplying around 10 per cent of global covered

 bond issuance, compared with about 5 per cent of financials'

 unsecured issuance, they have established themselves as covered bond issuers

 in the global markets. The high share of global covered bond issuance reflects

 both subdued issuance by European institutions and the desire of the Australian

 banks to establish themselves in the market. Perhaps more importantly, these

 bonds have traded at similar spreads to comparable issues by foreign banks

 (Graph 3).
Graph 3
There is scope for further issuance, with each of the major banks having utilised

 roughly one-third of its limit (based on current levels of over-collateralisation).

 It is likely, however, that banks will use their remaining capacity sparingly,

 particularly if conditions in global funding markets improve further. Banks

 have indicated a preference to keep some capacity for covered issuance in reserve,

 to draw upon in the event of another bout of stress in global financial markets.
Developments in Securitisation
The improvement in funding market conditions since mid 2012 has also exerted

 its influence on the securitisation market. The past year has seen a steady

 run of deals, with pricing at some of the tightest spreads since 2007 (Graph 4).
Graph 4
The decline in the cost of issuance has extended to non-bank lenders and smaller

 banks. In particular, a number of issuers have returned to the market after

 a hiatus of several years. And there has been a re-emergence of demand for

 non-prime RMBS, including deals with a significant number of loans with low

 documentation.
More broadly, investors seem to be increasingly comfortable with greater variation

 in pool characteristics. This is perhaps best illustrated by the greater variation

 in loan seasoning observed in the past couple of years (Table 1). Some

 issuers have been able to place loans with investors that they had previously

 held on their balance sheets for an extended period, while others have sold

 pools of relatively recent loans.
Table 1: Seasoning in Australian RMBS
*
Months
2009–2011
2012–2013
Minimum
11
7
Median
33
40
Maximum
71
96
Standard Deviation
12
20
*Weighted average seasoning per deal
Sources: RBA; S&P; Moodys; Fitch
There has also been greater variation in the structures employed by issuers

 during the past several years. Some issuers have reduced their use of lenders'

 mortgage insurance (LMI), which follows a move by credit ratings agencies to

 discount the credit enhancement that LMI brings to an RMBS. On the other hand,

 credit support has been increased to maintain AAA ratings.
Recent years have seen the emergence of some preference for bullet structures

 to minimise prepayment and extension risk for investors. Offshore investors

 in particular have shown a preference for bullet features. This partly reflects

 the mandates of certain investors, such as US money market funds, to hold securities

 with finite maturities. Issuers have incorporated arrangements such as liquidity

 underwriting and rollover features to provide bullet-like structures to deals.

 Nonetheless, there are limits to the extent that these structures can be incorporated

 without significant over-collateralisation or liquidity underwriting costs.

 As such, bullet notes have typically accounted for a small portion of the funds

 raised in an RMBS. The securitisation market remains principally about passing

 through cash flows.
Taken together, the increased variation in deal characteristics, alongside tighter

 pricing and a solid pace of issuance, point to an improvement in the underlying

 demand for Australian RMBS. Indeed, with the recovery in demand from private

 investors, the Australian Office of Financial Management (AOFM) announced in

 April 2013 that it would not make any further investments in RMBS. For around

 4½ years, the AOFM acted as a cornerstone investor, purchasing

 AAA rated tranches of smaller lenders' RMBS. In fact, the AOFM has actually

 sold a very small amount of RMBS in the past year. It currently holds more

 than $8 billion of these securities, compared with its peak of $11 billion

 in late 2011.
Some of the increase in private demand has come from abroad, which may reflect

 the dearth of marketed RMBS in some overseas markets. As you will be aware,

 RMBS issuance in Europe has been slow to recover amid subdued demand for credit

 among European households. Moreover, much of the securitisations that have

 occurred have been posted as collateral with central banks.
In Australia, the stock of mortgages is expanding at a slower pace than occurred

 during the adjustment to financial liberalisation and the low inflation environment

 (Graph 5). A related development is that housing turnover remains well

 below its peak in the early 2000s, which has contributed to a decline in prepayment

 rates. The corollary of this is that a lower level of RMBS issuance is required

 to fund a given share of Australian mortgages. In fact, the share of mortgages

 funded by securitisation has been more or less stable during the past year

 at around 8 per cent.
Graph 5
Alongside these slow-moving forces that are exerting themselves on the RMBS

 market, the global regulatory reform agenda is also playing its part. As the

 Reserve Bank has noted on more than one occasion, the ongoing effort to improve

 the regulation of the financial system, amid a reassessment of funding and

 liquidity risk by banks and investors, has the potential to affect the demand

 and supply of secured assets in a number of ways. The net result of these interactions

 is difficult to pin down.
To take one example, the Basel III liquidity standard might, all else equal,

 be expected to raise the demand for repo-eligible securities, including highly

 rated RMBS. However, it is difficult to disentangle the effects of this reform

 from the reassessment of liquidity needs by banks and investors. The approach

 taken by the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority and the Reserve Bank

 in the implementation of this reform has been carefully designed to have minimal

 disruption to the balance of supply and demand in securities markets. This

 extends to the classification of eligible securities for the Committed Liquidity

 Facility, as well as the various prices and haircuts that will be applied to

 eligible securities.
The Securitisations Project
I couldn't let this opportunity pass without saying something about the

 Bank's securitisations reporting initiative, which was announced at last

 year's conference. As has been stated previously, the Bank's primary

 motivation for collecting more information on asset-backed securities, such

 as residential mortgage-backed securities, is to better assess the risk of

 these assets as they have the potential to appear on the Bank's balance

 sheet.
In fact, around $20 billion of these securities will appear on the Bank's

 balance sheet later this month as banks' hold much higher cash balances

 with the RBA to cover settlement exchanges that occur after the close of the

 cash market each day. From 1 January 2015 on the order of $300 billion of these

 securities could potentially appear on the Bank's balance sheet with the

 introduction of the Bank's Committed Liquidity Facility.
Given this potential exposure, the Bank has a responsibility to ensure that

 the risk is well managed. The data the Bank receives will allow it to refine

 pricing where there are large geographic or borrower-type concentrations in

 loan pools, for example. And details of the cash flows associated with each

 security will provide greater transparency to the liability side of each transaction.

 This information will be particularly important for pricing self-securitisations,

 for which there are no market prices.
The Bank has also been motivated by an interest in promoting transparency in

 asset-backed markets. This recognises the inefficiencies associated with investors,

 other market participants and regulators not having access to relevant, reliable

 and standardised information in order to better understand and monitor risk.

 Regulatory reform will also result in increased demand for quality collateral.
[3]
To this end, the Bank has made it a requirement that certain information be

 made publicly available if securities are to be eligible for the Bank's

 open market operations.
In designing the templates, the Bank has been mindful of the need to balance

 concerns about privacy with investors' need to have enough information

 available to make a well-informed investment decision.
To address concerns about privacy, information providers will not report names

 and addresses and will replace actual loan and borrower identification numbers

 with dummy identifiers. In its latest round of consultation, the Bank has also

 proposed that loan-level data not be provided publicly at the postcode level.

 Property location will be identified in the loan template by an ABS statistically

 defined area, while a separate pool-level postcode summary of key variables

 in the loan template would be made publicly available. Certain dates will also

 be reported in calendar quarters, rather than exact dates; this will limit

 the ability to derive the property transaction date which will hinder borrower

 identification.
Users of the data will be limited to those with a legitimate purpose, such as

 potential investors and researchers. And these users will need to register

 with the information provider to access the data and enter into a binding agreement

 that limits the purpose for which the data may be used to an appropriate purpose.

 Under this agreement users should not be able to match, or attempt to match,

 the data against other information in order to identify an individual.
The final consultation period to determine the reporting templates is now closed.

 Once the Bank has considered the submissions and reported back to industry,

 which will occur this month, we will move into the implementation phase.
This is a large project for both issuers and the Bank. There are currently around

 420 RBA eligible asset-backed securities and each issuer will have to bring

 together information from varied data sources. The deadline is also tight.

 Cognisant of this, the Bank has gone to tender for the external system which

 will support the new reporting requirements and, once this is finalised, will

 make available its technical requirements and give some sense of the relative

 importance of the various pieces of information, as early as is practicable.
Communications relating to this will be via the Bank's website –
https://www.rba.gov.au/securitisations
. This

 will be the official source of information and testing and implementation coordination

 for the new reporting requirements. For example, a worked hypothetical example

 of the cash flow waterfall, which will provide the industry with a concrete

 implementation of this reporting template, will be posted on this site shortly.

 I would strongly encourage people to visit the site and register for the RSS

 feed to receive alerts.
The Bank is also seeking progress reports from information providers every two

 months. Once again, I would strongly encourage information providers to complete

 these reports. These will give the Bank a good understanding of industry readiness

 and help us assist industry in its preparations.
Conclusions
In conclusion, the securitisation market continues to recover. And, two years

 on, it is clear that covered bonds are a useful funding tool for Australian

 banks, enabling them to diversify their investor base and extend the tenor

 of their issuance. These instruments will continue to provide Australian banks

 with access to a wholesale funding source that is less sensitive to global

 risk events than unsecured funding.
As for increased transparency in the securitisation market, I don't get

 the sense that the Bank is pushing against the tide. It's already happening

 in other jurisdictions and in my discussions with issuers and investors it

 is clear that they both see potential benefits. As a result I take some comfort

 in the fact that this is a collective endeavour!
Thank you for your time.
Endnotes
This speech was co-authored with Cameron Deans and Ashley Fang.
[*]
For the Australian banking system as a whole, covered bonds have accounted for 27 per cent

 of long-term debt issuance. For the five banks that issue covered bonds –

 the four largest banks and Suncorp – the corresponding share is 34 per cent.
[1]
See Debelle G (2011), ‘
The Present and Possible Future of Secured Issuance
’,

 Address to Australian Securitisation Forum, Sydney, 21 November.
[2]
For a discussion of these issues see the Committee on the Global Financial System

 (2013), ‘Asset Encumbrance, Financial Reform and the Demand for Collateral

 Assets’, CGFS Papers No 49.
[3]
