BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: The Way We Pay: Now and in the Future – Sydney
DATE: 04/06/2014
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2014/sp-so-040614.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
The Way We Pay: Now and in the Future
Tony Richards
Head of Payments Policy Department
The Australian Savings & Deposits Conference 2014, Sydney
Sydney
–
4 June 2014
Audio
12.3
MB
Q&A Transcript
I will be speaking today on two topics. First, I will provide a summary of some new

 payments research from the Reserve Bank. Second, I will give a brief update

 of progress on the New Payments Platform, a major industry initiative to put

 in place some new payments infrastructure that will spur innovation in the

 Australian payments industry.
Let me start with the new research into the payments behaviour of Australian households.

 In 2007 and 2010 the Bank conducted detailed diary surveys of consumers'

 use of payments. Today the Bank is releasing the results from its third such

 study, which was conducted in late 2013. The Research Discussion Paper written

 by my colleagues Crystal Ossolinski, Tai Lam and David Emery will be available

 later this morning on the Bank's website. I am going to summarise some

 of their findings for you.
The Bank contracted a research firm to conduct a survey with three elements: a pre-diary

 questionnaire about the demographic characteristics of respondents; a seven-day

 payments diary; and a questionnaire about respondents' payments preferences

 and attitudes.
The response rate was good, with a final sample of over 1,150 respondents, selected

 to be representative of the Australian population in a wide range of aspects.

 For the first time, the survey was completed by most respondents online rather

 than on paper.
The diary provides details of all payments and transfers made by respondents over

 a seven-day period. This includes details of the amount, the payment method

 and channel used, and the type of merchant. It is a very rich database, with

 detailed information on over 15,500 payments that will allow us to study a

 range of research questions. And when we attempt to aggregate the survey results,

 the overall picture looks very like the macro-level retail payments statistics

 data that the Bank publishes, which lends credence to the survey results.
Not surprisingly, the survey shows that cash is used most often for small transactions

 (Graph 1). For example, it is used in nearly 80 per cent of transactions

 of $10 or less. This is not surprising as cash has many advantages in terms

 of convenience for both consumers and merchants. Then as transaction size increases,

 the use of debit cards initially increases most, then credit cards, then electronic

 payments such as BPAY or internet banking, and then cheques. I imagine that

 most people looking at the results of the study will relate to this ordering.
Graph 1
The 2013 results indicate that many of the trends that we observed in the 2010 study

 have continued. Looking at the share of the number of all transactions, there

 has been a continuing decline in the use of what we have traditionally called

 the ‘paper-based’ methods. While cash remained the most frequently

 used payment instrument, being used in 47 per cent of all transactions, its

 relative importance has fallen significantly since 2010 (Table 1). Cheque

 use also continued to fall. These trends have been mirrored by an increase

 in various forms of electronic payments, with a significant increase in the

 use of debit, credit and charge cards, and also an increase – from a

 small base – in the use of PayPal.
Table 1: Use of Payment Methods over Time
Per cent of number of payments
2007
2010
2013
Cash
69
62
47
Debit, credit and charge cards
26
31
43
BPay
2
3
3
Internet or phone banking
n/a
2
2
PayPal
n/a
1
3
Cheque
1
1
0
(a)
Other
1
1
2
Note: (a) rounds to zero
Sources: Colmar Brunton; Roy Morgan Research
Looking across age groups, cash is used more by older individuals than by younger

 ones (Graph 2). But the decline in its share of all transactions is evident

 across respondents in all age-groups. The decline is also fairly broad-based

 across different types of merchants. It can be partly explained by the fact

 that the mix of transactions in the economy is gradually shifting from in-person

 to online, where cash is essentially not used. However, it is mostly a function

 of the decline in cash use in the traditional point-of-sale environment and

 the development of newer electronic technologies that can match or surpass

 the convenience and speed of cash in some types of transactions and transfers.
Graph 2
While the survey confirms that the rate at which cash changes hands is falling, there

 are few signs that holdings of cash are doing so. We know from the aggregate

 data that banknotes on issue have for a long period grown broadly in line with

 the nominal growth in the overall economy. And the consumer use survey suggests

 the amount of cash in respondents' wallets grew between 2010 and 2013.

 Together this evidence suggests that it continues to have a significant role

 both as a store of value and for precautionary use when other means of payments

 are not available.
The flip-side to the declining use of cash has obviously been the rise in the use

 of payment cards for transactions of all sizes (Graph 3). This has been

 associated with continuing growth in the number of card terminals in Australia

 (up by around 35 per cent over the six years to 2013), and advances in card

 technologies and authentication methods. The ongoing shift to the use of PINs

 in card transactions and the sharp pick-up in the use of contactless payments

 have both resulted in a reduction in the typical time needed to complete a

 card transaction.
Graph 3
In the latest survey, two-thirds of respondents reported that they had a card with

 contactless functionality and almost half of these reported a contactless transaction

 in the week of the study. Contactless transactions accounted for 22 per cent

 of all face-to-face card transactions. This share was significantly higher

 for payments under $20 (Graph 4).
Graph 4
The use of contactless was higher for respondents that reported that speed of transaction

 was an important factor in choosing which payment to use. The survey also shows

 that contactless was used more frequently at retailers such as supermarkets,

 petrol stations and take-away food stores where the speed of the payment is

 likely to be important for the cardholder and/or the retailer.
The survey provides evidence that contactless card payments have been displacing

 both cash and signature or PIN-authorised card transactions. However, on balance,

 based on a post-survey question, it seems that the greater effect has been

 for contactless to displace traditional card transactions.
The survey shows that there are significant differences in the use of debit and credit

 cards across demographic groups. Younger households are much more likely to

 use debit cards than credit cards, presumably reflecting reduced access to

 credit cards and a preference to ‘use their own money’ (Graph 5).

 Lower income households also use debit more frequently than credit, most likely

 for similar reasons. However, those in the highest income quartile use their

 credit card significantly more than their debit card. This may well reflect

 the greater desire to get reward points associated with credit card use. The

 survey shows that an individual in the highest income quartile is six times

 more likely to have a premium credit card than a household in the lowest income

 quartile.
Graph 5
Not surprisingly, the survey shows a significant decline in the use of cheques. Around

 80 percent of respondents reported that they had not written a cheque over

 the previous year. Cheque use is especially low in younger age groups (Graph 6).

 However, it is also declining significantly in older age groups. We can expect

 the decline in the use of cheques to continue as other payment methods became

 available to meet either the needs of households that currently still prefer

 to use cheques or the needs of businesses that find there are few alternatives

 for some specific uses. This is something that the industry is working on,

 and the delivery of the New Payments Platform (which I shall speak about shortly)

 will provide an opportunity to continue this process.
Graph 6
The survey also provides evidence on the growth of some relatively new means of making

 payments or transfers.
For example, it shows that PayPal was used for around 3 percent of transactions in

 2013, up from around 1 per cent in 2010. This mostly reflects an increase

 in the share of transactions occurring online and an increase in PayPal's

 share of that market.
Smartphone payments are an area of strong innovation in the payments system. The

 survey shows that there is a shift toward making more person-to-person transfers

 using smartphones, with around 9 per cent of transfers to family and friends

 made via smartphone. However, the use of smartphones for payments was still

 low, at less than 1 per cent of consumer payments to businesses. It appears

 that, for the time being, smartphones are mostly a convenient alternative

 method of internet access, rather than a means of payment in their own right.

 This clearly has the potential to change as new near-field communications

 (NFC) or Bluetooth technologies for point-of-sale smartphone payments emerge.
Finally, the survey provides some evidence on the effects of some policy reforms

 implemented by the Bank over the past decade.
One such reform was to the ATM system in 2009. The intent was to provide greater

 transparency in ATM fees and to allow ATM owners to better recover their costs.

 This related to fees paid on transactions at ATMs not owned by the individual's

 financial institution, so called ‘foreign’ transactions. For cardholders,

 the main change was not in terms of the level of fees paid on a transaction,

 but in the transparency of those fees. In particular, if there is a fee, the

 individual must now be notified prior to authorising the transaction rather

 than in their subsequent monthly statement. The reforms have had a significant

 impact, with the 2013 survey showing that only 15 per cent of ATM withdrawals

 incurred a fee, down from 23 per cent in 2010. A small change in the transparency

 of a fee has had a significant effect on consumer behaviour.
The survey also provides some evidence on the Bank's reforms that required card

 schemes to remove their no-surcharging rules in 2003. This was followed in

 2013 by a change to allow card schemes to limit surcharges at the reasonable

 cost of card acceptance. This change was intended to find a reasonable balance

 between the schemes' desire to prevent ‘excessive’ surcharging

 and the merchants' right to recover reasonable costs.
We know from other surveys that a significant fraction of merchants impose a surcharge

 on card transactions from one or more card scheme. Where merchants do levy

 a surcharge, they are more likely to surcharge more expensive payment methods

 and the typical surcharge is higher for more expensive payment methods. However,

 the current survey showed that only 4 per cent of card transactions attracted

 a surcharge, indicating that consumers have proven to be pretty good at switching

 away from surcharged means of payment. In addition, the survey provides evidence

 that consumers who are willing to pay surcharges are more likely to place a

 value on rewards programs than those who do not pay surcharges.
The Bank has signalled in its submission to the Financial System Inquiry that the

 Payments System Board will be continuing to study the issue of surcharging

 and especially the incidence of apparent excessive surcharging. However, it

 is important to remember that some payment methods – for example credit

 and charge cards that provide the cardholder with significant rewards –

 can be very expensive for merchants. Accordingly, it is important – subject

 to appropriate disclosure and also that there is at least one payment method

 that is not surcharged – that merchants should be allowed to surcharge

 for more expensive methods. This is, of course, not just an issue for some

 high-cost cards: we may find, for example, that it becomes more relevant for

 cash and especially for cheques as their use falls and costs increase.
Related to this, I should note that the consumer use survey is not the only work

 that the Bank has been doing to improve our collective understanding of the

 payments landscape.
In particular, the Bank is currently undertaking a large-scale review of the costs

 borne by financial institutions and merchants in accepting different payment

 instruments. A comprehensive exercise like this one was last undertaken in

 2007. This year's exercise involves a wide range of entities – including

 a number represented today – and is examining the costs of a number of

 payment methods at a relatively fine level of detail. It will also involve

 a survey of small- and medium-sized merchants so that we understand how the

 costs borne by smaller merchants differ from those borne by larger ones. We

 have benefited from a number of rounds of consultation with financial institutions,

 merchants and associations, and will be continuing to work closely with these

 entities until we publish the report towards the end of the year.
Moving on, I would like to give you an update on progress with the industry's

 New Payments Platform (NPP) project.
It is almost exactly two years since the Bank released the conclusions of its Strategic

 Review of Innovation in the Payments System.
In the Review, the Payments System Board (PSB) identified a number of gaps in the

 services currently provided by the payments system.
Among these were:
the ability for individuals to make electronic payments with real-time funds availability

 to the recipient
the ability to make and receive such payments outside of normal banking hours
the ability to address payments in a relatively simple way, such as to an individual's

 mobile phone number or email address rather than to their BSB and account

 number
and, most relevant for businesses, the ability to send anything more than a

 minimal amount of information with an electronic payment.
Accordingly, the PSB set a number of strategic objectives to deal with these gaps.

 In response, the payments industry has come together to work on a project that

 aims to meet these objectives. It is working on a project known as the NPP,

 which will establish a completely new set of infrastructure.
As recommended by the PSB, the industry's NPP solution will be based on a hub-based

 infrastructure. That is, financial institutions will connect to a central set

 of shared infrastructure. This will be more efficient and access-friendly than

 the bilateral links that characterise much of our existing payments infrastructure.

 For example, a new entrant will only have to make a single connection, rather

 than establishing bilateral links with all the existing players. It will also

 be more innovation-friendly, in that there will be a central body, an industry-run

 Utility Company that will be able to coordinate upgrades to the infrastructure.
Together, the payments hub or ‘switch’, the communications network and

 the central addressing service that is being built will be known as the ‘Basic

 Infrastructure’. This infrastructure will link financial institutions

 such as banks, credit unions and building societies, as well as other approved

 entities.
It will allow the exchange of fast, flexible, data-rich payments messaging. It will

 be available to support new types of payments services that can be tailored

 to particular needs of customers, including ones that we may not yet have thought

 of. It will be linked to a Settlements Service built by the Reserve Bank which

 will provide real-time interbank settlement of each NPP payment.
All of this new infrastructure will be available on a close to 24/7 basis.
While many types of services will be enabled by the NPP, the first will be developed

 cooperatively by the industry. It is currently being called the ‘Initial

 Convenience Service’ and is expected to focus on real-time person-to-person

 payments using mobile channels. While some banks currently provide services

 like this, they effectively only provide real-time payments if the two parties

 are customers of the same bank.
The project is being overseen by a Steering Committee that includes representatives

 from a wide range of institutions, both large and small, as well as the Reserve

 Bank and the Australian Payments Clearing Association (APCA). The Committee

 is working to implement the NPP by the end of 2016, consistent with the targets

 set in the Strategic Review.
The current focus of the Committee is on the selection of vendors to provide the

 Basic Infrastructure and Initial Convenience Service. It is expected that the

 successful vendor or vendors for the Basic Infrastructure will be announced

 in August. There is currently also a lot of work underway to establish the

 Utility Company that will own and govern the Basic Infrastructure.
The PSB has been keenly watching the progress of the NPP.
The Board expects that the NPP will create a good platform for future innovation.

 It has been particularly encouraged by the way that the industry has come together

 to work on the NPP. It is conscious of the substantial commitment of time and

 resources that the industry is making in this project in response to the strategic

 objectives identified by the Bank. This investment will deliver significant

 benefits for the Australian economy. It should also help ensure that the institutions

 that are currently providing payments services to Australians remain relevant

 in the future too.
The centralised infrastructure and real-time nature of the system, combined with

 the flexibility of payment messaging, ability to carry additional remittance

 information and the easy addressing capability, will mean that payments can

 be better integrated with many other aspects of our lives. Businesses should

 be able to achieve substantial efficiency gains and there will be significant

 improvements to the timeliness, accessibility and usability of the payments

 system for consumers.
If implemented effectively, the NPP will place the Australian payments infrastructure

 at the global frontier.
All in all, it is an exciting time to be in the Australian payments industry.
