BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Summary
DATE: 12/03/2014
SPEAKER: Philip Lowe
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2014/sp-dg-120314-summary.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech Summary
Demographics, Productivity and Innovation
Philip Lowe
Deputy Governor
Speech to The Sydney Institute
Sydney
–
12 March 2014
View the speech
Audio
34
MB
Q&A Transcript
The speech discusses the potential links between demographic developments and factors

 that affect the potential to continue to raise living standards in Australia

 – such as productivity growth and attitudes to risk and innovation.
The speech begins by comparing demographic trends in Australia with those in other

 developed economies and notes that the Australian population has risen at a

 faster rate than almost any other country in the OECD. The diversity of Australia's

 current population and the high share of immigrants is also highlighted.
Turning to productivity growth, the speech details the challenges in this area and

 underlines the importance of lifting productivity to avoid a slowdown in living

 standards. Differing views on why Australia's productivity growth has slowed

 are explored. The speech emphasises that irrespective of which viewpoint is

 correct, productivity growth is determined by the ability to innovate, manage

 risk and respond to changing circumstances.
The speech then considers attitudes towards risk and innovation and proffers that

 society is increasingly focused on risk mitigation and control. It suggests

 that attempts to reduce risk should be balanced against other factors, such

 as implications for productivity growth. The speech then raises the possibility

 that an ageing society could become more risk averse and outlines the challenges

 that this could present in generating productivity.
Countering this assessment, the speech concludes by discussing how the unusual demographic

 trends in Australia could promote innovation. In particular, it emphasises

 the likely contribution of new skills and ideas offered by immigrants. Finally,

 it underlines the importance of building on such advantages and strengthening

 opportunities to innovate which it is hoped will support a continued growth

 in living standards.
View the speech
