BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: The Securitisation Market – Sydney
DATE: 11/11/2014
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2014/sp-so-111114.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
The Securitisation Market
Chris Aylmer
[
*
]
Head of Domestic Markets Department
Remarks to the Australian Securitisation Conference
Sydney
–
11 November 2014
Audio
12.37
MB
Introduction
Thank you for giving me the opportunity to speak here today. My remarks are in two

 parts. The first part scans recent developments in the securitisation market.

 In the second part, I will discuss the role of asset-backed securities (ABS)

 in the Bank's market operations and how we manage the risks around these

 securities.
Recent Developments
Let's start with the global backdrop. While conditions in global financial markets

 have improved since the depths of the global financial crisis, the market for

 asset-backed securities has notably lagged this improvement.
[1]
Issuance of private-label asset-backed securities in the US is currently equivalent

 to around 1½ per cent of GDP, compared with an average of around 8 per

 cent in the first half of the 2000s (Graph 1). Issuance of private-label

 residential mortgage-backed securities (RMBS) has been virtually non-existent

 since 2008. In contrast, issuance of auto loan-backed securities is nearing

 its pre-crisis level. Issuance of securities backed by student-loans and credit

 card receivables is also growing, though it remains well below its pre-crisis

 peak.
Graph 1
Activity in the European securitisation market remains very subdued, with annual

 issuance placed with investors relative to the size of the economy declining

 for the fourth year in a row. While the challenging economic conditions on

 the continent have contributed to this, European authorities have identified

 a number of other impediments and are developing proposals to address them.
[2]
In September the European Central Bank (ECB) announced that it will implement an

 asset-backed securities purchase program aimed at expanding the ECB's balance

 sheet. While this program is not explicitly targeted at reviving the European

 ABS market, the ECB expects the programme to stimulate ABS issuance.
In comparison with its overseas counterparts, the Australian securitisation market,

 which remains predominantly an RMBS market, has experienced a strong recovery

 over the past couple of years, albeit not to pre global financial crisis levels.

 Issuance started to pick up in late 2012, reached a post-crisis high in 2013,

 and has remained high since then.
This mainly reflects the strong performance of Australian residential mortgages and

 the high quality of the collateral pools which are primarily fully documented

 prime mortgages. While delinquency rates on Australian prime residential mortgages

 increased after 2007, this increase was a lot less severe than in most other

 developed economies (Graph 2). Indeed, serious delinquencies in Australia,

 those of 90 days or longer, remained below 1 per cent and have declined since

 2011 to around 0.5 per cent currently. Mortgage prepayment rates, which affect

 the timing of the payments to the RMBS notes, have also been relatively stable

 in Australia, resulting in subdued prepayment and extension risk for RMBS investors.
Graph 2
Issuance margins on RMBS continued to tighten throughout this year across all categories

 of issuers (Graph 3). Banks have been able to place their latest AAA-rated

 tranches in the market at weighted average spreads of
80 basis points
– the lowest level since

 late 2007. Spreads on the AAA-rated tranches of non-bank issued RMBS have also

 declined, to around
100 basis points
. Investor

 demand has extended across the range of tranches, with a significant pick-up

 reported in demand for mezzanine notes. As a result, a number of issuers have

 priced their mezzanine notes at some of the tightest spreads since 2007.
Graph 3
Similar to last year, RMBS issuance this year has mainly originated from the major

 banks (Graph 4). Indeed, issuance by the major banks is on par with their

 issuance prior to the global financial crisis. Issuance by other banks has

 also been robust this year, although it is still well below pre-crisis levels

 when these issuers accounted for around 40 per cent of the market.
[3]
Graph 4
Mortgage originators have been active this year, although their issuance has predominantly

 been of prime RMBS. Mortgage originators have issued only $1.6 billion of non-conforming

 RMBS in 5 transactions so far this year. The number of mortgage originators

 active in the market in the past two years has increased relative to the period

 from 2009 to 2012.
They are an important presence in the market. In the period preceding the global

 financial crisis, mortgage originators took advantage of innovations in the

 packaging and pricing of risk. In doing so, they were able to undercut bank

 mortgage rates. The banks responded and spreads on mortgages declined markedly.

 While a number of large mortgage originators have exited the market, the presence

 of mortgage originators promotes competition in the mortgage market.
Issuance of asset-backed securities other than RMBS has generally been in line this

 year with previous years. Issuance of commercial mortgage-backed securities

 (CMBS) and other ABS this year has been around $5 billion, compared with

 an average of about $6 billion over the three preceding years.
The investor base in Australian ABS has continued to evolve (Graph 5). The stock

 of RMBS held by non-residents has been relatively steady since late 2010 suggesting

 that non-residents have been net buyers of Australian ABS. The strong performance

 of Australian RMBS and lack of issuance elsewhere may have been an important

 driver behind the participation of foreign investors. There has been a pick-up

 in RMBS holdings by Authorised deposit-taking institutions (ADIs) – they

 now hold just under
40 per cent
of marketed ABS outstanding –

 with the major banks accounting for much of the increase.
Graph 5
Holdings of ABS by real money domestic investors have gradually declined, to the

 point where these investors, in aggregate, now hold less than a quarter of

 what they held four years ago. The longer-term sustainability of the Australian

 securitisation market may well depend on increasing participation in the market

 by domestic real money investors.
One of the key structuring developments since mid 2007 has been the increase in credit

 subordination provided to the senior AAA-rated notes. This primarily reflects

 decreased reliance by the major banks on lenders mortgage insurance (LMI) support

 in their RMBS. This trend has been driven by investor preference for detaching

 the
AAA-rating
on the senior notes from the ratings

 of the LMI provider.
The increased subordination in the major banks' RMBS has been to a level in excess

 of that required to achieve a AAA-rating without LMI support. This mitigates

 the downgrade risk owing to changes in ratings criteria. In contrast, other

 categories of RMBS issuers have continued to use LMI to support their structures,

 allowing them to achieve AAA-ratings on a larger share of their deals.
ABS and Market Operations
As you will be aware, ABS can be used as collateral with the Reserve Bank in our

 open market operations and liquidity facilities. As at June, the Bank held

 about $25 billion of these assets under repo as part of our liquidity management

 operations (Table 1).
Table 1: Australian Dollar Securities Held under Repurchase Agreements
June 2012
June 2013
June 2014
$ billion
Per cent
of total
$ billion
Per cent
of total
$ billion
Per cent
of total
CGS
9
35
16
42
18
25
Semis
9
35
9
30
16
22
Supras
1
2
1
4
3
5
ADI issued
6
23
8
19
9
12
RMBS
1
3
1
4
25
35
Other
(a)
0
1
0
1
1
1
Total
24
100
35
100
71
100
(a) Includes government guaranteed securities
Source: RBA
Our current holdings are a function of our liquidity operations, in particular the

 expansion of the facilities we offered as part of the move to same day settlement

 of direct entry payments in November 2013. This resulted in a larger volume

 of repos being entered into by the Bank on a regular basis. In fact, the Bank's

 balance sheet expanded by about $20 billion – on the liability side of

 the Bank's balance sheet, exchange settlement account balances rose, while

 on the assets side, the Bank took self-securitised mortgage backed securities

 under repo. The Bank's use of self-securitised assets for this purpose

 reflects a number of factors, most notably a shortage of marketable collateral

 assets.
The Bank manages the risk of its ABS and other collateral to a very high standard,

 as ultimately the risk is borne by the taxpayer. There are three main elements

 to this: the quality of the collateral; a margin regime for managing risk;

 and accurate valuation.
The quality of the collateral
ABS are the only securities that the Bank accepts as collateral that are directly

 backed by real assets. Only the highest credit quality ABS, those with a AAA,

 or equivalent, rating, are eligible collateral with the Bank. Most of the other

 forms of eligible collateral are unsecured claims on highly rated issuers.

 Structured through bankruptcy remote vehicles, the credit quality of ABS reflects

 the quality of the security's collateral pool and the security's structural

 features, rather than the credit quality of any particular repo counterparty.

 Because of this unique feature, the Bank under certain conditions is willing

 to relax its rule for not accepting as collateral, securities related to the

 repo counterparty.
ABS are complex securities, with a number of parties providing key services or facilities

 to the ABS-issuing trust that contribute to the performance of the security.

 Often these services are tangential to the credit quality of the security,

 and a failure by a service or facility provider, when the provider's commitment

 to the ABS is not too large, will at worst lead to a small credit loss for

 the security. Such risks are managed through appropriately calibrated repo

 margins.
Margins
The baseline margin on standard asset-backed securities is
10 per cent
. The Bank considers a standard asset-backed

 security to be one with a collateral pool that consists of at least
90 per cent
prime, residential and full-documentation mortgages. Asset-backed securities

 not meeting this requirement, including ABS backed by collateral other than

 residential mortgages, are considered to be non-standard, and attract a higher

 baseline margin of between 15 to 20 per cent.
In the case of specific liquidity facilities, such as for open repos and the Committed

 Liquidity Facility, the related-party exemption rules have been varied for

 sponsors, originators and/or servicers (known colloquially as the ABS issuer).

 As a general rule, such exemptions are only granted to standard ABS.
Additional margins apply where there are elements of relatedness between the asset-backed

 security and the counterparty presenting the security to the Bank. This reflects

 the fact that counterparties may provide facilities to the ABS trust. These

 include interest rate swaps, basis swaps and liquidity facilities. There are

 limits on most categories of related-party risk and the margins are additive.
[4]
In addition, under certain conditions, the Bank gives no value for monies collected

 from the ABS collateral pool held with the ABS issuer (that is, the balance

 of the collection account). The total margins on the self-securitised RMBS

 currently on repo with the RBA vary from
18 to 27 per cent
. That is, these securities face

 an additional margin of
8 to 17 per cent
over

 the baseline standard ABS margin, with most attracting an additional margin

 of 11 per cent.
Some forms of related-party risk, such as the ones posed by the providers of guaranteed

 investment contracts or redemption facilities, which feature in RMBS with hard

 bullet notes, are too significant and cannot obtain a related-party exemption.
[5]
Valuation
The Bank applies the margin appropriate for the security's risk to the market

 price of the security to arrive at the price at which the Bank purchases the

 security under repo. Most of the Bank's eligible collateral is actively

 traded, so prices are readily available.
However, market prices for some collateral, especially ABS, are sometimes not readily

 observable. In this case the Bank uses an internal estimate of the security's

 fair value. Previously, in cases where the Bank could not identify a market

 price for non-government securities collateral, it assigned a fair value of

 90 per cent of par. More recently, however, the Bank has developed an internal

 valuation model for self-securitised RMBS which is used to determine fair value.
The Bank approaches the valuation of self-securitised RMBS in a similar way that

 a private investor would follow to assess fair value. In essence:
the weighted-average life (WAL) of the self-securitised RMBS is estimated by projecting

 the principal payments on the RMBS given the transaction structure and assumptions

 about the prepayment behaviour of the mortgages in the collateral pool;
the Bank then estimates a relationship between the margin over relevant benchmark

 money market rates (usually 1-month BBSW) of RMBS traded in the market and

 their WAL, while controlling for other relevant factors;
the estimated WAL and discount rates are used in a standard floating-rate note pricing

 formula to arrive at the fair value of the self-securitised RMBS.
Future development
The risk management and valuation of ABS collateral is obviously an analytically

 intensive process, requiring considerable information about the security and

 the underlying assets. Over time we will further develop pricing and margins

 that reflect the specifics of the asset-backed security and its collateral

 pool. This could, for example, take the form of credit risk models of the collateral

 pool which take into account characteristics such as geographic concentrations,

 delinquencies and loan-to-value ratios. These collateral credit models will

 be combined with structural security models to calibrate margins specific to

 the security that reflect its projected behaviour under stress scenarios.
Conclusion
In conclusion, the Australian securitisation industry continues to advance and on

 most metrics is doing relatively well. At the same time, asset-backed securities

 are becoming an increasingly important part of the Reserve Bank's liquidity

 operations, and therefore the Bank's balance sheet. The Bank manages the

 risk of these securities (and our other collateral) to a very high standard.

 As you will be aware, this is the Bank's primary motivation for the new

 mandatory data reporting requirements for asset-backed securities that are

 eligible at the Bank. It is to the credit of the Australian Securitisation

 Forum and its members that they also saw this as an opportunity to promote

 improvements to market transparency.
Thank you for your time.
Endnotes
I would like to thank Ivailo Arsov, In Song Kim and David Wakeling for assistance

 in the preparation of these remarks.
[*]
This has not been a total surprise. See, for example, Debelle G (2010),
The 

 State of Play in the Securitisation Market
,

 address to the Australian Securitisation Conference 2010.
[1]
Issues identified include regulatory capital charges on asset-backed securities,

 aspects of ratings agency methodologies limiting the ability of some European

 asset-backed securities to obtain high ratings and limited investor appetite

 for the asset class. For more details, see Bank of England and European Central

 Bank (2014), The Case for a Better Functioning Securitisation Market in the

 European Union, Discussion Paper, May, available at: <http://www.bankofengland.co.uk/publications/Documents/news/2014/paper300514.pdf>.
[2]
Some of the other bank issuers have been acquired by the major banks since 2007.

 St George Bank, for example, accounted for 30 per cent of issuance for the

 group between 2005 and June 2007; Westpac acquired St George in late 2008.
[3]
The additional related-party margins will apply to all ABS from next year but the

 exemption for ABS issuers will remain limited to the Bank's liquidity

 facilities.
[4]
Guaranteed investment accounts and redemption facilities exist to directly support

 the timely payment of principal; a failure of one of these facilities'

 providers would typically trigger a default event on all of the RMBS notes.
[5]
