BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Future of Money – London
DATE: 02/07/2014
SPEAKER: London
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2014/sp-ag-020714.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Future of Money
Guy Debelle
Assistant Governor (Financial Markets)
Address via Telepresence Robot to Camp Alphaville
London
–
2 July 2014
Audio
5.48
MB
Thanks very much to Izzy Kaminska for allowing me to grace the stage from the other

 side of the world and to Kate Mackenzie (an Alphaville alumnus) for getting

 the Australian presence at Camp Alphaville up with me and my fellow Bronte

 resident, John Hempton.
And Izzy, this shows robots can be a force for good. The telepresence robot saved

 me 48 hours travelling time and all the carbon emissions that go with that.

 Though if telepresence robots really take off, a few airlines will be out of

 business which would be more in keeping with Izzy's thesis.
It is a privilege to be opening the batting at Camp Alphaville though these days

 it seems any old Australian can open the batting for England. An Australian

 central banker appearing via robot talking about the future of money is very

 much an overture for today's conference with topics to come including ‘Central

 Banks and their Jedi Mind Tricks’, ‘FX Wars’ and ‘China

 up Shibor Creek’. I would very much add a question mark to that last

 topic.
David Birch, who is going to be on the panel shortly, recently wrote that once again

 we are talking about a cashless society. I would like to pick up on the words

 ‘once again’. The death of cash has been foretold many times over

 the decades. As Mark Twain might say, cash has turned up at its own funeral

 quite a few times. Notwithstanding many innovations in payments technology,

 cash is hanging in there. Another paper-based transactions medium, cheques,

 are clearly on the way out, but cash doesn't seem to be going that way

 yet.
David goes on to talk about a world of lots of exchanges and lots of currencies,

 a veritable Tower of Babel of currencies. In that world, someone needs to be

 Douglas Adams' babelfish. And I would see central banks as playing that

 role (though I would say that of course).
So what do we want from money? We want it to be a medium of exchange and a store

 of value. For both of those functions, trust is absolutely critical. Because

 money is an inter-temporal store of value, I need to know it's going to

 have value tomorrow and that other people are going to accept it. In that sense,

 money is a bit like a bubble; it only has value as long as someone else believes

 it has value. But fiat money has a bit more going for it than that. It has

 value in part because it is backed by the power of the state to tax. That has

 been true for centuries, as money has evolved from sea shells to gold to fiat

 money.
So what is the threat of digital disruption to this world? For something like bitcoin,

 I need to ask whether I can trust the algorithm. Can I trust the security?

 It relies on reputation rather than regulation. The experience over the past

 year or so shows up a few problems with that.
An important question to think about (at least for a central banker) is whether digital

 disruption is a micro story or a macro story. There may be digital disruption

 at the micro level to the payments system, but that may not have macro implications.

 The transmission mechanism might change, but that is always the case and something

 that is always on the radar for a central bank. So there may be transitions

 between different payments media with minimal macro consequences.
There may also be a lot of changes in payments mechanisms at the cutting edge, which

 may be picked up by the twitterati, but I am not so sure about your average

 punter. Technology is very much about diffusion: how far and how fast. Both

 of those two elements are critical in determining the extent of disruption.
In a world of competing currencies and competing payments mechanisms, as I said earlier,

 reputation is key. I am not sure it would be a stable equilibrium to have multiple

 currencies all circulating side by side. Gresham's Law would suggest that

 one will win out (and not necessarily the best one). I would think that one

 system's reputation would trump the others and that most people would really

 only be interested in understanding and verifying the reputation of one currency,

 certainly not too many more than that.
In this context it is interesting to think about Scotland. Scotland in the 18th and

 19th century was near the libertarian ideal of free banking, though obviously

 it didn't last. The Scottish independence vote is coming up in a few months.

 If that gets up, it has been suggested that Scotland might no longer be part

 of the pound, or at least get any seigniorage from it. In that world, if the

 Scots are scratching around for a new currency, they can try digital currencies.

 The rest of us could watch for a few years and see how that natural experiment

 goes.
So to conclude, I think the digital threat to the future of money is very much a

 micro story, not a macro one. More electronification seems certain, though

 even then, I can see cash hanging in there. I am not willing to say ‘no

 future for cash’, or book a ticket for its funeral on my mobile payments

 device. The macro story is a clearer picture. The transmission mechanism might

 change, but the principles and overall framework are likely to remain intact

 for a while to come.
