BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Reforming and Financing the Post-crisis Future – Melbourne
DATE: 04/07/2014
SPEAKER: Melbourne
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2014/sp-so-040714.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Reforming and Financing the Post-crisis Future
Luci Ellis
Head of Financial Stability Department
Remarks to the 2014 Economic and Social Outlook Conference hosted by the Melbourne Institute and
The Australian
Melbourne
–
4 July 2014
Audio
12.99
MB
Q&A Transcript
Thank you to the organisers for the opportunity to speak to this group about such

 an important topic. The central concern flagged as the theme for this session

 is whether the post-crisis regulatory reform program has distorted provision

 of finance in this country in a way that impedes our growth prospects. So I

 would like first to talk about those reforms, before moving on to discuss what

 they mean for how economic activity in Australia is financed.
The crisis showed that the global regulatory structure existing at the time was not

 delivering the degree of system safety that society expected or wanted. Australia

 had already built a bit more conservatism into its prudential framework than

 the global minimum standard. So did some other countries that were less affected

 by the crisis. I would argue that events have vindicated that choice –

 not to eliminate risk entirely, but to manage it appropriately. In a couple

 of respects, the Basel III package of reforms to global banking regulation

 represented a catch-up to where Australia and some other countries already

 were.
The post-crisis reform program goes well beyond the Basel standards and making banking

 safer. Far-reaching reforms have also been implemented or proposed in the areas

 of over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives trading, resolution of failing financial

 intermediaries, and the so-called ‘shadow banking’ system outside

 the perimeter of prudential regulation. These are the four areas that Australia

 has advocated focusing on in its G20 presidency year. (Barry Sterland will

 have more to say about the G20 regulatory reform agenda later in this session.)

 There is still some work to do to implement some of these agreed reforms. But

 the Australian authorities have taken the view that any new initiatives from

 here cannot really be described as necessary responses to the crisis. The global

 regulatory community needs to set a high bar for proposals beyond what has

 already been agreed.
If the Australian authorities have limited appetite for continually adding to the

 reform program, we have even less appetite for rolling it back. A return to

 the pre-crisis set-up would be a mistake. Australia went into the crisis with

 a financial system that was better placed to handle the shocks than some other

 systems were. But there were some things that could have been better and have

 since improved. Consumer protection rules now cover a wider range of loan types.

 Funding structures in banking now better reflect liquidity risks. The authorities

 have some more effective ways to resolve financial firms if they do fail. And

 protection for depositors has been strengthened and clarified. Those are just

 a few examples of the work that has been done in recent years.
The Australian authorities have been actively engaged in developing the post-crisis

 reforms. In doing so, we have worked to ensure that global reforms can still

 fit local conditions. We are just one voice among many – and a fairly

 small one. Even so, our efforts have met with some success. For example, the

 new Basel liquidity rules needed to be workable in countries like Australia,

 where there is not much government debt. Partly because of the efforts of the

 Australian authorities, an option was added to allow banks to meet the Liquidity

 Coverage Ratio through a committed liquidity facility with the central bank.

 Several other countries in a similar situation will be using the same approach.
Tailoring global rules for local conditions is a very different thing from ignoring

 global standards entirely. Walking away from these global reforms is not an

 option for Australia. Australian financial firms play in a global financial

 system. They diversify their investor base by tapping global markets. So they

 need to be able to show that they meet the minimum standards that the global

 market expects. For banks, that includes the Basel III package. And the Basel

 III package always contemplated that banking systems that could meet the new

 capital requirements ahead of the deadline should do so. Other financial firms

 and infrastructure will also need to meet the global standards relevant to

 them.
Setting up global regulation takes time and effort. So does complying with new regulation.

 But harmonising global financial regulatory standards surely benefits firms

 with business in many countries, compared with the alternative of each country

 going entirely their own way. I can't help noticing that there has been

 less attention given to harmonising regulation globally for other industries

 where the suppliers are also often global firms and the customers are also

 generally local households and businesses. Pharmaceuticals, household cleaning

 products and children's toys and car seats are all markets with substantial

 market shares going to global producers. Safety matters a great deal for all

 of these products. Yet there is no Basel Committee for cleaning products regulation.

 We don't have information-sharing arrangements or common rules for over-the-counter

 medication the way we do for over-the-counter derivatives. Those industries

 just have to wear the costs of complying with national regulation.
Part of the reason for the difference is that if something does go wrong in one country,

 there is not the same spillover to other countries, the way there is in finance.

 Financial regulatory gaps and lapses in other countries can hurt us, as the

 financial crisis showed. It is in all countries' interests to cooperate

 on regulatory standards and promoting financial stability. Regulators cooperate

 for the benefit of the people of their countries, not for the benefit of the

 regulated firms.
Complying with regulation still does take effort, though, and absorbs resources that

 could be used for something else. Regulators do need to be mindful about compliance

 burdens. The regulated entities also need to be alert to inefficiencies in

 their approaches to compliance. If the imperative to comply with new regulation

 were to spur a rethink of outmoded business practices or inefficient systems,

 that could be a good outcome.
With a reform program as extensive as the post-crisis reforms have been, it is natural

 to wonder if there might be some unintended consequences. In the lead-up to

 the crisis, it was apparent that, globally, risk was being underpriced. By

 implication, credit was too easily available. Some of that spilled over to

 Australia, most notably for business credit, which over 2007 expanded at an

 annual rate of more than 20 per cent. Even now, it seems that the

 price of risk has again declined to low levels, though not quite as low as

 in early 2007. Volatility in financial markets is also quite low at the moment.

 Some market participants might again have become complacent about the risks

 they are taking. Policymakers are rightly wary of excessively exuberant credit

 supply. But at the same time, it would be unfortunate if the post-crisis policy

 responses had the effect of restricting credit supply too much and of shutting

 out worthy borrowers.
The text in the conference program introducing this session exemplifies this concern

 about financing economic activity. Banks, it claimed, are being turned into

 glorified building societies, lending for mortgages and not much else. I don't

 think that is a completely accurate characterisation, but it is a claim we

 should take seriously.
In asking what the post-crisis reform program has meant for particular sectors, we

 need to be mindful of an important principle: that bank capital should be allocated

 according to risk. If a particular loan or other asset is riskier, then banks

 need to hold more capital against that asset than they must hold against a

 less risky asset. Lending to business is riskier than mortgage lending to households.

 The US experience has shown that it is possible to have a bad outcome on mortgage

 lending, even before an economic calamity, rather than as part of one. But

 the breakdown in lending standards you need to get that kind of an outcome

 is extreme. The losses on mortgage lending, over decades and across many countries,

 are simply lower than losses on business lending. Other episodes of losses

 on mortgage portfolios have generally been the result of an economic downturn,

 not the cause of it. That is the evidence.
The evidence is also that finance for small business in Australia was not particularly

 badly hit by the crisis. Bank lending to unincorporated businesses –

 that is, sole traders and partnerships – held up better than lending

 to the corporate sector in the post-crisis period. It was the foreign bank

 branches that, as a group, contracted their lending most. They normally lend

 to the big end of town, more so than to small business and start-up ventures.
The concerns about availability of finance for small business hark back to some of

 the complaints one used to hear about banks in the 1970s and 1980s. Banks wouldn't

 support innovative Australian business, went the story, so those businesses

 had to move offshore to get funding. When it came down to it, most of the complaints

 seemed to be about the rotary engine. But underneath it all was a legitimate

 concern. Start-up businesses, innovation and entrepreneurship are a large part

 of what society needs to move forward and raise living standards. Yet they

 are also inherently risky propositions. Many new businesses fail. Their creditors

 will make losses.
If something is a riskier proposition, lenders ought to hold more capital against

 the loan than against something safer. That is as it should be. But more than

 that, maybe that business shouldn't be funded with debt, or at least not

 entirely so. Such businesses might be better funded by equity-type finance

 that allows for an unprofitable build-up phase of the business, and that can

 absorb the anticipated volatility in profit. But that kind of investment isn't

 a loan, and it isn't the kind of asset that should dominate the balance

 sheet of a bank.
Remember that banks accept deposits.
[1]
There is a huge social value in having some kind of asset that people can trust

 in, so that value will be there when they come to make payments. As a society,

 we have decided that private entities should be able to offer such a safe asset.

 But if their liabilities are to be so safe, and so liquid, they must be regulated

 and supervised appropriately.
[2]
Part of that regulation and supervision is designed to limit the riskiness

 of the assets backing those deposit liabilities. So rather than looking to

 banks for loans, perhaps new businesses need finance that looks more like venture

 capital.
The Bank raised similar issues in its submission to the Financial System Inquiry

 (RBA 2014). Over the years, there has been a lot of attention given to the

 level of competition in the residential mortgage market. But as we said in

 that submission, the supply of mortgage finance is ample. There is no need

 for new policies that would advantage lending for that purpose.
If there are structural impediments to competition in finance, they are more likely

 to manifest in small business finance. Unlike larger corporations, small business

 does not have access to non-intermediated market alternatives, especially global

 bond markets. There are things that can be done to improve the infrastructure

 in the capital market. But there will be limits to how much difference this

 will make for start-up firms. Someone would still have to perform a credit

 assessment on those firms, and evaluate their business plans. This is costly,

 bespoke work, where relationship banking provides an information advantage.
So there are some impediments to debt financing of small business, but I doubt that

 the post-crisis reform program has made them any worse. There is nothing in

 the Basel III package that makes housing finance relatively more attractive

 compared with other lending than was already the case in Basel II and before.

 And those relativities are designed, however imperfectly, to reflect risk.

 The exact numbers in those risk weightings have changed over time, but the

 relativities have not.
It should also be remembered that some of the additional conservatism in Australia's

 prudential framework is precisely in this area. APRA set the local rules to

 require banks using their own models to hold more capital against housing mortgages

 than a plain-vanilla version of the Basel standards would require.
[3]
Banks in some other countries actually hold much less capital against mortgages

 than the big banks here do. It could perhaps be argued that Australia should

 go further and be even more conservative in its treatment of housing finance.

 That would, of course, make mortgages more expensive and less available than

 they otherwise would be. Whether and how far to go in this direction is something

 the Financial System Inquiry may want to examine.
The upshot of all this is that banks have advantages in assessing creditworthiness

 that financial markets cannot completely replicate. So banks will probably

 always play an important role in financing small and new businesses. Because

 they take deposits, though, they need to ensure that their assets are not too

 risky, and that they hold sufficient capital for the risks they do run. So

 they probably cannot be the only source of finance for these ventures.
If there is a segment of business finance that is riskier, perhaps much of it should

 be structured more like equity than debt. It therefore probably needs to come

 from another class of investor, not prudentially regulated deposit-taking banks.

 In Australia, the superannuation sector more or less equals the banking system

 in size. Its asset base includes a lot of equity exposures: it is a sector

 that clearly can take some investment risk. So some observers naturally wonder

 if the superannuation sector could be somehow induced to direct its funds in

 ways that fulfil various social goals and perceived funding needs. But as the

 Bank pointed out in its submission to the Financial System Inquiry, the goal

 of the superannuation system is to provide retirement incomes for its beneficiaries.

 Superannuation assets should be managed in the best interest of fund members.

 Their allocation should not be distorted in pursuit of other ends.
The availability of appropriately structured finance is an important issue for the

 Financial System Inquiry to consider. The committee will be releasing an interim

 report in coming weeks. I don't want to speculate on what that report contains,

 or make suggestions for what it should contain, given that the text has presumably

 already been finalised. If I look back at the Bank's submission, though,

 I see a few other themes that I hope the Inquiry has examined further. One

 important issue relates to Australia's superannuation system, namely its

 cost and pricing. Analysis from several sources suggests that at least some

 parts of the sector incur costs and charge fees that are quite high compared

 with other countries. There is no social benefit to paying more for the same

 funds management services. Every dollar that is paid in fees to trustees, fund

 managers and all the other layers of the industry is a dollar that is not going

 into Australians' retirement savings. I'm pleased to see that Treasury

 has recently taken up that particular issue.
[4]
To conclude, public policy needs to ensure that the stability and safety of the financial

 system meet society's actual expectations. It also needs to ensure that

 this stability is not at the expense of the innovation and entrepreneurship

 that can raise living standards. The objective is not to eliminate all risk.

 But those risks need to be structured in ways that limit the chance of a systemically

 bad outcome. They also need to be allocated to those parties best able to bear

 them. In large part, that is what the post-crisis reform program has been designed

 to do.
Thank you for your time.
Endnotes
Throughout this speech, I use the term ‘bank’ to include any institution

 engaged in banking business, specifically deposit-taking. In Australia, authorised

 deposit-taking institutions include credit unions and building societies

 as well as institutions that are actually called banks, but to keep things

 simple I use ‘bank’ to refer to all of them.
[1]
They also need to have access to central bank liquidity. For more discussion of this,

 see Debelle (2011) and Ellis (2013).
[2]
I have discussed this previously in Ellis (2013). See also RBA (2014), Box 6A.
[3]
See Gruen (2014).
[4]
Bibliography
Debelle G (2011), ‘
Collateral, Funding and Liquidity
’,

 Address to Conference on Systemic Risk, Basel III, Financial Stability and

 Regulation, Sydney, 28 June.
Ellis L (2013), ‘
Stability, Efficiency, Diversity: Implications for the Financial Sector and Policy
’,

 Paul Woolley Centre for the Study of Capital Market Dysfunctionality Conference,

 Sydney, 18 October.
Gruen D (2014), ‘Towards an Efficient and Stable Financial System’, CEDA

 State of the Nation 2014 , Canberra, 23 June. Available at <http://www.treasury.gov.au/PublicationsAndMedia/Speeches/2014/Towards-an-efficient-and-stable-financial-system>.
RBA (2014), ‘
Submission to the Financial System Inquiry
’,

 March.
