BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Future Directions in Financial Stability Analysis: Learning from Others, Learning from the Past – Sydney
DATE: 09/10/2014
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2014/sp-so-091014.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Future Directions in Financial Stability Analysis: Learning from Others, Learning

 from the Past
Luci Ellis
[
*
]
Head of Financial Stability Department
Address to the Paul Woolley Centre for the Study of

 Capital Market Dysfunctionality Conference
Sydney
–
9 October 2014
Audio
18.6
MB
Q&A Transcript
My thanks, once again, go to the Paul Woolley Centre for the opportunity to participate

 in this conference. I have had the privilege of speaking at all four of the

 Centre's annual conferences. My previous three speeches were very much

 from the perspective of someone from a policymaking institution – on

 how to detect risks to financial stability, how to respond, and what mix of

 skills you might need to do so. With this being the last conference of this

 type at the Centre, I thought it would make sense to talk about future directions

 for research. This is, after all, an academic conference.
Before I get to that, I'd like to make a couple of comments about recent developments.

 The Reserve Bank has been closely monitoring emerging risks in property markets

 for some time now. At least some of the growth in housing prices since the

 middle of last year was a bit of a catch-up from a period of weakness. Some

 increase in prices was to be expected given the current level of interest rates.

 And housing prices are still within the same range, relative to incomes, that

 we have seen over the past decade, albeit towards the top of that range. But

 if you look beyond the national aggregates and averages, risks do seem to have

 been building in some parts of the housing market, specifically the investor

 segments of the Sydney and Melbourne markets.
Currently close to half of all net new housing finance is extended to self-declared

 investors rather than owner-occupiers. That share is noticeably higher than

 rental housing's share of the housing stock, even allowing for a possible

 faster rate of churn in investor loans. Obviously that can't continue forever.

 We raised the issue over a year ago in the September 2013
Financial Stability Review
; it is a reason why, in the latest
Financial Stability Review
,

 we described the composition of the housing and mortgage markets as becoming

 unbalanced.
Part of the anticipated effect of monetary policy is to induce more construction

 activity. Higher prices are the incentive to get that expansion, which is indeed

 happening. But it is worth noting that the vast bulk of that new borrowing

 is to purchase existing properties (Graph 1).
We talked about these issues at some length in the
Financial

 Stability Review
last month, and last week before the Senate. I do not

 have anything new to add today to what we have already said in the past few

 weeks. We obviously need to keep a close eye on market developments, including

 lending standards. Amongst other things, banks and other lenders need to consider

 the risks they are taking on, not just from individual loans, but from the

 collective effects of lending decisions on the system as a whole.
Graph 1
APRA is the regulator and supervisor of banks and other deposit-taking businesses

 in Australia. It has already been turning up the dial in its supervisory activities

 in this area, though this might not have been obvious to observers outside

 those regulated institutions. As has already been described publicly, APRA

 is consulting with the Reserve Bank and with other members of the Council of

 Financial Regulators, about additional steps that could be taken to reinforce

 sound lending practices. In doing so, it will balance the advantages and disadvantages

 in the context of financial system stability, safety, and efficiency, and it

 will consider how those measures can best be targeted.
Everything I have mentioned so far today is consistent with the existing framework

 for financial stability policy in Australia: APRA has the mandate to use its

 powers to promote financial stability; it can take a holistic approach to risk;

 it can and does coordinate with other regulators, under the auspices of the

 Council of Financial Regulators. So what I am describing is very much in keeping

 with the ‘state of mind’ of macroprudential policy that I described

 in my speech here in 2012.
Authorities in many countries have looked to prudential and supervisory measures

 as part of the policy response to financial risk. Different countries have

 designed their responses differently, according to the institutional arrangements

 they have and the specific risks they face. In doing so, they have found relatively

 little existing theory to draw upon in the academic literature. That's

 where you come in, and broadly speaking it's the topic of the remainder

 of my talk today.
A Crisis for Theory?
It has been said that the global financial crisis was also a crisis for macroeconomic

 theory. New models and approaches are required, so it's claimed. I don't

 think I can add much new to that discussion. Economists far more knowledgeable

 and eminent than me have had quite a bit to say on this recently.
[1]
Some of the participants in that debate have argued that the problem with mainstream

 theory was that it assumes that people have rational expectations. I agree

 that we need more research into the biases that pervade human behaviour. But

 I'm not so sure that ‘rational expectations’ is the first assumption

 we should throw out of the standard models. The standard models that were being

 taught in graduate schools – those coming under the umbrella label of

 ‘DSGE’ models – didn't just assume that people were rational

 and forward-looking.
[2]
Most of them also assumed that there was a representative agent, who was infinitely

 lived and who had full information about the structure of the economy.
Or in other words, you are the only person in the world; you are going to live forever;

 and you know everything. It might be a reasonable way to model an economy comprised

 entirely of teenagers, but I think it might have some shortcomings when analysing

 the economy we actually have. More seriously though, without some diversity

 of actors in the model, some diversity of beliefs, there are no financial markets,

 no borrowing and lending transactions.
It is true that many mainstream macro models did not contain financial sectors, or

 admit the possibility of financial crises. They were built to answer different

 questions – and that's ok! No single model can do everything.
This does not mean that policymakers were unaware of the importance of financial

 factors. Some of the most senior policymakers had been authorities on financial

 frictions and crises in their academic lives.
[3]
And there were plenty of recent crises to remind us that crises matter. In

 fact, in the lead-up to the crisis, two of the most frequent policy debates

 were, first, what to do about so-called ‘global imbalances’ and

 second, whether and how monetary policy should respond to asset prices.
These were not just conversations among policymakers, either. Plenty of serious academic

 work was published on these topics during the pre-crisis period, often using

 more or less mainstream models (e.g. Bordo and Jeanne (2002) and Kiyotaki and

 Moore (1997)). Many of these papers were written by distinguished academics

 and published in top journals. These papers had welcoming audiences. If you

 wanted to work on these topics, nobody was stopping you. I've read some

 reports of sniggering in seminar rooms, when people presented papers outside

 the mainstream models. Let me assure you that good papers on financial stability

 topics had interest and respectful audiences at central banks and international

 agencies long before the crisis.
So if the core mainstream models couldn't be used to investigate financial crises,

 it wasn't because they were inherently limited. It was because (like Jessica

 Rabbit) they were drawn that way. That was a choice of the modellers. It comes

 down to the questions they were trying to answer. So perhaps the real issue

 is not so much whether our models and theory needed to change, but why mainstream

 macro theory was not more interested in financial crises and financial stability

 issues generally.
Nowadays, of course, there is more interest in the subject. Whatever the methods

 to be used, this is an incredibly exciting time to be researching topics related

 to financial stability. Indeed, never before have there been so many interesting

 questions to pursue, yet so little time for us policymakers to pursue them

 ourselves.
Even more exciting is that it's a game that many people can play, not just economics

 and finance types. For example, I think there is a lot that sociologists and

 organisational psychologists could have to say about why the major global banks

 take the risks that they do. And because we know that so much of the financial

 stability policy framework centres on communicating and warning about risk,

 I'd love to hear from academics in the field of communications, about whether

 we could do it better.
Learning from the Past
So how should academics interested in financial stability topics approach the subject?

 Some observers have suggested that what we need is better models of asset price

 bubbles (Allen and Carletti 2013). Honestly, I'm not so sure that this

 is the first priority. I just don't see asset markets as having an on/off

 state – bubble or no bubble. There will always be some speculators in

 any asset market, more at some times than others. And even in the hottest market,

 there will always be some people buying for completely non-speculative reasons

 based on expected dividends or the suitability of the home, or whatever other

 ‘fundamentals’ are important to them in the context of that particular

 asset. This kind of diversity is particularly relevant in property markets,

 where every property is different in some way. Even if prices seem overinflated

 in general, there can always be a well-priced property somewhere.
On a more practical level, as I've explained elsewhere previously, asset prices

 can go through boom-bust cycles that seem completely in line with fundamentals

 like rents, if those fundamentals are also cyclical. Busts of this type can

 be just as painful as the bubbly sort. Another limitation of a bubbles-focused

 approach is that your estimate of the bubble is only as good as your model

 of fundamentals. Unfortunately, many models of fundamentals are quite limited.

 In particular, many of them implicitly assume the same single-agent structure

 that is so problematic for macroeconomic models.
Perhaps a more productive approach might be to think of asset markets as having many

 different type of trader operating in them, some more speculative in their

 intentions than others. Models with different types of trader have a longstanding

 place in the literature.
[4]
I think there is more to be done in this vein.
Rather than focusing on bubbles specifically, I'd like to step back and suggest

 a couple of guidelines that I think are likely to be important for staying

 on the right track when investigating financial stability issues.
First,
get your stocks and flows straight
. I believe that no model

 will capture financial stability dynamics unless it incorporates stocks as

 well as the flows into and out of them. The obvious case is a balance sheet.

 If you are interested in a topic related to financial stability, tracking flows

 of income and expenditure isn't enough. You must also track the underlying

 balance sheets – the debt, the liquidity position, leverage and so on.

 That is not a new insight. The role of balance sheets, and especially debt,

 was a central theme of work by Irving Fisher, Wynne Godley and many others.
I'd go further than that and say that balance sheets are not the only stock that

 matters. Physical stocks – of equipment, of real estate, or of particular

 types of capital goods such as ships – can also be very important. Long-lived

 physical assets can experience large price cycles because their supply –

 a stock – is inherently sluggish. Speculative bubble dynamics are actually

 not required for a painful boom-bust cycle in asset prices.
An example might help illustrate this point. The recent financial crisis was sparked

 by a meltdown in the US mortgage market. Mortgage defaults started rising rapidly,

 long before unemployment did. Many countries had booms in housing prices before

 the crisis. But only a few had large subsequent increases in mortgage defaults.

 And only in the United States did defaults rise dramatically
before
unemployment rose significantly. Why was that? As I've

 discussed elsewhere, a lot of factors contributed, not least the utter breakdown

 in lending standards in the US mortgage market (Ellis 2010). But also crucial

 was the overbuilding, the build-up of a supply overhang.
A good indicator of this is the US Census Bureau's series on the share of non-rental

 housing that is both vacant and for sale – the owner-occupier vacancy

 rate (Graph 2). You can think of it as a kind of unemployment rate for

 houses. The vertical line shows the December 2006 release, which was published

 in early 2007, before the financial part of the crisis had started.
Over more than half a century, this vacancy rate had never before risen so high or

 so quickly. It should be clear from this that the US housing market was in

 a different position to Australia's, or the United Kingdom's, or many

 other countries that had seen strong growth in housing prices up to that point.

 Because it had a supply overhang, the United States was set for a larger downturn

 than those other countries.
[5]
Looking at the flow of building work wasn't enough to see the problem.

 You also had to look at the resulting stocks.
[6]
Unfortunately a lot of people missed this point. That might have been partly

 because they weren't looking across different countries' experiences.
Graph 2
Second,
allow for incomplete information, uncertainty and thus 

 default
. Incomplete information is especially important when some

 people have information that others do not. From these asymmetries spring agency

 problems of the type that seem endemic in finance. There is already a substantial

 body of literature on these issues.
[7]
I expect that it will remain a fruitful area for research, particularly when

 one considers issues of organisational culture, fraud and so on.
The specific possibility of default on a loan is a fundamental building block in

 any investigation of financial stability issues: people who borrow cannot know

 for sure that they will be able to repay the debt. They might expect and plan

 to do so, but some unexpected bad event might prevent it. Neither borrower

 nor lender knows for sure who will default. While lenders might estimate a

 probability of default, they cannot observe it.
[8]
Uncertainty about default induces lenders to impose constraints on how much they

 will lend to a particular borrower. Again, this is all in much older and relatively

 (though in some cases not entirely) mainstream literature. Some of these papers

 focused on companies as customers of the banking system (Bernanke and Gertler

 1989); others applied similar ideas to the banks themselves, allowing for the

 possibility of bank runs (Diamond and Dybvig 1983).
So there are credit constraints. They take different forms but often boil down to

 working out how large a repayment the borrower can be expected to service.

 Credit constraints of this type can have macro consequences, and in particular

 they affect how we should interpret movements in certain macro-level quantities.

 If average interest rates fall, the loan amount that corresponds to that repayment

 is larger. Australia went from being a high-inflation country to a low-inflation

 country in the early 1990s. One result of that was that average nominal interest

 rates fell, and so the sustainable amount of debt rose relative to income –

 permanently. People should therefore not expect ratios of housing prices or

 debt to income to revert to their long-run, multi-decade averages. We have

 discussed this conclusion numerous times over the past 20 years.
[9]
Obviously if we are wrong about this, we would love to know about it. So far,

 nobody has come up with a counterargument to this idea, let alone a compelling

 one.
Instead we see some people confidently opining that property prices are however many per cent

 overvalued. What is the model behind these statements? As far as I can tell,

 there is never a real model, only an assumption that if the national ratio

 of prices to incomes or rents is however many percentage points away from some

 multi-decade long-run average, it must revert to that average. Yet there is

 no theory that says things should work that way. Credit constraints matter,

 and if those constraints should change, say because of regulatory change or

 disinflation, then the sustainable level of these kinds of ratios will also

 shift.
[10]
Learning from Others
I feel a little as though I have spent most of today's talk citing all the well-known

 seminal papers in this field. And they are the well-known seminal papers. The

 point I am making is that none of this is completely new. The profession as

 a whole was not ignoring financial stability issues, even if the whole profession

 wasn't focused on the topic.
Certainly some of the authors I've cited in the footnotes to this talk might

 have felt themselves to be outside of the mainstream of macroeconomics as it

 is taught in the top graduate schools overseas. I have deliberately sought

 to show that these topics were being researched, were being published in top

 journals, and were getting the necessary attention from many policymakers.
That said, it is a collection of work that did not make it into those canonical macro

 models. More needs to be done on this front. Some of the most relevant ideas

 were coming from top academics such as the ones I've cited today, who could

 hardly be said to be outside the core of the profession. Certainly there are

 other important insights coming from those who aren't big names. And there

 are some quite big names whose influences are somewhat outside the graduate

 school canon.
[11]
There is much to be learned from all those voices.
Beyond the diverse voices in the fields of economics and finance, I think there is

 a lot to be learned from a different kind of ‘other’: researchers

 in other fields entirely. Many of the issues relevant for financial stability

 analysis are quite difficult to tackle using standard economics models. It

 is hard enough to model a system with diverse kinds of atoms; it's even

 harder to model a system with diverse kinds of humans, who think ahead and

 plan and mould their behaviour in response to what they think the other guy

 is going to do.
There are so many interesting ideas in other fields. For example, I already mentioned

 the problems of assuming a single type of agent in the system. Recently, researchers

 in central banks and elsewhere have been using network models to obtain some

 useful insights on the structure of particular financial markets and relationships.

 Inherently, this means recognising that you can't treat each market participant

 as being interchangeable with the others. Each of them will have a different

 set of relationships, and therefore pose a different set of risks to the others

 and to the system. Networks have a long history in the mathematical literature,

 but they are relatively new tools in economics and finance.
Another interesting angle comes from so-called agent-based modelling, which really

 aggregates up from the individual. The overall behaviour develops organically,

 rather than assuming that the micro represents the macro.
When I titled this talk ‘learning from others’, though, I really did

 mean ‘learning’. Economics as a field is particularly known for

 co-opting techniques from other disciplines. There is econophysics, ideas from

 evolutionary biology, ideas from geography. There are people looking at networks,

 searching for power laws, and many other examples. But economics and finance

 will remain the fields with the most to say about financial stability. As we

 adopt these models and techniques, we have to be aware of their strengths and

 weaknesses, and be mindful of using them in ways that are not misleading. We

 have to engage with the expertise in those other fields, and learn from them.
One of the great things about universities is that those multidisciplinary conversations

 can happen right here on campus. Unlike at central banks and international

 financial institutions, where almost everyone doing research comes from some

 variety of economics or finance training, at universities, there are experts

 in those other fields right down the hall or in the next building. Not all

 of their approaches and techniques will be appropriate for our purposes. We

 are much more likely to be able to tell the difference between the useful transplants

 and the less useful ones if we engage with the originating fields. Be wary

 of just reading a paper or two and thinking that you understand a whole field

 or technique.
So if I am to articulate a vision of what research in financial stability topics

 could look like, it would be one of both continuity and change. I anticipate

 that many of the most useful ideas will be developed from existing ideas, especially

 those on asymmetric information and uncertainty. I also anticipate that some

 techniques adapted from other fields will prove fruitful, though there might

 be others that end up being dead ends for our purposes, no matter how useful

 they are in their original fields. And I anticipate that, try as I might, there

 will still be more interesting papers than policymakers like me have time to

 read. For that, I apologise. I will try, though, because I'm looking forward

 to seeing what you come up with.
Thank you for your time.
Endnotes
Thanks to Fiona Price for her assistance in preparing this talk.
[*]
Most recently Blanchard (2014) and Stiglitz (2014).
[1]
DSGE stands for ‘dynamic stochastic general equilibrium’, though in practice

 it refers to a particular subset of models that involve time paths (dynamic)

 and random shocks (stochastic), and where things add up with no production

 or income entering or leaving the system from unexplained sources (general

 equilibrium).
[2]
Most obviously Ben Bernanke – see Bernanke and Gertler (1989). And of course

 plenty of career policymakers were working on these topics as well (Borio

 and Lowe 2002).
[3]
See, for example, Shliefer and Summers (1990) and De Long
et al
(1990).
[4]
This reasoning found its way into the BIS Annual Report in 2008.
[5]
This is the point made in Ellis, Kulish and Wallace (2012).
[6]
Two quite separate strands of this literature are well represented by Allen and Gale

 (2000) and Greenwald and Stiglitz (1986).
[7]
Technically this is a case of Knightian uncertainty rather than risk in the usual

 sense, even though default risk is usually treated as a probabilistic risk.

 Thank you to Penny Smith for reminding me of this point.
[8]
Most recently, this was discussed in Chapter 2 of the Bank's initial submission

 to the Financial System Inquiry. See also Ellis (2013).
[9]
This state of affairs is not helped by the data limitations in some other countries,

 which mean that commendable efforts by international agencies to publish

 comparable property price information are limited to deviations of indexes

 from their own long-run averages. It is not possible to compare ratios across

 countries using such a data set, but many commentators have misunderstood

 these data sets and done so.
[10]
I'm thinking here of people like Axel Leijonhufvud and Roger Farmer.
[11]
Bibliography
Allen F and D Gale (2000), ‘Bubbles and Crises’, Economic Journal, 110(460), pp 236–255.
Allen F and E Carletti (2013), ‘New Theories to Underpin Financial Reform’,
Journal of Financial Stability
, 9(2),
pp 242–249
.
Bernanke B and M Gertler (1989), ‘Agency Costs, Net Worth, and Business Fluctuations’,
American Economic Review
, 79(1), pp 14–31.
Blanchard O (2014), ‘Where Danger Lurks’,
Finance & Development
, 51(3), pp 28–31.
Bordo MD and O Jeanne (2002), ‘Monetary Policy And Asset Prices: Does ‘Benign

 Neglect’ Make Sense?’,
International Finance
, 5(2), pp 139–164.
Borio C and P Lowe (2002), ‘Asset prices, financial and monetary stability:

 exploring the nexus’, BIS Working Paper 114.
De Long B, A Shleifer, LH Summers and RJ Waldmann (1990), ‘Noise Trader Risk

 in Financial Markets’,
Journal of Political Economy
, 98(4), pp 703–738.
Diamond DW and PH Dybvig (1983), ‘Bank Runs, Deposit Insurance, and Liquidity’,
Journal of Political Economy
,
91(3), pp 401–419
.
Ellis L, M Kulish and S Wallace (2012),
Property Market Cycles as Paths to Financial Distress
, Property

 Markets and Financial Stability, Proceedings of a Conference, Bank for International

 Settlements and Reserve Bank of Australia, Sydney.
Ellis L (2010), ‘The Housing Meltdown: Why did it Happen in the United States?’,
International Real Estate Review
, 13(3), pp 351–394.
Ellis L (2013), ‘Housing and Mortgage Markets: The Long Run, the Short Run

 and the Uncertainty in Between’, Citibank Property Conference, Sydney,

 23 April. Available at <
https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2013/sp-so-230413.html
>.
Greenwald B and JE Stiglitz (1986), ‘Externalities in Economies with Imperfect

 Information and Incomplete Markets’,
Quarterly Journal of Economics
, 101(2), pp 229–264.
Kiyotaki N and J Moore (1997), ‘Credit Cycles’,
Journal of Political Economy
, 105(2), pp 211–248.
Shliefer A and LH Summers (1990), ‘The Noise Trader Approach to Finance’,
Journal of Economic Perspectives
,
4(2), pp 19–33
.
Stiglitz JE (2014), ‘Reconstructing Macroeconomic Theory to Manage Economic

 Policy’, NBER Working Paper 20517.
