BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Digital Disruption – Opportunities for Innovation and Growth – Sydney
DATE: 11/06/2014
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2014/sp-so-110614.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Digital Disruption – Opportunities for Innovation and Growth
Sarv Girn
[
*
]
Chief Information Officer
Speech to the Committee for Economic Development of Australia (CEDA) Adjusting Australia Series
Sydney
–
11 June 2014
Audio
14.15
MB
Q&A Transcript
Digital Disruption, it is an opportunity of a lifetime, but on the other hand

 it is also littered with risks. If you are an executive of a business or a

 director on a board then the challenge is to determine if the right balance

 has been achieved in these extremes.
The biggest risk of all however is to not do anything at all – ignoring

 the waves of digital disruption in business and society has led to extinction

 for many. You only have to look at the likes of Nokia – which in spite

 of owning 30 per cent of the world's mobile patents (GSM) finds

 itself struggling to stay relevant; Kodak invented the digital camera technology,

 but failed to capitialise on it; General Motors – produced the first

 commercial electric car almost 20 years ago, stopped its rollout, and now finds

 itself trying to catch up with the Japanese hybrids; bookstores, the music

 industry and newspapers – all of which were the giants of their time,

 and now find themselves trying to avoid extinction.
If as an executive in a business you walk away from this event without any actions

 of your own in digital disruption then that will be a failure.
Digital disruption brings many opportunities for innovation and productivity

 outputs. Over the next 15 minutes I will cover three key areas:
First, a brief definition of digital disruption and how it's different

 from continuous improvement;
Second, the opportunity around us in the digital environment; and
Finally, how to deal with disruption as an executive or board member.
I would hope from this you will get a very good feeling of why your organisation

 should act to harness the many growth opportunities around us by building digital

 innovation into the goals and DNA of your organisation.
Digital Disruption Defined
Let's first start with the definition of digital ‘disruption’.

 The word ‘disruption’ is very interesting. I'm not sure when

 and how the meaning took a twist from what I think many of us would have understood

 this to be when we were kids. When I was at school, often, and I would probably

 say very often, the teacher would say ‘stop being disruptive’,

 ‘you are a disruptive child’. Of course that was never said to

 me, and if I look at each of you in the audience I don't think you were

 disruptive either. We were all very well behaved!
So when did we start to use the term disruption with innovation and change?

 Has anybody heard of a person named Clayton Christensen? Clayton Christensen

 has been a key force behind the concepts of disruption and innovation over

 the last 20 years. For those of you who are new to this name then do take the

 time to understand who he is and what he has written. In a nutshell he is regarded

 as the world's top expert on innovation and applying technology to disrupt

 and grow industries. His ideas have been widely used in many firms around the

 world. He has been instrumental in changing the face of innovation for firms

 such as Intel – where his work in embedding a culture of disruptive innovation

 led to the creation of the Celeron chip, a low-end challenger to mainstream

 chips in Intel. Within a year the Celeron had captured 35 per cent

 of the market. For General Motors, his firm was instrumental in creating an

 environment for the innovation that led to the development of the electric

 car.
The introduction of digital disruption offers a fundamentally better alternative

 (to the present approach) for solving a customer problem, in a cheaper, quicker

 and more convenient manner with technology playing a key enabling role. It

 is not evolutionary change, but radical in the way it changes businesses and

 societies. Think about online broking disrupting the stockbroker business –

 clearly the likes of CommSec in the 1990s led the disruption in this country.

 Think about the iTunes eco-system, disrupting not just the music industry,

 but the software development industry through apps across a range of Apple

 devices. Think about more recently the pizza business – what could be

 so disruptive in that? Domino Pizza openly declares that technology and innovation

 is very important to them. Have a look at their case study, Facebook ordering,

 order tracking and 3D pizza creation by customers has made it the fastest growing

 company in the pizza industry. It has redefined the way customers order, track

 and receive pizzas, achieving $2 million sales in 12 weeks on a new iPhone

 app launched in 2009. Another more recent example is MOOC (Massive Open Online

 Course) which is challenging traditional education by offering an online platform

 for students and professors to collaborate and offer innovative learning opportunities

 outside the traditional universities.
When we use the word disruption in context of ‘digital disruption’,

 then it's about innovating to break the ranks of status quo, it redefines

 the norm, and changes the markets and competitors around us. This comes through

 a relentless focus on the customer and offering new business models and new

 ways of applying technology. Some of this disruption is clearly a very positive

 change for society, business and economies. But if you are the firm being disrupted

 by others then I am not sure that it is that positive at all – you just

 have to look at the likes of Kodak, Borders, Nokia, Blackberry, General Motors,

 and the list goes on.
As you look at the many success stories, and how their approach has differed

 from ongoing continuous improvement, then you will see very quickly that the

 opportunities for innovation and growth are there. So what are the opportunities

 in the landscape around us?
Digital Opportunity
As we look around the business environment it's clear that the velocity

 of change we experience as a consequence of digital technology is unprecedented

 and in most cases unpredictable. There have been many waves of change and the

 frequency of this is only growing.
Across the last three decades we have seen mainframes disrupted by minicomputers,

 which in turn were disrupted by PCs. Then the Internet brought a completely

 new paradigm, followed by mobile technology being launched at a rapid rate

 into the market. We now see wearable technology and 3D printing knocking on

 the door to introduce another wave of change in health, manufacturing and no

 doubt many other industry sectors.
This innovation has primarily been led by the technology sector initially, followed

 by an insatiable demand from businesses and society. This constant cycle of

 innovation and consumption has allowed the technology sector to grow dramatically

 in the last 20 years. The growth compared with other sectors has been nothing

 short of amazing. If you look at this graph of S&P 500 Sector Weightings

 over the last 15 years, the technology sector has been consistently 15-20 per cent

 of the index and over the last five years it has actually been larger than

 the banking and finance sector.
Graph 1
Another aspect to consider in our environment is the extent of patents lodged

 by various sectors over the years. Whilst this is not a direct indicator of

 innovation and disruption, it does demonstrate the activity arising from research

 and development efforts, and can act as a good lead indicator of potential

 future disruption from that sector. When we look at this Graph of ‘Global

 Patent Grants by Sector’ we see that the computer technology sector has

 been growing at a year-on-year rate of 14 per cent over the last 10 years.
Graph 2
If we look at related sectors such as electrical, digital and telecommunications,

 you can see the full scale of digital innovation. Compare this against an area

 such as medical, which has also innovated in this period, however it has been

 dwarfed by the technology sector.
Looking a bit further at these global patents, a question of geography arises.

 Where are these patents all coming from? You may be expecting something along

 the lines of Silicon Valley or Europe. In fact, when we look at the next graph

 of ‘Global Patents by Region’ we see a very interesting story.
Graph 3
Yes the patents from Oceania are low, but no doubt the population size in the

 region is a factor. However, patent grants in Asia are right at the top, and

 have been growing at a faster rate than both North America and Europe. The

 likes of Japan, China and Korea play a key role in this. A very interesting

 insight is that Europe and North America led the patents until around 1990,

 and then Asia started its dramatic rise. But we do need to note that the advent

 of patents in a region doesn't imply that is where there will be subsequent

 disruption. In addition, the number of patents isn't the only factor at

 play here, the quality and ability to commercialise these to deliver ‘disruptive’

 products and services is also relevant. What is very clear though, is that

 the large number of patents does point to a concentration of skills and know

 how, which itself flags an environment and culture that fosters change and

 innovation. This is akin to much of the innovation led from Silicon Valley

 in California 1980s.
Let's now move onto the use and growth of the internet. The percentage of

 population that is using the internet in a country is very interesting.
Graph 4
Looking at this graph of ‘Internet Penetration Rate’ the first insight

 is that Australia has one of the leading penetration rates globally. The other

 insight is the relatively small number of people in Australia using the internet

 in context of other areas with larger populations.
As we look further down at the blue circles for Asia, we see a very low penetration

 rate, but one that is growing more rapidly that the rest of the world. The

 projected growth suggests there is clearly a disruptive change coming. If this

 increase continues over the next five years then just through a modest increase

 from 30 per cent to 40 per cent penetration (which is still

 well below Europe and US) then the number of people on the internet will roughly

 double in the world.
Some of you representing service and product organisations may think of this

 as a sales opportunity. But be warned, those additional people on the internet

 will not just be buying, but also selling themselves, and disrupting markets

 globally. Has anyone heard of a business called Alibaba? It is a Chinese giant

 which handles 80 per cent of China's ecommerce and last year

 handled more sales than eBay and Amazon combined. I suspect we will see a few

 more of companies such as this in the next five years.
So in terms of the digital environment, Australia's proximity to Asia brings

 a clear advantage, an advantage we cannot afford to ignore. The traditional

 leaders of our current landscape will clearly be challenged with innovation

 and disruption arising from this part of the world. Against the backdrop of

 this opportunity, how do you deal with disruption ? What can be learnt from

 the positive experiences of the disruptors and the mistakes of the disrupted?
Dealing with Disruption
As an executive the way you deal with digital disruption is more critical now

 than ever before; do you see it as a risky threat or an innovation opportunity,

 and what questions must you ask to ensure you don't become extinct? Surviving

 with a status quo mindset may not be enough when challenger business models

 are thriving in this digital age.
When we look at some of the lessons of the past, then three golden rules stand

 out as being key questions executives and directors need to deal with.
First, a conscious and clear business strategy on whether you will be a leader

 of change and disrupt business models, a fast follower that adopts innovation

 from others, or will maintain a religious focus on incremental continuous improvement

 to drive safe reliable services with a low appetite for risk. There is no right

 or wrong here, but what is important is a conscious decision on your digital

 direction. In this day and age getting the strategy for digital innovation

 agreed upfront is as important as the risk appetite statement you may traditionally

 see in the boardroom.
The second golden rule is to create a culture that fosters innovation in your

 organisation. A clear learning from the past has been that firms with strong

 governance and risk practices are unlikely to disrupt given their natural strength

 in always looking at a strict Return on Investment (ROI) in a time period.

 Innovation, particularly the disruptive type, requires a culture of experimentation,

 a funding model that allows testing and learning, and an approach which ‘fast

 fails’ projects if they do not show signs of success. This culture needs

 to be created in well run risk averse organisations. So dealing with this challenge

 is key. Do you create a separate challenger subsidiary at the edge of your

 firm? Do you adapt your funding model to encourage experimentation? Or do you

 allow more freedom to test and learn within certain thresholds? And how do

 you deal with innovation that may eat into your current products? Some of the

 disrupted ignored this last one and locked away their innovation for fear of

 losing their traditional products. Unfortunately others catch up and then overtake.

 All these questions are ones many of the leaders have answered explicitly in

 the past to succeed.
The third golden rule relates to collaboration. Digital disruption and innovation

 requires partnerships with the leaders, particularly the technology firms and

 those in the supply chain. Who you work with matters more than who you work

 for in this space. In this the questions to ask include the extent of research

 and development (R&D) with appropriate universities, the relationships

 with upstream and downstream partners to ensure you horizontally and vertically

 integrate, and whether the right operating environment, or ecosystem, has been

 created for stakeholders to interact and innovate even further.
When you look at the leaders in digital disruption, then the signs of them applying

 these golden rules are clearly there. Apple, with its drive to disrupt with

 new products to change lives, has a culture of strong R&D, it built partnerships

 with the telecommunications companies in order to launch the first iPhone,

 and in created an iTunes ecosystem for music, apps and now radio. IBM shipped

 PCs with MS-DOS pre-installed; Amazon created an ecosystem that has now gone

 beyond books to hosting other businesses.
But not all firms are like these technology leaders. Choosing how to deal with

 disruption in context of your industry is important, whether you're a bank,

 law firm, small business or a government entity.
Are there any applications for digital disruptive for central banks? Certainly

 there is, we too have to deal with disruption and need to respond in a way

 that promotes a stable environment but one that still allows innovation to

 occur.
So for example, in the Bank we have chosen to apply the innovation brought by

 the global technology leaders to our practices. A Microsoft and Linux server

 environment that is 80 per cent virtualised brings efficiencies and

 reduces implementation times for the technology that supports the critical

 financial systems that underpin our economy. You can imagine how this helps

 us create industry testing environments for banking, markets and payment systems

 – you could call it an industry cloud for testing. A mobile bring your

 own device (BYOD) environment with an adoption rate of almost 30 per cent

 across the Bank provides flexibility and convenience for our staff. And looking

 externally, establishment of a real time payments system will foster innovation

 in the industry and meet consumer demands for speed in the digital age.
What is clear when dealing with disruption is that the approach has to be built

 into the goals of the organisation and embedded into the DNA of the organisation,

 especially the culture which can lead to the adoption or shelving of new ideas.
So in closing, disruption is happening all around us, there are many opportunities

 for us, and it is possible to deal with disruption. If you do want to harness

 the growth potential then observing and learning from the patterns of the leaders

 is vital. Building digital disruption plans into the corporate conversation

 and embedding it into the goals and cultural DNA of your firm is fundamental.
Endnote
Thanks to Ajay Sharma in the preparation of this speech.
[*]
