BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Why Financial Stability Matters, and What We Can Do About It – Adelaide
DATE: 04/06/2014
SPEAKER: Adelaide
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2014/sp-so-fs-040614.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Why Financial Stability Matters, and What We Can Do About It
Luci Ellis
[
*
]
Head of Financial Stability Department
Address to the University of Adelaide
Adelaide
–
4 June 2014
Audio
28.87
MB
Q&A Transcript
financial stability, risk and uncertainty
Thank you to the University of Adelaide Economics Department for the invitation to
 speak to this group. It is always a pleasure to come to Adelaide.
This evening, I thought it would be worth taking a step back and reflecting on some
 of the lessons of the crisis and the post-crisis period. Certainly there are
 a lot of things I have learnt in my time so far as head of Financial Stability
 department.
I started in this role on 20 October 2008, just a few weeks after Lehman Brothers
 – and a string of other institutions – had failed.
As you can imagine, those first few months were quite frantic. The Australian financial
 system and economy were not doing too badly, but there was always a possibility
 that investor panic could lead to a run on Australian institutions. After
 some governments overseas guaranteed the banks in their countries, Australia
 had little choice but to follow suit. The financial stability team at the
 Bank were heavily involved both in designing the guarantee, and putting it
 in place. (I personally processed several applications.)
The subsequent years have been just as busy. First came the wave of regulatory reform,
 directed by the G20. Australia's role in the international standard-setting
 process expanded. Before 2009, the Australian authorities were not even members
 of the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS). Now both APRA and the
 RBA have seats at the table, and the Bank has had to get more involved with
 the details of prudential standard-setting than we did before the crisis.
Once the international standards were agreed, next came the wave of implementation.
 There is still some work to do in some areas, but many of the big pieces of
 the reform agenda are in place in most countries, or soon will be.
Now the third wave of post-crisis work is to assess that implementation. Almost all
 of the main reform initiatives from groups such as the G20 are soon followed
 up by a cross-country peer review, to check how countries have implemented
 the reforms, and the time lines. This comes on top of the usual rounds of
 international scrutiny, such as the IMF Financial Sector Assessment Program
 (FSAP), which Australia went through in
 2012.
[1]
I think policymakers around the world have learnt a lot over the past six years.
 I'd like to spend some time this evening reflecting on some of the lessons
 that I think are most important.
The Right Question
The first lesson is that asking the right question is half the battle. We need to
 ask: what problem are we trying to solve? Central banks and supervisors are
 mandated to promote financial stability, or some variant on those words. Remarkably,
 there has not been much consensus in how to define that policy goal. For some,
 it is about preserving market functioning; for others, it is about avoiding
 undesirable movements in asset prices or exchange rates.
In Australia, at least, we focus on the risk of a disruption in the financial system
 so severe that it materially harms the real economy. We don't try to pre-specify
 the form that disruption might take. We focus on the ultimate goal.
Recent research in Europe using household survey data shows that people don't
 actually care about financial imbalances for their own sake (Stracca 2014).
 They care about incomes and unemployment – about output. At a deep level,
 a financial stability mandate is really an output mandate. We want to avoid
 financial instability because it reduces output and harms human welfare through
 that channel. History shows that downturns are worse, and recoveries slower,
 when there has been a banking or broader financial
 crisis.
[2]
Our policies should, after all, improve the welfare of society. That is one of the
 Bank's legislated mandates. Research like this tells us something important
 about how we pursue those ends. As policymakers, we do not – should
 not – care about asset prices or credit for their own sakes. Nor do
 we care if banks are safe just for the sake of having safe banks. Rather,
 we care whether a bank that did fail might do so in a way that harms the real
 economy. Banks are firms, and firms do not love, or hurt – or vote.
 But people do, and people are harmed by the recessions, by the loss of their
 life savings, by all of the things that financial instability inflicts upon
 the world. That is why we promote the stability of the financial system and
 the firms within it, but do not pursue a ‘no-failures’ regime.
 We are not trying to eliminate all risk, and we are not mandated to serve
 the interests of some firms ahead of society.
Society's welfare might therefore not be best served by policies that seek to
 minimise variability in property markets, or asset prices more broadly, or
 some measure of credit. It might be how it works out in practice, perhaps.
 But our objectives and our policy practice must be founded on the welfare
 of society, as best we understand it.
And that comes back to output. It comes back to the fact that financial instability
 is harmful to output and employment. Property markets, asset prices, credit
 and the array of other variables we look at in financial stability circles
 are not objectives. They are information variables. They are useful, but we
 should not define our performance in terms of having control over these variables.
 What matters more are the risk of a crisis and the severity of the resulting
 effects on output.
Behind those output figures, there is a real human cost to financial instability.
 The recent crisis was a standout example of this. Unemployment rates increased
 dramatically in a number of countries. People lost their livelihoods, their
 savings, their homes. Graph 1 shows the share of US mortgages that were
 behind on their repayments, as well as the separate group subject to foreclosure
 proceedings. The sum of the two peaked around 9 per cent. Even when you
 factor in the people who owned their homes outright (without a mortgage),
 that means a significant fraction of the population was in distress. The total
 number of American families who actually lost their homes over this period
 ran into the millions.
Graph 1
Financial instability is also contagious. Many of the people who lost their jobs
 or their homes in the years following the crisis had not contributed to the
 build-up of risk that sparked the crisis. They were simply hit by the ensuing
 recession. The economic effects of the crisis can also spread to countries
 that had not been part of the financial crisis itself, such as many in the
 Asian region. You can see this in Graph 2, which shows the sharp fall
 in industrial production in Asia following the crisis. I find it remarkable
 that the declines are larger, and longer-lasting, than the later downward
 spikes associated with natural disasters: the earthquake and tsunami in Japan,
 and flooding in Thailand.
Graph 2
So the problem we are trying to solve is to reduce the risk and cost of financial
 instability. We should therefore seek to reduce the build-up of risk, which
 might or might not manifest as a boom in asset prices and credit. We should
 also seek to make the system resilient to the shocks that occur from time
 to time, so that the system does not end up in crisis following every unexpected
 event.
In framing the objectives of financial stability policy in this way, it becomes clear
 that rapid developments in property markets, other asset prices and credit
 can be – but are not always – a signal that risks to financial
 stability are building. I do not underestimate the challenge of disentangling
 this signal from the normal transmission mechanism of monetary policy.
Asking the right question about our goal turns out to have been less obvious than
 you might imagine. A lot of the pre-crisis debate about financial stability
 policy was framed around the question, ‘should monetary policy prick
 bubbles?’. The first problem with this question is that it assumed what
 the policy instrument should be. Monetary policy might be part of the solution,
 but you should not assume it is.
The second problem with the question was that it assumed that asset price bubbles
 were the crux of the policy problem. The debate could then be diverted into
 discussions about whether you could identify bubbles, how you could do that,
 and whether you could pop them before they become dangerously large –
 again, assuming that you could do that without too many bad side effects.
I have two reservations about framing the policy problem in this way. The first is
 that the policy debate then ends up being about my model versus yours. The
 estimate of the bubble component of prices is only as good as the model of
 fundamentals. And getting bogged down in arguments about models is a recipe
 for inaction.
Another problem with this framing is that, actually, a bubble in asset prices is
 not even necessary in order for a financial stability problem to occur later
 on. This is particularly so in property markets, where supply is inherently
 more or less fixed, because most of it has already been built. In that case,
 large price and construction cycles can happen that appear completely consistent
 with fundamentals.
Perhaps this can be best illustrated with a data series from outside the property
 sector (Graph 3). This graph shows the Baltic Dry Index. It summarises
 the average price of bulk shipping services, as opposed to container shipping.
 As you can see, there are a number of drawn-out price booms over several years
 that subsequently crash. This pattern is most noticeable in the past decade
 or so, but taking the lower base into account, the price cycle around 1994
 was also very large.
Graph 3
I struggle to imagine how one could have a bubble in shipping services. They are
 a service, not an asset that can be stored and on-sold. What we see here is
 no bubble, but exactly the kind of boom-bust price dynamics that can occur
 when the underlying supply is more or less fixed. As with property, it takes
 time to build ships, and the annual production of ships is usually only a
 small fraction of those currently operating. So an increase in demand, because
 of a boom in world trade, eventually hits the vertical part of the short-run
 supply curve, where there simply are no more spare ships. Shipbuilders respond,
 but it takes a while for the new ships to be completed. Prices fall, and if
 those new ships come on line at the same time as world trade is weakening,
 as it did in 2008–09, then the size of that price fall can be dramatic.
Property markets show the same dynamic. We can see from this graph that large price
 cycles can happen even while prices stay in line with rents (Graph 4).
 And of course, property, broadly defined, is much more important to the Australian
 financial system than the shipping industry
 is.
[3]
Graph 4
Now consider that in many markets of this kind – including property as well
 as shipping – there is a lot of leverage. When prices fall, entities
 in these markets can become distressed. Their spending falls; that would affect
 the real economy directly. And if they have a lot of debt, and default on
 it, there can be further repercussions through the financial system.
So asset price bubbles might be one development to watch for, but if we are asking
 the right policy question, we have to look at much more than that.
In framing the objectives of financial stability policy as something other than the
 absolute level of some asset price, I am not saying that asset prices do not
 matter to social welfare. For example, whenever housing prices boom, people
 worry that housing has become unaffordable. Of course, if prices are rising,
 it must be that someone can afford those prices. If they are motivated by
 speculative expectations, though, prices can run ahead of levels that can
 be sustained in the longer term. So there can be a financial stability angle
 to those concerns,
if
a future fallout is likely to harm the real economy, either directly or via distress
 in the financial system.
But the real policy concern here is that other people get priced out. It is fundamentally
 a question of distribution, particularly intergenerational distribution. This
 is not in the remit of financial stability policy, and the two goals should
 not be conflated. But we should be mindful of this equally legitimate goal
 of public policy, which is to ensure that everyone can access appropriate
 shelter that they can reasonably afford. Sometimes this goal mutually supports
 the goal of financial stability. But as we saw in the US housing meltdown,
 if you get the policy response to an affordability issue wrong, the consequences
 for financial stability can be dire.
The Multiple Facets
The second important lesson is that financial stability analysis and policy are multifaceted.
 It requires more than one approach to analysis and more than one policy instrument
 to respond. As such, it will often require more than one agency or arm of
 government to work together.
I came to this role from the monetary policy side of the Bank. Having seen both sides,
 it is clear to me that financial stability policy is a bit different.
Monetary policy reminds me of this picture (Figure 1, left side). The sea might
 be stormy; the view ahead might be obscured by fog; the timing of the waves
 might be unpredictable. Even with a lot of information, you might only have
 a vague idea of where you are right now. But at least you know roughly where
 you are going – you have a single target – and you have a single
 instrument that you know usually works, to steer you in approximately the
 right direction.
Financial stability policy looks rather different (Figure 1, right side).
Figure 1: Two Policy Approaches
Monetary Policy
Image: Microsoft Clip Art
Financial Stability Policy
Image: Shutterstock.com
When thinking about risks in the financial system, there seem to be a lot of moving
 parts. It isn't obvious how they all connect. And there seem to be many
 places where you can intervene and have some effect – though perhaps
 not the one you were expecting!
That complexity has implications for the approach to analysis. Rather than try to
 estimate a single model of fundamentals and look for bubbles, look at all
 the evidence and try to piece together the story. It is a bit like the work
 of an archaeologist: you don't have complete information, but somewhere
 in the shards of pottery and other bits and pieces, you can make out a coherent
 explanation that fits with all the pieces you have.
That complexity also has implications for the appropriate policy framework. Because
 the risks can come from so many different sources, it does not make sense
 to restrict oneself to a single policy tool in response, or even a small collection
 of them. In fact, it is probably a mistake to focus solely on policy tools
 for responding to current risks: in other words, policies of waiting until
 you have a problem and then responding. I think it is worth devoting more
 time to thinking about the design of the overall policy framework, and how
 that might support financial stability.
For a start, it is very hard to have a good financial stability outcome without the
 right macroeconomic policy framework. If we abstract from the recent US crisis
 for a moment and think about the broader run of crises, we can see how important
 it is to get the broader macro and fiscal frameworks right. In emerging and
 middle-income countries, foreign currency borrowing and other cross-border
 issues are much more of a concern than whatever is going on in mortgage markets,
 which are often quite small in these countries.
Australia is known as a country that has been able to use a fully floating exchange
 rate to absorb shocks from abroad (Rajan 2014). More fundamentally, a fully
 floating exchange rate regime means that monetary policy can be set according
 to domestic conditions, and balance of payments surpluses do not expand money
 and credit. With a floating exchange rate and a sufficiently forward-looking
 approach to inflation targeting, it is less likely that monetary policy settings
 will unleash a period of overly exuberant asset price and credit growth. Financial
 markets and asset prices respond more quickly to monetary policy than output
 and inflation do. So we should not be surprised that if interest rates are
 ‘too low’ for the domestic economy, the financial stability effects
 of that arise before the inflation effects.
It takes some work to get the institutions right to make it possible to float with
 confidence. In particular, you need deep, liquid hedging markets. This ensures
 that domestic entities are ultimately borrowing in the domestic currency,
 even if the original bond is in a foreign currency. They are both protected
 from the worst effects of exchange rate volatility, and given the incentive
 to manage FX risk. And they are not lulled into a false sense of security
 that the exchange rate will remain stable.
As part of the overall macro policy framework, it might help to design the tax system
 in a way that avoids overly rewarding leveraged speculation, particularly
 in property. There are often reasonable sounding rationales for things like
 generous deductibility of interest payments. The result is sometimes to make
 leveraged speculation in second-hand assets tax-preferred to investment in
 new income-producing assets that do not generate capital gains. These rationales
 need to be balanced against the costs of financial instability, as well as
 the more conventional concerns about resource allocation favouring speculative
 assets.
Calibrating the regulatory framework appropriately also helps promote financial stability.
 This includes the regulatory framework for consumer protection when extending
 credit. This area of regulation is often underappreciated. But it is an important
 line of defence against an extreme easing in lending standards, especially
 if some lenders are not prudentially supervised. In Australia, household borrowers
 have recourse to arbitrators and the courts if they believe they have fallen
 victim to predatory lending. There are certainly cases in Australia where
 the courts have struck down or reduced loans that the lender should not have
 made. That is a powerful incentive not to engage in various kinds of abuses,
 such as lending based on fictional incomes.
The prudential regulatory framework also needs to be calibrated appropriately. If
 a potentially harmful credit boom does occur, should you necessarily conclude
 that you need to engage in some kind of countercyclical prudential policy?
 Maybe not: if the overall framework is simply calibrated too loosely, the
 outcomes are observationally equivalent. Perhaps the whole regime just needed
 to be tighter, which is what the Basel 2.5 and Basel III packages achieved.
Of course, this means that the objective of the prudential regime needs to include,
 or at least be compatible with, promoting financial stability. If you specify
 the mandates of the policymakers appropriately, this need not be a problem.
 I will talk about this a bit more in a moment, but there is no need to constrain
 the mandate of prudential supervision to be the safety of individual institutions.
 To do so is a choice, one that has not worked out well in other countries.
Even if the overall policy framework is well designed, there could still be a build-up
 of risks to financial stability that one might need to respond to. Again,
 the system is so complex and the potential risks so diverse, that it does
 not make sense to restrict the policy response to one or a few different policy
 tools. The response is multifaceted.
The early 2000s debate about policy responses to asset price developments was mainly
 about how monetary policy should respond. It is still an open question. One
 can imagine situations where one might want policy to be a bit tighter –
 and inflation lower than target – for financial stability considerations.
 After all, monetary policy is about setting the price of credit. But as I
 mentioned a few moments ago, setting monetary policy according to domestic
 circumstances is surely the first step.
Prudential regulation and supervision can also help lean against credit excesses,
 and is perhaps more direct than monetary policy. It gets less attention in
 global policy debates, perhaps because it is in some sense invisible. You
 can't graph engagement with boards. You can't even see the supervisor's
 implied threat of using directions powers or higher capital requirements under
 Pillar 2. But those powers, if credible, can shape bank behaviour and risk-taking.
All this raises the question of what the central bank can do to promote financial
 stability, if it is not the supervisor. For a start, it has a longstanding
 role as liquidity provider and so-called ‘lender of last resort'.
 These functions are essential to the authorities’ crisis management
 planning and response. They also allow the Bank to gather market intelligence
 relevant to financial stability.
Beyond those traditional functions of central banking, the financial stability function
 has two tools: a telephone, and a microphone. The telephone is, of course,
 for calling APRA and sharing our concerns. Central banks have a concentration
 of analytical resources: highly skilled people accustomed to analysing economic
 and financial data. APRA does too, but having people with different training
 and expertise looking at these issues from different perspectives helps ensure
 that emerging risks are not missed. And if a particular risk involves parts
 of the financial sector that are not prudentially regulated, the central bank
 (or securities regulator) is likely to be better placed to join the dots.
The other policy tool, the microphone, is a reference to communication. I've
 used cartoons to make some of these points about financial stability policy
 before (Ellis 2012), and here is another one (Figure 2). The essential
 point is that people's expectations matter. Exposing and warning of risks
 can ideally change behaviour, and steer the system away from higher-risk outcomes.
Figure 2: Communicating about Risks
Sources: RBA; mathematica.stackexchange.com; apologies to Randall Munroe
At this point I should probably mention macroprudential policy. By now it should
 be clear that the Australian authorities' views on this supposedly new
 toolkit are a bit different from those in some other jurisdictions. We view
 macroprudential policy as something to be subsumed into the broader financial
 stability framework. We recognise that quantitative restrictions were already
 tried in the 1960s and 1970s – and didn't always work so well. And
 we think that it is entirely acceptable for prudential measures, macro or
 otherwise, to be wielded by the prudential supervisor, where they have the
 appropriately formulated mandate.
Of course a successful financial stability policy framework needs to operate across
 more than one kind of policy response. And that means it must cross several
 public agencies. That is another way in which financial stability policy is
 a multifaceted effort. These agencies need to not only coordinate, but to
 achieve a much deeper level of engagement. If the Australian experience is
 a guide, achieving close and effective engagement comes down to consistent
 mandates and genuine respect among equals. The rationale for carving out particular
 bits of the prudential framework under separate governance – which is
 what people mean nowadays by ‘macroprudential tools’ – appears
 to be that supervisors cannot be relied on to discharge their duties with
 system-level concerns in mind. That might be true in some countries, but not
 in Australia and at least some other countries. And it does not strike me
 as being particularly respectful of the expertise of supervisors. The last
 thing we would want is the situation shown in this cartoon, where the central
 banker, on the left, is assuming that he or she knows better than the prudential
 supervisor on the right (Figure 3).
Figure 3: Suboptimal Interagency Relationships
Source: RBA; mathematica.stackexchange.com; apologies to Randall Munroe
The division between ‘microprudential’ supervision, narrowly focused
 on individual institutions, and system-wide ‘macroprudential’
 supervision, never made much sense to us in Australia. You can't promote
 the safety of institutions without considering their environment, which includes
 the financial system as a whole. If the supervisory agency really is microprudential
 in outlook, fixing its mandate might be needed; fixing its mindset is surely
 equally important. As I have explained on a previous occasion, in Australia,
 the authorities consider macroprudential policy to be better described as
 a state of mind than a suite of tools (Ellis 2012). Another way of describing
 this is as ‘macro-prudence’ rather than macroprudential (Littrell
 2013).
That state of mind informs the design of the overall prudential framework. It does
 not need to be restricted to periodic responses when emerging risks are detected.
 A good example of what this means for prudential regulation is the prudential
 practice guide on mortgage lending, which APRA released in draft form recently.
 Instead of setting out prescriptive rules, APRA's approach has been to
 empower bank boards to demand prudent lending policies and practices at their
 banks.
The Bank had flagged the release of this document in the last
Financial Stability Review
. While it is APRA's policy and
 document, naturally the Bank and APRA shared views about it during the drafting
 process, and we fully support what APRA is doing in this area. It is calibrating
 the overall framework with a view to market-wide concerns, rather than responding
 from time to time with specific interventions.
This is not to say that some countercyclical tightening of prudential policy settings
 is never warranted. But if monetary policy responds appropriately to domestic
 conditions,
and
the prudential framework is sufficiently tight
and
there are no leakages through public sector involvement in absorbing credit risk,
 the set of circumstances in which a countercyclical prudential response to
 a credit boom is needed is much narrower.
The Path Ahead
The third lesson I have taken from the past few years is that there is still a great
 deal to learn. On the policy side, there has been a great deal of experimentation
 with new and changed policies. Some of these are changes to the prudential
 framework, such as the higher capital requirements and new liquidity rules
 that are part of the Basel III package. The main effects of these changes
 are fairly predictable, in that they will make the banking system safer and
 more resilient. In the case of the liquidity rules, most jurisdictions had
 some kind of requirement; now these are going to be harmonised globally.
Some of the other policies are perhaps a little more adventurous. For example, the
 move to central clearing in derivatives markets will change how those markets
 operate. At the very least, many of the existing statistical relationships
 between various pieces of data can be expected to change. That is a perennial
 issue for analysis when there is a regime change in regulation or policy more
 generally.
[4]
The scope for learning more is even greater on the analytical side. I think this
 is an exciting time for researchers and policy analysts alike.
It is far too early to present a unified framework for financial stability analysis,
 and it might not even be possible. Even so, we can piece together some of
 the important factors that we need to look at in our work (Figure 4).
 Essentially, we are looking at the behaviour of participants in the economy
 and financial system, especially the risk they are taking, as well as any
 rent-seeking
 behaviour.
[5]
Their behaviour is shaped by behavioural traits as well as the incentives they face,
 which in turn are determined by the institutional environment – tax,
 legal systems, regulation and developments in the rest of the world. And the
 combination of how people and firms behave and the shocks that they face will
 determine their resilience, how vulnerable they are to become distressed,
 and what that might mean for financial stability and the health of the real
 economy.
Figure 4
Each of these pieces of the system requires some theory to make sense of it, much
 of which is yet to be developed. They also require some data to track what
 is happening, much of which does not yet exist. Thus even as the program of
 post-crisis regulatory reform reaches its latter stages, our task will remain
 challenging and will continue to evolve.
In sum, there is still a lot to learn in this complex, multifaceted world of financial
 stability analysis and policy. And if asking the right question is half the
 battle, answering it is surely the other half. Accordingly I stand ready to
 at least try to answer your questions tonight.
Thank you for listening.
Endnotes
Thank you to Jessica Pratten for assistance on an earlier version of this talk.
[*]
To give a flavour of the extent of this scrutiny, in the past four years, Australia
 has responded to around 20 reviews by the Financial Stability Board, including
 annual implementation monitoring exercises, thematic peer reviews and, in
 2011, a specific country review of Australia. Individual standard-setters
 also conduct their own reviews, such as the BCBS' 2013 review of Australia's
 implementation of the Basel III reforms.
[1]
See Cerra and Saxena (2008) and Reinhardt and Rogoff (2009).
[2]
Loans to shipbuilders and shipping companies are important to banking systems in
 some other countries, including Germany, Greece and South Korea. Losses
 on these loan portfolios tend to surge periodically in similar ways to portfolios
 of loans for commercial real estate and property development.
[3]
This is, of course, the famous Lucas (1976) Critique.
[4]
I discussed these behaviours in detail in an earlier speech (Ellis 2011).
[5]
Bibliography
Cerra V and S Saxena (2008), ‘Growth Dynamics: The Myth of Economic Recovery’,
American Economic Review
, 98(1), pp 439–457.
Ellis L (2011), ‘
The Platypus Moment: Rents, Risks and the Right 
 Responses
’, Paul Woolley Centre for Capital Market Dysfunctionality
 Annual Conference, Sydney, 13 October.
Ellis L (2012), ‘
Macroprudential Policy: A Suite of Tools or a 
 State of Mind?
’, Paul Woolley Centre for Capital Market Dysfunctionality
 Annual Conference, Sydney, 11 October.
Littrell C (2013), ‘Macro Prudence vs Macro-prudential Supervision’,
 Macquarie University Centre for Financial Risk, Sydney, 23 March. Available
 at <http://www.apra.gov.au/Speeches/Pages/Macro-prudence-vs-macro-prudential-supervision.aspx>.
Lucas RE (1976), ‘Econometric Policy Evaluation: A Critique’,
Carnegie-Rochester Conference Series on Public Policy
, 1(1), pp 19–46.
Rajan RG (2014), ‘Competitive Monetary Easing: Is it Yesterday Once More?’,
 Brookings Institution Conference, Washington DC, 14 April. Available at
 <http://rbidocs.rbi.org.in/rdocs/Speeches/PDFs/SPBOOKING10042014.pdf>.
Reinhardt CM and K Rogoff (2009),
This Time is Different: Eight Centuries of Financial 
 Folly
, Princeton University Press, Princeton.
Stracca L (2014), ‘Financial Imbalances and Household Welfare: Empirical Evidence
 from the EU’,
Journal of Financial Stability
, 11(1), pp 82–91.
