BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Collateral and Liquidity: Striking the Right Balance – Sydney
DATE: 09/07/2014
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2014/sp-so-090714.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Collateral and Liquidity: Striking the Right Balance
Mark Manning
[
*
]
Deputy Head of Payments Policy (Financial System)
Global Investor/ISF Australia Conference
Sydney
–
9 July 2014
Audio
18
MB
Q&A Transcript
Good morning. It is a pleasure to address this gathering today and I would like to

 thank Global Investors and ISF Australia for the opportunity. The topic I would

 like to cover this morning is collateral and liquidity. In particular, I'd

 like to explore important changes in the way collateral is used and what this

 might imply for policymakers – and central banks in particular.
Introduction
Regulatory developments and changes in financial institutions' risk preferences

 are fundamentally altering the way liquidity flows through the system and how

 institutions fund themselves. These include: the expansion of central counterparty

 (CCP) clearing; margining of non-centrally cleared derivatives; higher capital

 charges for uncollateralised exposures; an emerging investor preference for

 collateralised lending; margin segregation; increasing caution around rehypothecation

 and re-use of collateral … The list goes on. Given the experience of

 the global financial crisis, there are good reasons for all of these changes.

 At the same time, central banks and other regulators can help to smooth the

 transition to the eventual new steady state, including by ensuring appropriately

 measured implementation of new regulations.
An economist at the International Monetary Fund (IMF), Manmohan Singh, has written

 extensively on this topic. In a paper presented at the RBA conference on liquidity

 and funding markets last year, Singh emphasised the ‘financial lubrication’

 role of collateral and the importance of well-functioning collateral markets

 for channelling liquidity within and between the banking and non-bank financial

 sectors (Singh 2013). He observed that the effectiveness of these markets may

 already have declined since the onset of the financial crisis. The broader

 implications of this had probably not yet been felt, however, because less

 effective circulation of collateral through the system had to some extent been

 offset by increased issuance of government debt and easy monetary policy.
But in time these changes seem likely to alter established market practices and reshape

 incentives. In the remainder of this talk I will discuss some of the key drivers

 and implications of these changes. I will also highlight where central banks

 or other regulators' responses could potentially help to strike the right

 balance.
Increased Demand for High-quality Liquid Assets
Much has already been written on the drivers of increased demand for eligible high-quality

 liquid assets. In an article co-authored with my colleague Alex Heath a couple

 of years ago (Heath and Manning 2012), we highlighted two key regulatory reform

 drivers of increased demand.
First, new liquidity standards introduced under the Basel III reforms. These standards

 include minimum requirements for the size and composition of banks' liquid

 assets: the Liquidity Coverage Ratio. In particular, banks will have to hold

 sufficient high-quality liquid assets to be able to withstand 30 days of outflows

 under stressed market conditions. For these purposes, the Australian Prudential

 Regulation Authority (APRA) has defined high-quality liquid assets to include

 cash, central bank reserves and government securities. Although these requirements

 do not formally take effect in Australia until the start of next year, we have

 already seen a marked change in Australian banks' liquid asset holdings.

 Since late 2006, the total quantum of liquid assets on banks' balance sheets

 has risen from around $100 billion to just over $300 billion. Adjusting for

 the overall growth in balance sheets over that period, this equates to an increase

 from around 7 per cent to 11 per cent of total assets. Within this, the share

 of short-term bank paper has declined from more than 50 per cent to just 15

 per cent, with a particularly marked shift into government securities (Table 1).
Table 1: Australian Banks' Assets
Domestic books
December 2006
December 2011
December 2013
$ billion
Share
(a)
$ billion
Share
(a)
$ billion
Share
(a)
Liquid assets
(b)
104
7
260
10
306
11
– Government securities
(c)
10
10
72
28
126
41
– Short-term bank paper
54
52
64
24
44
15
– Long-term bank paper
9
9
74
29
60
19
– Other
(d)
30
29
50
19
76
25
Total bank assets
1,582
2,597
2,896
(a) Share of total Australian dollar assets (per cent), subcomponents are

 the share of liquid assets
(b) While deposits with other banks are a store of liquidity, they

 do not contribute to the stock of liquidity held by the banking system

 as a whole, since the recipient banks will, in turn, need to hold additional

 liquidity against these deposits; consequently, they are excluded from

 this table
(c) Includes Commonwealth Government Securities and securities issued

 by the states and territories
(d) Includes notes and coins, Australian dollar debt issued by non-residents

 and securitised assets (excluding self-securitised assets)
Sources: ABS; APRA; RBA
Second, reforms that encourage or mandate CCP clearing of standardised over-the-counter

 (OTC) derivative trades that require collateralisation of non-centrally cleared

 trades will significantly increase the demand for collateral.
Collateral agreements in these markets are not new. Since well before the financial

 crisis, the proportion of non-centrally cleared trades that are subject to

 collateral agreements has been on the rise. Indeed, the most recent annual

 margin survey conducted by the International Swaps and Derivatives Association

 (ISDA) reports that around 90 per cent of transactions in credit, fixed-income

 and equity derivatives are subject to a collateral agreement. A smaller proportion

 of trades in foreign exchange and commodity derivatives are subject to such

 agreements, in part reflecting the greater participation of non-financial entities

 in these product markets
(Graph 1)
.
Graph 1
Agreements to date have typically provided only for the exchange of collateral to

 cover current mark-to-market exposures; that is, variation margin. Looking

 ahead, however, OTC derivative trades, whether or not centrally cleared, will

 also be subject to collateral to cover potential future exposures should a

 counterparty default and the positions have to be closed out; that is, initial

 margin.
Initial margin requirements are already beginning to bite – at least among

 interdealer trades in the more standardised OTC derivative markets, such as

 that for interest rate derivatives. The majority of outstanding notional value

 of OTC interest rate derivatives is already centrally cleared and therefore

 subject to both initial and variation margin requirements. In some jurisdictions,

 such as the United States, this reflects that central clearing is already mandatory.

 In others, market participants have transitioned to central clearing either

 in anticipation of a mandate, or simply due to a commercial incentive as liquidity

 has shifted to the cleared market.
The most widely used CCP in the global OTC interest rate derivative market is the

 SwapClear service operated by LCH.Clearnet Limited (LCH.C Ltd). Since the global

 financial crisis, the outstanding notional value of OTC interest rate derivatives

 cleared through SwapClear has increased to more than US$200 trillion. At the

 same time, the initial margin posted by participants to support this activity

 has also risen significantly.
The transition to central clearing is less advanced in other OTC derivative product

 classes and with initial margining of non-centrally cleared derivatives not

 yet widespread the implications for collateral demand have yet to be fully

 felt on collateral demand. A number of studies have attempted to quantify the

 likely ultimate effect of both central clearing and initial margining of non-centrally

 cleared trades. These have reached a variety of conclusions, depending on assumptions

 around matters such as the volatility of the underlying products and the degree

 of netting efficiency. Several studies – including Duffie and Zhu (2011)

 and Heath, Kelly and Manning (2013) – observe that central clearing of

 multiple products through a single CCP is likely to deliver the greatest netting

 efficiency and as a result could temper the demand for collateral-eligible

 assets. Indeed, Duffie, Scheicher and Vuillemey (2014) estimate that central

 clearing of credit derivatives could reduce collateral demand by almost a third

 relative to a scenario in which these products remained non-centrally cleared

 but were subject to initial margin. Anderson and Jõeveer (2014), on

 the other hand, model conditions under which non-centrally cleared arrangements

 in regional markets could, by accommodating a wider range of local collateral

 assets, be less costly than clearing through CCPs.
The Australian authorities have closely monitored these developments, paying particular

 attention to the way regulatory changes are implemented. A case in point is

 mandatory clearing requirements for OTC derivatives. The regulators recognise

 the trade-off between the benefits of collateralisation in managing counterparty

 credit risk and the costs in terms of increased liquidity risk. Acknowledging

 that some market participants may face liquidity constraints, the regulators

 favour careful implementation of central clearing requirements. In their latest

 recommendations to government, the regulators observed that where small financial

 institutions and especially non-financial entities had restricted access to

 liquid assets to meet CCPs' initial and variation margin requirements,

 new sources of risk could emerge (ASIC, APRA and RBA 2014). Accordingly, the

 regulators concluded that mandatory clearing requirements should be imposed

 only on internationally active dealers. In particular, they noted that:
… for some non-dealers it is unclear whether either the private or

 public policy benefits will ever be sufficient to offset the costs. Given this,

 on the basis of currently available information, the Regulators would expect

 to give close consideration to a specific exclusion from any mandatory clearing

 obligation for certain non-dealers.
ASIC, APRA and RBA 2014, p 4
Similarly, Australian regulators argued internationally for a narrower product scope

 for mandatory initial margining of non-centrally cleared derivatives that excluded

 foreign exchange derivatives and the currency component of cross-currency swaps.

 And, also recognising the limited supply of high-quality Australian dollar-denominated

 assets eligible to meet the Basel liquidity standards, APRA has permitted authorised

 deposit-taking institutions (ADIs) to access a committed liquidity facility

 made available by the Reserve Bank. I will return to this shortly.
Collateral Assets
The fundamental role of collateral is to manage counterparty credit risks in wholesale

 markets. There are a number of reasons why collateral is an effective tool

 for this:
Collateral overcomes problems of informational asymmetry; a collateral receiver need

 only monitor the quality of the collateral, not its counterparty.
Collateral offers pre-funded credit protection, since the collateral receiver has

 the assets in hand at the time of default.
Secured lending and other forms of collateralisation of exposure overcome difficulties

 in writing complex contracts that can anticipate all possible market and economic

 circumstances; legal agreements that underpin collateral arrangements by contrast

 are relatively simple and can rely on standardised documentation.
Given its role and purpose, collateral typically takes the form of high-quality assets

 that are subject to limited credit and market risk and easy to monitor. Collateral-eligible

 assets typically must also be liquid, since in the event of a counterparty

 default, the holder of collateral will aim to liquidate the assets on a timely

 basis.
For instance, repurchase agreements – or repos – are typically written

 on a defined set of high-quality assets. In Australia, most repos are contracted

 against Commonwealth Government Securities or securities issued by the states

 and territories. As collateral becomes more scarce, however, market participants

 may begin to accept a broader set of collateral assets than solely high-quality

 liquid assets.
The CPSS-IOSCO
Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures
(the Principles) set international standards for CCPs and other financial market

 infrastructures (CPSS-IOSCO 2012). The Principles state a clear preference

 for collateral assets ‘with low credit, liquidity and market risks’,

 and set similar expectations around the assets in which a CCP reinvests any

 cash collateral received. Other assets may be eligible ‘if an appropriate

 haircut is applied’. In the centrally cleared space, some CCPs already

 accept a relatively wide range of collateral assets to meet margin obligations

 (Table 2). For instance, in addition to cash and government bonds, CME

 and Eurex accept various private debt securities. While in most cases, cash

 and government bonds still predominate, this flexibility is valuable to some

 participants.
Table 2: Eligible Collateral at a Range of OTC Derivatives CCPs
ASX Clear
(Futures)
CME
Eurex
ICE Clear
(Credit)
LCH.C Ltd
(SwapClear)
Cash
(a)
✔
✔
✔
✔
✔
Government bonds
(a)
✔
✔
✔
✔
✔
Corporate bonds
✔
✔
Bank bills
✔
Mortgage-backed securities
✔
✔
Money-market fund shares
✔
Equities
✔
Gold
✔
(a) Various currencies/governments
Sources: CCP websites
For non-centrally cleared transactions, cash remains the most common form of collateral.

 ISDA reports that around 75 per cent of collateral is currently in cash form,

 with around 15 per cent in government securities and 10 per cent in other fixed-income

 securities, including corporate bonds (ISDA 2014). As initial margin is more

 frequently exchanged in these markets, non-cash collateral is likely to become

 more important. Similar to the Principles, new standards established by the

 Basel Committee on Banking Supervision (BCBS) and International Organization

 of Securities Commissions (IOSCO) require that collateral assets ‘be

 highly liquid and should, after accounting for an appropriate haircut, be able

 to hold their value in a time of financial stress’ (BCBS-IOSCO 2013,

 p4). BCBS-IOSCO (2013) provides an illustrative list of eligible collateral,

 which extends well beyond traditional high-quality liquid assets.
Clearly, there's a balance to be struck. And that's where the central bank

 comes in. A central bank, uniquely, can use its balance sheet to transform

 financial assets of differing characteristics into cash balances. One way to

 increase the potential size of liquidity operations is to expand the set of

 securities that are eligible for repo to the central bank. Not only does this

 directly contribute to liquidity, but it also does so indirectly since collateral

 eligibility criteria in the private sector typically consider the assets that

 the central bank is willing to accept in its operations. For example, since

 access to liquidity from the Reserve Bank is an important consideration in

 the liquidity frameworks of Australian CCPs, the range of collateral accepted

 by the Bank is a determinant of both their collateral eligibility criteria

 and their decisions around reinvestment of cash collateral. In addition to

 government securities, the Reserve Bank will accept private securities issued

 by ADIs, as well as a range of asset-backed and corporate securities that meet

 minimum criteria for credit quality.
As previously noted, the Reserve Bank has taken a similar stance in responding to

 the structural shortage of high-quality liquid assets to meet ADIs' requirements

 under the Basel liquidity standard. In particular, ADIs may establish a committed

 liquidity facility with the Reserve Bank to help meet these requirements (APRA

 2011). Under such a facility, the Reserve Bank would commit, in exchange for

 a fee, to making available a pre-agreed amount of liquidity under repo. All

 securities eligible in the Reserve Bank's normal operations will be eligible

 for the committed facility. It should be noted that, in the case of CCPs, access

 to liquidity from the Reserve Bank has not been formalised in the same way

 as for ADIs.
Effective Supply
The basic conclusion of a number of recent studies is that there is no globalised

 shortage of high-quality liquid assets (CGFS 2013). That may well be true today,

 particularly given the rapid expansion of government debt in most jurisdictions

 in recent years (Graph 2). However, the focus of most analyses to date

 has been on outstanding securities issued, rather than the ‘effective’

 supply: that is, the outstanding supply of securities on issue, adjusted to

 reflect how much is actually available to meet collateral needs. This requires

 an adjustment for how much is locked away in long-term portfolios and not made

 available for loan, and a further adjustment for the ‘velocity’

 of collateral. Collateral velocity refers to how many different purposes are

 satisfied, on average, by re-using a single line of collateral. Most re-use

 activity is concentrated in securities lending and repo markets. Standard collateral

 agreements, such as the Credit Support Annexes that support ISDA documentation,

 generally include a right of re-use unless this is expressly removed.
Graph 2
Kirk
et al
, researchers from the Federal Reserve Bank of New

 York, describe a number of dealer activities that rely on efficient rehypothecation

 and re-use of collateral (Kirk
et al
2014). These include,

 for instance, intermediation of offsetting repo or derivative transactions

 between clients. In both cases, considerable efficiencies – and hence

 cost advantages to the clients – can be gained by passing through the

 collateral received from one client to the other, rather than relying on own-sourced

 collateral. In the absence of efficient rehypothecation and re-use, it is likely

 that the costs of such intermediation – which is integral to market funding

 and risk management – could rise materially.
There are of course important risk considerations associated with rehypothecation

 and re-use. These were revealed by the severe deleveraging that occurred following

 the failure of Lehman Brothers in 2008, and the difficulties experienced by

 many institutions in recalling securities that had passed through long re-use

 chains. Accordingly, some investors in high-quality liquid assets have become

 less inclined to make these assets available in lending programs, and there

 is increasing caution among collateral providers around rehypothecation and

 re-use. Central clearing also naturally curtails this activity, since CCPs

 are not permitted to re-use posted collateral. As a result of such factors,

 Singh (2013) estimates that collateral velocity in the major financial centres

 declined by around a third between 2007 and 2012. Kirk
et al
(2014) present similar evidence.
Looking ahead, some regulatory restrictions on this activity will be introduced,

 including in the derivative margining regime established by BCBS and IOSCO.

 And some policymakers favour more wideranging restrictions. While acknowledging

 the risk considerations, the Reserve Bank has argued strongly in international

 forums that imposing tighter restrictions on collateral rehypothecation and

 re-use would be counterproductive. Such restrictions could materially raise

 the cost of intermediation and increase the risk that the demand for high-quality

 collateral exceeded supply. After extensive consideration of these issues,

 the Financial Stability Board (FSB) concluded last year that the focus should

 instead be on greater transparency of securities lending and repo activity

 and better disclosure to clients around the extent to which their collateral

 would be rehypothecated (FSB 2013). The Bank supports the FSB's conclusions.
Collateral Efficiency
Recognising emerging constraints on their collateral, financial institutions are

 increasingly focusing on how to ensure efficient use of collateral. Many institutions

 are taking steps to improve the flow of information on collateral holdings

 across business units and geographical locations, in some cases assisted by

 third-party collateral management services. We will no doubt hear about some

 of these in the next session. Many such services also provide tools that assist

 in optimising collateral use, including by facilitating re-use. These typically

 apply algorithms that identify the collateral that is cheapest to deliver to

 meet a particular collateral need, given the collateral receiver's eligibility

 criteria.
We have also heard a lot about collateral transformation, whereby one party exchanges

 low-quality or illiquid assets with another for high-quality assets that meet

 some collateral eligibility criteria. There does not yet appear to be very

 active use of these services, neither domestically nor internationally, but

 there remains some prospect that these arrangements will become more important

 and more widely used over time.
The central bank again has a role to play in improving collateral efficiency. At

 the time ASX was developing its collateral management service, for example,

 market participants made it clear that, as a major counterparty in the Australian

 repo market, the Reserve Bank's participation was important. The Reserve

 Bank has, accordingly, joined the service as a collateral receiver.
In its financial stability role and as overseer of key financial market infrastructure,

 the Reserve Bank will keep a close eye on the evolution of collateral management

 services. The Bank will also monitor whether, over time, collateral transformation

 evolves as a core financial market activity. As these arrangements become more

 widespread, the Bank will want to be aware of any new interlinkages and dependencies

 and will want to understand how they may be altering market participants'

 behaviour.
Conclusions
In conclusion, the way that collateral is used is changing rapidly. Any interruption

 to collateral markets, or material decline in their efficiency, could have

 important implications for the cost of a range of intermediary activities and,

 more broadly, capital allocation and risk transfer in the financial markets.
Central banks and other financial regulators need to ensure that the implementation

 of regulation in this space strikes the right balance. In this talk, I have

 cited the importance of the appropriate exercise of regulatory discretion and

 a considered approach to implementing regulatory reforms – such as OTC

 derivative reform and Basel liquidity standards. Greater transparency around

 how collateral markets function is also important. For instance, good data

 on collateral rehypothecation and re-use could help central banks and other

 financial regulators to respond effectively if there was some disruption to

 these markets, or if in adjusting to the new steady state new risks emerged.
Thank you for your attention.
Endnote
I would like to acknowledge the assistance of Angus Moore and Belinda Cheung in the

 preparation of this speech, as well as helpful comments and contributions

 from a number of colleagues. Any remaining errors are my own.
[*]
References
Anderson R and K Jõeveer (2014), ‘The Economics of Collateral’,

 Financial Markets Group Discussion Paper No 732.
APRA (Australian Prudential Regulation Authority) (2011), ‘Implementing Basel

 III Liquidity Reforms in Australia’, APRA Discussion Paper, 16 November.
ASIC (Australian Securities and Investments Commission), APRA and RBA (Reserve Bank

 of Australia) (2014), ‘
Report 

 on the Australian OTC Derivatives Market
’, April.
BCBS-IOSCO (Basel Committee on Banking Supervision and Board of the International

 Organization of Securities Commissions) (2013),
Margin Requirements for Non-centrally Cleared Derivatives
, Bank

 for International Settlements, Basel.
CGFS (Committee on the Global Financial System) (2013),
Asset Encumbrance, Financial Reform and the Demand for 

 Collateral Assets
, CGFS Papers No 49, Bank for International Settlements,

 Basel.
CPSS-IOSCO (Committee on Payment and Settlement Systems and Technical Committee of

 IOSCO) (2012),
Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures
, Bank for International

 Settlements, Basel.
Duffie D, Scheicher M and G Vuillemey (2014), ‘Central Clearing and Collateral

 Demand’, NBER Working Paper No 19890.
Duffie D and H Zhu (2011), ‘Does a Central Clearing Counterparty Reduce Counterparty

 Risk?’,
The Review of Asset Pricing Studies
, 1(1), pp 74–95.
FSB (Financial Stability Board) (2013), ‘Strengthening Oversight and Regulation

 of Shadow Banking’, August.
Heath A, G Kelly and M Manning (2013), ‘
OTC 

 Derivatives Reform: Netting and Networks
’, in A Heath, M Lilley

 and M Manning (eds),
Liquidity 

 and Funding Markets
, Proceedings of a Conference, Reserve Bank of Australia,

 Sydney, pp 33–73.
Heath A and MJ Manning (2012), ‘
Financial 

 Regulation and Australian Dollar Liquid Assets
’, RBA
Bulletin
,

 September, pp 43–52.
ISDA (International Swap Dealers Association) (2014), ‘ISDA Margin Survey 2014’,

 April. Available at <http://www2.isda.org/functional-areas/research/surveys/margin-surveys/>.
Kirk A, J McAndrews, P Sastry and P Weed (2014), ‘Matching Collateral Supply

 and Financing Demands in Dealer Banks’, Federal Reserve Bank of New

 York
Economic Policy Review
, 20(2), pp 1–25.
Singh M (2013), ‘
The Economics of Shadow Banking
’,

 in A Heath, M Lilley and M Manning (eds),
Liquidity and Funding Markets
, Proceedings

 of a Conference, Reserve Bank of Australia, Sydney, pp 5–28.
