BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Recent Trends in Inflation – Online and Sydney
DATE: 16/11/2021
SPEAKER: Online and Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2021/sp-gov-2021-11-16.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Recent Trends in Inflation
Philip Lowe
[
*
]
Governor
Address to the Australian Business Economists (ABE)
Online and Sydney
–
16 November 2021
Audio
45.8MB
Q&A Transcript
Download
463KB
Thank you for the invitation to speak to the Australian Business Economists again. I am glad to have this
 opportunity to gather together with some of you in person, rather than just speak to my computer camera.
Today, I would like to focus on recent trends in inflation – both here and overseas. I will then
 discuss the implications for the RBA's monetary policy.
Over recent months, concerns about inflation have moved to the centre of many people's radar screens,
 after years of being at the periphery. This has coincided with headline inflation rates in some countries
 rising to their highest rates in a long time. Understanding the reasons for this higher inflation and how
 persistent it is likely to be are important issues for households, investors and central banks.
Some background
The recent concerns about inflation have come after many years of inflation being below central banks'
 targets. This first graph shows the gap between the average inflation rate over the 10 years to the
 end of 2019 and the target rate (Graph 1). The picture is pretty clear: the undershooting of
 inflation targets has been a common, though not universal, experience. The reasons for this are complex
 but include increasing globalisation, advances in technology and changes in the way labour markets work.
Graph 1
Now in 2021, the common experience is higher inflation. CPI inflation has increased in most advanced
 economies, with a number now experiencing headline inflation rates above 4 per cent
 (Graph 2). Asia is an exception, though, with inflation rising by only a small amount in Japan and
 China. So not every country is in the same position.
Graph 2
In those countries experiencing higher inflation, central banks and investors are asking themselves how
 persistent this increase will be. Is it just a temporary development associated with the pandemic? Or is
 it the start of a more persistent change in inflation dynamics in our economies?
Most central banks and international organisations have concluded that the increase in inflation is likely
 to be only temporary. This is evident in the next graph, which shows the latest inflation data for a
 range of countries, together with the IMF's forecast for inflation in 2022 (Graph 3). In most
 economies, inflation is expected to be much lower next year, with inflation rates generally clustered
 around 2 per cent.
Graph 3
A related question is to what extent policy interest rates will have to increase to achieve and sustain
 the forecast reduction in inflation rates? Current market pricing suggests that investors expect that
 most central banks in advanced economies will increase their policy interest rates by the end of 2022,
 with some – including New Zealand, Norway and South Korea – already having done so
 (Graph 4). It is noteworthy that only a modest increase in policy interest rates is anticipated,
 with rates expected to plateau at what would still be historically low levels. This is consistent with
 the view that the current increase in inflation is only transitory and that a period of contractionary
 monetary policy will not be required to return inflation to target.
Graph 4
Some explanations
With that background, I would like to discuss some of the reasons why inflation has risen recently. While
 there are a range of idiosyncratic factors at work, many of the explanations boil down to a simple one
 – that is, a shift in the balance of demand and supply as a result of the pandemic.
The best place to start is the very large shift in household spending patterns over the past year and a
 half. When households were locked down, they had difficulty spending on many household services and
 switched their spending to goods (Graph 5). Rather than taking a trip, going to the gym or eating
 out, people purchased goods for their homes, including fitting out their home offices and purchasing home
 exercise equipment. The result was an unprecedented switch in consumption patterns and the effect of this
 has reverberated throughout the global economy.
Graph 5
This surge in demand for goods quickly ran up against a supply side that was not flexible enough. Modern
 supply chains are calibrated to operate on a ‘just-in-time’ basis. This reduces the cost of
 holding inventories, but it means that the global production system is not well suited to a sudden and
 large shift in demand. And there was the added complication that at the same time demand surged, supply
 was temporarily constrained as governments and firms took steps to contain the virus. The
COVID-19
containment measures also affected the logistics industry. And so,
 once bottlenecks started to emerge, the problems in supply chains and in logistics fed off one another
 and compounded.
So there was a perfect storm of sorts: very strong demand for goods combined with a hit to productive
 capacity. The result was a sharp increase in shipping costs around the world, a fall in inventories,
 increased delivery times and large rises in the prices of many goods (Graph 6).
Graph 6
As time has passed, the hit to the supply side because of
COVID-19
has been
 largely overcome, although there are ongoing supply problems in some areas. Today, the main issue is not
 a reduced ability of global producers to produce goods, but rather an inability to respond quickly enough
 to strong global demand. For many goods, producers are operating at an inelastic part of the global
 supply curve.
A similar story has played out in many commodity and energy markets. Even before the pandemic, a number of
 these markets were operating at a point where the short-run supply curve was quite steep. As a result,
 even modest shifts in demand moved prices significantly. This is evident in the large increases in the
 prices of gas and many base metals recently (Graph 7). The situation has been compounded, especially
 in Europe and China, by adverse weather events that have directly reduced supply in some energy markets.
Graph 7
The other side of this shift in consumption patterns has been reduced demand for services. This had seen
 services price inflation slow a bit, but not enough to offset the increase in goods price inflation. More
 recently, global services price inflation has picked up to be around its pre-pandemic level.
Looking ahead, an important question is whether consumption patterns will normalise over time, and if so
 what effect will this have on prices. There is genuine uncertainty here. It is likely, though, that
 consumption patterns will return to something more normal. This is not only because we can once again
 consume many services, but also because households are unlikely to make repeat purchases of durable
 goods.
A return to a more normal pattern would be associated with softer growth in the demand for goods and
 stronger growth in the demand for services. It is possible that this could coincide with a resolution of
 some of the lingering supply disruptions and an increase in global supply of goods as firms respond to
 higher prices. If so, the balance between demand and supply for goods could be quite different from what
 we have seen recently. This is one basis for thinking that the current elevated rates of inflation are
 temporary: a period of strong demand saw prices rise, which was recorded as higher inflation, but prices
 aren't likely to keep rising at current rates as conditions normalise, and some prices may even
 decline.
More fundamentally, a critical issue is how the labour market responds. It is unusual to have persistently
 higher inflation without persistently higher wages growth (unless there is a shift lower in labour
 productivity growth). The two generally go together. There have been historical exceptions to this, and
 other factors that affect firms' costs and mark-ups can have persistent effects. But at the current
 juncture, the labour market is the key.
From my perspective, there are a couple of issues to watch here.
The first is how the higher inflation feeds through to inflation expectations and wage norms. It is
 possible that higher inflation leads workers to seek larger wage increases to compensate them for a loss
 of purchasing power. This is especially so if workers believe the higher inflation is here to stay. If a
 period of higher wages growth were to reset wage growth norms, this would have a persistent effect on
 overall inflation.
The second issue is how the balance of supply and demand in the labour market shifts as economies open up
 and the demand for labour-intensive services increases. Among other things, this will depend upon how
 labour force participation evolves.
Here, the experience has been quite different across countries. In the United States, labour force
 participation has not yet recovered and is still around 2 percentage points below its pre-pandemic
 level (Graph 8). In contrast, in Australia we were hitting record highs for participation just
 before the Delta outbreak and are expected to return to these highs in the coming months. This has also
 been the experience in several countries in Asia, including Japan, where workers remained attached to
 their employers throughout the pandemic and where labour force participation rates remained close to
 record highs.
Graph 8
In the United States, the high incidence of
COVID-19
infections resulted in a
 significant reduction in labour supply as people prioritised looking after their own health and that of
 their families. The closure of schools also had an effect. Further, the income-support arrangements were
 less successful than Australia's JobKeeper program in maintaining the attachment between businesses
 and employees. The result has been a significant shock to labour supply in the United States. This has
 not been the case in Australia.
These developments are relevant because strong growth in the demand for services will require a sharp
 increase in hours worked. In countries where participation has fallen and fewer
employee–employer
relationships were preserved, one might expect more friction
 in the labour market. In these countries, labour market matching might be harder to achieve and there
 could be more upward pressure on wages and inflation. The high incidence of
COVID-19
infections in some countries may also mean that some people are
 reluctant to take or return to customer-facing jobs. So these are issues to watch.
We are already seeing some of these dynamics play out and they help explain differential wage outcomes
 across countries. In the United States and the United Kingdom there has been a sharp increase in wages
 growth (Graph 9). In contrast, this has not been the case in Australia or Japan, where there has
 been less of an effect on labour supply.
Graph 9
To summarise, inflation in many countries rose as increased demand for goods quickly ran up against a
 supply side that was not flexible enough. In some countries, developments in energy markets, partly due
 to adverse weather events, have added to the upward pressure in inflation. Although there is some
 uncertainty, it is likely that inflation from these sources will moderate over the next 18 months as
 demand rebalances towards services and the supply of goods adjusts. Now, the critical issue for inflation
 is how the labour market responds, particularly as demand for services picks up.
Inflation in Australia
I would now like to turn to Australia.
Many of the factors that have caused inflation to rise elsewhere are also at play in Australia, though
 most of these are more muted here. There are also significant differences as well, which I will discuss
 in a moment.
As in the rest of the world, Australia has experienced a lift in inflation, although it is less pronounced
 than in many other countries. In underlying terms, inflation was 0.7 per cent in the September
 quarter and 2.1 per cent over the year to the September quarter (Graph 10). While this
 outcome was higher than expected, it is important to remember that at 2.1 per cent, underlying
 inflation is only just above the bottom of the 2 to 3 per cent target band and remains
 lower than the average for the past three decades.
Graph 10
The higher price of oil in global markets has also affected the headline inflation rate in Australia, with
 petrol prices up by 24 per cent over the past year (Graph 11). The effects of the shift in
 consumption patterns are also evident. Some imported goods prices have increased because global goods
 prices have increased and domestic retailers are discounting by less in response to strong domestic
 demand. For example, new car prices have increased at the fastest rate since 2001 and the prices of
 electronics and computing equipment have fallen at the slowest rate for many years. The prices of some
 other consumer durables, including household furnishings (but not clothing), have also been increasing a
 little more strongly than in recent years.
Graph 11
The shifting
demand–supply
balance is also evident in the higher cost of
 building a new home. Again, this is the result of a combination of global price rises for many building
 materials – including timber and steel – and a domestic price response to strong demand for
 new homes and renovations (Graph 12). The price of constructing a new dwelling – which has a
 weight of 8½ per cent in the CPI basket – increased by 3.3 per cent in the September
 quarter and further increases are expected.
Graph 12
So there are similarities with other countries. I would now like to turn to two important differences.
The first of these is energy prices. Energy prices in Australia have been trending lower for a number of
 years, after earlier large price increases (Graph 13). This recent experience has mainly reflected
 lower wholesale electricity prices, which is in part a result of increased capacity from wind and solar
 generators. In contrast, a number of other advanced economies have experienced very large increases in
 electricity prices as their power systems struggle to meet demand.
Graph 13
The second and more important difference is what has been happening in the labour market.
Labour force participation in Australia remains high and the wage-setting processes – including
 multi-year enterprise agreements and the annual minimum wage case – impart a degree of inertia into
 aggregate wage outcomes. Wages growth is expected to pick up, but to do so only gradually. Our business
 liaison suggests that most businesses retain a strong cost control mindset and are seeking to use
 measures other than raising base wages to attract and retain staff. There are some jobs that are in very
 high demand where wages have increased, but we are yet to see a broad-based pick-up in wages growth. In
 contrast, as I discussed earlier, wages growth has already picked up markedly in some other countries.
Turning to the outlook, we expect underlying inflation to pick up further, but to do so only gradually. On
 the one hand, some normalisation in consumption patterns here and around the world should partly
 alleviate the current upward pressure on inflation. But on the other hand, we are expecting a gradual
 pick-up in wages growth as the labour market tightens.
In terms of the specifics, our central forecast is for the Wage Price Index to increase by 2½
 per cent over 2022 and 3 per cent over 2023 (although overall labour costs are expected to
 increase somewhat faster than this). Underlying inflation is expected to be 2¼ per cent over 2022
 and 2½ per cent over 2023 (Graph 14).
Graph 14
Monetary policy
I would now like to turn to the implications of all this for monetary policy in Australia.
The recent inflation data indicate that we are making better-than-expected progress towards our inflation
 objective. This is welcome news. But we still have a way to go. Underlying inflation has only just
 returned to the target range for the first time in six years and is only just above the bottom of that
 target range.
In terms of the real economy, the recovery is back on track following the interruption caused by the Delta
 outbreak. This recovery is being underpinned by high rates of vaccination and expansionary policy
 settings. We are expecting the recovery to continue and the unemployment rate to trend lower, reaching
 4 per cent by the end of 2023. The last time the unemployment rate was lower than this was in
 the early 1970s.
Over the past 50 years, an inflation rate in the twos and an unemployment rate in the fours would
 have been considered very good outcomes. We need to remember, though, that we are in this place only
 because of extraordinary policy support. Over time, as a country we will need to refocus on the
 underlying drivers of growth in the economy and jobs.
In terms of the cash rate, the Reserve Bank Board has said that it will not increase the cash rate until
 inflation is sustainably in the target range. It is hard to precisely define what ‘sustainably in
 the target range’ means. But we want to see underlying inflation well within the
2–3
per cent range and have a reasonable degree of confidence
 that it will not fall back again. The trajectory for inflation is also important, with a slow drift up in
 underlying inflation having different policy implications to a sharp rise. Another important
 consideration will be developments in the labour market.
Unless labour productivity growth is very weak, it is likely that wages will need to be growing at
 3 point something per cent to sustain inflation around the middle of the target band. This
 doesn't mean that we have a target for wages growth or that wages growth is the only determinant of
 inflation. Rather, we are using wages growth as one of the guideposts in assessing progress towards our
 goal and whether inflation is sustainably in the target range. As we get closer to that goal, you could
 expect us to provide further guidance, including our projections for inflation.
Given the global and domestic forces I have discussed, the inflation outlook is more uncertain than it has
 been for some time. But our central scenario is that underlying inflation reaches the middle of the
 target by the end of 2023. If this comes to pass, it would be the first time in nearly seven years that
 we will be at the mid-point. This, by itself, does not warrant an increase in the cash rate. As I have
 said, much will depend upon the trajectory of the economy and inflation at the time. It is still
 plausible that the first increase in the cash rate will not be before 2024.
There are, of course, other possibilities. It is possible that the global inflation shock is more
 persistent and that the rebalancing of consumption patterns does not result in an easing of inflation
 pressures. In addition, we have little historical experience as to how the Australian labour market works
 at an unemployment rate of 4 per cent. There is also the question of the effect on labour
 supply of the reopening of the international border. It is therefore possible that faster-than-expected
 progress continues to be made towards achieving the inflation target. If so, there would be a case to
 lift the cash rate before 2024. It is also possible that progress will be slower than expected, which
 would result in the cash rate staying at current levels for longer.
Finally, I would like to repeat a point I made a couple of weeks ago – that is, the latest data and
 forecasts do not warrant an increase in the cash rate in 2022. The economy and inflation would have to
 turn out very differently from our central scenario for the Board to consider an increase in interest
 rates next year. It is likely to take time to meet the condition we have set for an increase in the cash
 rate and the Board is prepared to be patient.
Thank you for listening.
I look forward to answering your questions.
Endnote
I would like to thank Penny Smith for assistance
 in preparing this talk.
[*]
