BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Opening Remarks to the Inquiry on Housing Affordability and Supply in Australia – Videoconference
DATE: 15/11/2021
SPEAKER: Videoconference
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2021/sp-ag-2021-11-15.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Opening Remarks to the Inquiry on Housing Affordability and Supply in Australia
Luci Ellis
Assistant Governor (Economic)
Bradley Jones
Head of Economic Analysis
House of Representatives Standing Committee on Tax and Revenue
Videoconference
–
15 November 2021
Download
154KB
Hansard Transcript
Thank you, Chair, for the opportunity to appear again before this inquiry into an important topic. Shelter
 is a fundamental human need, so naturally housing affordability is a keenly felt issue. Its importance is
 highlighted by the number of parliamentary and other inquiries on housing over the past 20 years.
Our submission to this inquiry covers a range of aspects of this issue. In my opening remarks I will
 confine myself to some observations about the longer-run context for housing markets, and then outline
 some noteworthy features of the current situation, as Australia emerges from the
COVID-19
pandemic.
The longer-run context is that financial deregulation in the 1980s and the global decline in inflation in
 the 1990s combined to reduce nominal interest rates. With lower interest rates, people could service a
 bigger mortgage with the same repayment. Some of this extra buying capacity financed an increase in the
 quality of the housing stock. But because most of the housing stock was already in place, the main effect
 was to bid up housing prices; this was captured in land prices. There were some distributional
 consequences to this. The price increases were greatest in the most desirable regions and neighbourhoods.
 First home buyers now had to save a bigger deposit relative to their incomes. And some features of the
 tax system, combined with the possibility of leverage, meant that buying rental properties became
 especially attractive. The big-picture story, though, was one of increased demand stemming from greater
 availability and serviceability of finance.
The pandemic and policy responses to it have shifted the balance of supply and demand in some housing
 markets. Over the past year or so, we have again seen strong growth in housing prices. This followed
 periods of weakness in 2018 and early 2019, and again, briefly, at the very beginning of the pandemic.
 Properties coming onto the market are being snapped up quickly. Data on housing finance show that this
 increase in demand was initially mostly owner-occupiers, but demand from property investors has also
 increased recently. Clearly some purchasers are willing to pay these prices, although others have missed
 out. Indeed, strong rises in housing prices have been a feature of many advanced economies'
 recoveries from the pandemic. This is not surprising when interest rates are low, incomes were boosted by
 fiscal policies and many households are cashed up with savings accumulated during lockdowns.
Another common feature across countries is that many households are wanting larger homes than they did
 before the pandemic. The combination of the time confined at home during lockdowns, and the likely future
 of more working from home, has brought the quality and size of one's home sharply into view. We do
 not know how lasting this shift in preferences will be. For now, though, renovation activity,
 commencements for new detached homes and price growth of high-value homes are all at high levels.
This demand response to the pandemic relates to the quality and comfort of each individual home. That is a
 very different margin of adjustment than the number of new homes. In Australia, additions to the housing
 stock have run ahead of population growth for a number of years. This led to higher vacancy rates in the
 largest capital cities. Vacancy rates in the two largest cities rose further following the onset of the
 pandemic; with the international border closed, population growth dropped sharply. At the same time, the
 HomeBuilder subsidy and similar state-based grants have encouraged more home building, and will for a
 while yet. So we do not have the ingredients of an obvious overall shortage of homes.
If Australia had not been building enough homes to house its population, you would have seen rents rising
 across the country. Instead, the situation has been mixed in recent years. In the larger cities, where
 most of the new apartments were built, rents were quite flat. Lower migration and other shifts in
 population in response to the pandemic and related health measures have mostly exacerbated these trends.
 Rents have been quite weak in the two largest cities of late, but in some regional areas, pressures on
 rental affordability are reportedly quite acute.
As we outlined in our submission, the supply side of the housing market has inherently limited capacity to
 adjust to sharp increases in demand. There are some things that could be done to make the flow of new
 housing supply more responsive. These include speeding up planning systems to reduce general
 inefficiencies, improving transport infrastructure and lowering the cost of new construction. Supply-side
 changes of this nature would dampen the increase in prices that ensues when demand increases. But they
 will not undo the fact of rising demand, and they will not prevent price increases entirely. Moreover,
 housing market policies that add to demand will only amplify any upswing in prices.
My colleague Brad Jones and I would be happy to answer any questions you may have about the Bank's
 submission.
