BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: The Housing Market and Financial Stability – Online
DATE: 22/09/2021
SPEAKER: Online
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2021/sp-ag-2021-09-22.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
The Housing Market and Financial Stability
Michele Bullock
[
*
]
Assistant Governor (Financial System)
Bloomberg Inside Track
Online
–
22 September 2021
Audio
20.1MB
Q&A Transcript
Download
323KB
Thank you for the opportunity to speak with you today. When the pandemic hit Australia in early 2020,
 policymakers entered a world of unknowns. The health situation required drastic curtailment of much
 economic activity. Fiscal and monetary policy both responded quickly and strongly. Governments provided
 substantial financial support to firms and individuals who overnight lost business and jobs. The Reserve
 Bank reduced interest rates to historically low levels and introduced a suite of other policy measures to
 lower funding costs and interest rates across the economy. The banks offered borrowers deferrals on their
 loan repayments. There were moratoriums on evictions and rent relief for businesses and households. The
 idea was that we were building a bridge to get us over the economic crevasse created by the pandemic.
At that time we were writing our
Financial Stability Review
. Things were changing so quickly
 that we seemed to be rewriting it daily. It ended up being quite a different style of Review than we
 would typically produce. Its focus was on the ability of the financial system to absorb the shock and
 support the economy. It also focused on the potential implications for household and business balance
 sheets. In particular, we noted the decline in demand in the residential property market and highlighted
 the risks this could pose to highly indebted households. To quote:
A key financial stability risk is the extent to which the weakness in economic activity spills over
 to the housing and commercial property markets. The prospect of large declines in property prices
 presents significant balance sheet risks for households, businesses and lenders.
Now, eighteen months later, as we are drafting our
Financial Stability Review
that will come
 out in October, we are not talking about financial stability risks from housing debt given falling
 prices. Rather, we are monitoring the surprising and dramatic rebound in the housing market and asking
 ourselves whether there are financial stability risks from these developments and the accompanying rise
 in housing credit.
Although it is not property prices
per se
that we care about from a financial stability
 perspective, developments in the housing market (including prices) provide information on the emergence
 of financial stability risks. Today I want to set out how we think about the housing market in the
 context of financial stability.
The housing market has been buoyant
After initially declining a bit at the onset of the pandemic, housing prices have recovered strongly
 (Graph 1). Despite some moderation during the recent lockdowns in NSW and Victoria, the strength has
 been broad based across states and across metropolitan and regional areas and particularly in detached
 housing.
Graph 1
In this environment it is unsurprising that housing credit growth has picked up and the rapid rebound in
 loan commitments suggests some further pickup in growth to come (Graph 2). Growth in housing credit
 is currently running at an annualised rate of around 7 per cent. Recent data on commitments,
 combined with several assumptions, suggest housing credit growth could peak at an annualised rate of
 around 11 per cent early next year.
Graph 2
There are a number of factors driving this strength. Low interest rates are clearly an important factor,
 making it easier for households to service their debt and changing the trade off on whether to rent or
 buy. Also important has been the government support for housing construction, including the HomeBuilder
 scheme. Growth in housing credit in late 2020 and early 2021 was driven by increases in loan commitments
 for the purchase of new dwellings or housing construction. More recently, however, there are signs that
 credit growth is increasingly being driven by purchases of existing dwellings, in which turnover is
 currently quite high.
The strength in the housing market is positive for the economy, and indeed an important channel for
 monetary policy to support the economy through housing construction, home improvements and purchases of
 household items. In fact, strongly rising housing markets and housing credit have been a feature of many
 other countries over the past 18 months as monetary policy has lowered lending rates and governments
 have provided fiscal support. However, while household debt to income in Australia hasn't increased
 much over recent years, it is at a high level, both historically and relative to other countries. So
 sustained strong growth in credit in excess of income growth may result in vulnerabilities building in
 bank and household balance sheets.
What does this imply for financial stability risks?
There are two interrelated channels through which the housing market could have implications for financial
 stability: bank balance sheets and household balance sheets.
Banks
The Australian banks are very exposed to the housing market. Around 60 per cent of their lending
 is for housing (Graph 3). And housing is also common collateral for loans to small and medium
 businesses. A decline in housing prices impacts the value of that collateral but of itself does not
 necessarily lead to losses. If there were an economic shock that resulted in borrowers being unable to
 service their debt, however, and at the same time housing prices fell sharply, the debt would be unable
 to be recovered in full by the sale of the property, resulting in a loss to the banks. If the losses were
 large enough the banks might exacerbate the decline by reducing their lending.
Graph 3
There are two broad mitigants against this – lending standards and capital.
Bank lending standards and practices determine how much risks bank take on. The Global Financial Crisis
 (GFC) demonstrated the impact that poor lending standards can have on bank balance sheets. Banks are in
 the business of taking risk – if they only lent money when they were 100% certain it would be
 repaid there would be too little credit. So there is a balance to be struck. Some loans will go bad but
 banks manage those risks by maintaining appropriate standards on who they lend to and how much. This
 involves, among other things, standards around serviceability and loan to valuation ratios.
Currently in Australia, the evidence suggests that lending standards overall have been maintained in the
 face of very strong demand for housing (Graph 4). This is in contrast to 2014-2017 when there were
 signs that lending standards were declining. During that period the Australian Prudential Regulation
 Authority (APRA) took a number of measures to bolster lending standards and curb growth in lending that
 was posing a higher risk to financial and economic stability.
[1]
The share of new lending at high
 loan to valuation ratios rose last year, in part reflecting an increase in the number of first home
 buyers who tend to have lower deposits. Lending at high debt to income ratios has also risen since early
 2020. APRA and the Bank are monitoring these trends closely.
Graph 4
The other mitigant is capital. The more well capitalised the banking system, the more ability it has to
 absorb losses. The GFC, which originated in a boom and bust in the housing market in the United States,
 demonstrated what can happen if banks are not well capitalised. The substantial losses sustained by many
 banks during that period severely depleted capital positions and resulted in banks pulling back from
 credit provision amplifying the economic downturn. This wasn't so much an issue in Australia though
 since the Australian banks were quite well capitalised at the time.
Following that episode, there was a worldwide effort to increase the capital in the banking system through
 what are known as the Basel III reforms, implemented in Australia by APRA. While the Australian banks did
 not have the undercapitalisation problems of some overseas banks, they now have even stronger capital
 positions than they did at the time of the GFC. Indeed, stress tests undertaken by the Bank and reported
 in our October 2020 Review indicate that even a very severe recession and substantial fall in property
 prices would still leave the banks with capital above their regulatory minima.
[2]
The
 strength of the banks allowed the banks to respond positively to the pandemic shock, supporting the
 economy through lending and loan repayment deferrals rather than amplifying the shock.
Households
The second channel through which the housing market could impact financial stability is the household
 sector. The bulk of household debt in Australia is mortgage debt – people borrowing to buy homes.
 Households that have borrowed a lot to purchase a home relative to their income could, in the event of a
 shock to their employment status or income, find they are unable to continue to service their loans. This
 may not be a problem if the value of the loan is less than the value of the property. While it would be
 disruptive and stressful to have to sell their home, they would at least be able to repay the debt.
 However, if the value of the home has fallen substantially since they took out the loan, they will be
 unable to ‘self-cure’ in this way. In these circumstances, banks would incur losses and if
 there are enough, like in the GFC, there could be a substantial impact running from households to banks.
As I have already noted above, this currently seems an unlikely channel in Australia's case given the
 strength of the banks' balance sheets. But there is another channel through which a high level of
 household debt could have implications for the economy and by extension financial stability –
 through its impact on consumption. Over-exuberance in the housing market can amplify these risks in two
 ways. First, rapid price rises can increase the likelihood that some new borrowers will over-stretch
 their financial capacity in order to obtain a new loan, making them more likely to reduce their
 consumption in response to a shock to their incomes. Second, if rapid price rises ultimately prove to be
 unsustainable they could lead to sharp declines in price and turnover in the future. This in turn could
 result in reduced spending, both directly as a result of a decline in turnover and through the wealth
 effect.
Household debt in Australia has increased substantially over the past 30 years (Graph 5). Much
 of this occurred in the 1990s and 2000s as declines in inflation and interest rates, and rises in real
 income, meant that people were able to service higher levels of debt. Financial liberalisation in the
 1980s also removed some unnecessary credit constraints. Both of these are permanent shifts and no cause
 for alarm. And although household debt to income in Australia is higher than many overseas countries,
 this can be partly explained by the fact that, unlike many other countries, households own the rental
 stock (and hence have the debt) in Australia, rather than corporate landlords owned by specialist firms
 or pension funds.
[3]
Graph 5
Nevertheless, there is quite a bit of international and domestic evidence that suggests that households
 that have high levels of debt are more likely to curb consumption in response to shocks in income or
 wealth.
[4]
A large number of highly indebted households reacting in such a way to an economic downturn or decline in
 housing prices could amplify the economic shock. A boom in the housing market, accompanied by an increase
 in housing debt could therefore make the economy more susceptible to downturns.
For example, in a recession in which a large number of indebted households suffer reduced income, from say
 loss of employment or reduced hours, they might choose to reduce their consumption. It may be just
 precautionary. But if households are constrained (in the sense that they don't have a great deal of
 income left after meeting debt servicing requirements and the basics of their lifestyle) they are more
 likely to reduce consumption. This will amplify the initial impact of the economic shock.
Another way in which developments in the housing market and debt could impact the economy is through the
 wealth effect. Sharp declines in housing prices could result in households curbing their consumption,
 more so if they are highly leveraged, further exacerbating any downturn in the economy. In this sense,
 sharp rises in housing prices that are not associated with fundamentals could lead to instability by
 raising the risk of a subsequent decline. This is one reason why we watch investor activity in the
 housing market quite closely. Investors have the potential to amplify movements in housing prices, buying
 when prices are rising quickly but potentially selling when they fall in an effort to avoid a capital
 loss. Any amplified swings in housing prices will have an impact on the wealth of all households and
 hence potentially their consumption.
As I noted above, while picking up, investor activity in the housing market is currently nowhere near the
 levels it was in 2014 when APRA introduced its investor lending benchmark. And it is hard to judge in
 real time whether housing prices are out of line with fundamentals. Nevertheless, when prices are rising
 very rapidly and there are expectations that this will continue, borrowers are more likely to overstretch
 their financial capacity in order to purchase property. We are therefore watching developments in housing
 markets and credit very closely.
What can the authorities do?
Given the potential for risks to be building, there is a question about what the authorities can do aside
 from monitor developments. Unlike in 2014 and 2017, the concerns this time are not specific types of
 lending such as investor or interest only lending. So the tools used at that time are not really
 appropriate at this time. This suggests that if there were to be a need for so-called macro-prudential
 tools to address rising risks, they should be targeted at the risks arising from highly indebted
 borrowers. Tools that address serviceability of loans and the amount of credit that can be obtained by
 individual borrowers are more likely to be relevant. Indeed we have seen such tools used in a number of
 countries in recent times and they could be employed in Australia should the circumstances be judged to
 warrant it.
Conclusion
The unprecedented monetary and fiscal support to the Australian economy through the pandemic has helped
 ‘build a bridge’ to the other side. The strong recovery in the housing market is part of that
 bridge. But with the increase in housing prices and housing debt, risks to financial stability could be
 building. Even though the banks have strong balance sheets and lending standards are being maintained,
 there is a risk that in this environment, households will become increasingly indebted. A high level of
 debt could pose risks to the economy in the event of a shock to household incomes or a sharp decline in
 housing prices. It is these macro-financial risks that warrant close watching. Whether or not there is
 need to consider macro-prudential tools to address these risks is something we are continually assessing.
Thank you.
Endnotes
I would like to thank Jonathan Kearns, Natasha
 Cassidy, Michelle Wright and Amelia Gao for assistance in preparing this talk.
[*]
See RBA (Reserve Bank of Australia) (2018),
Financial Stability Review
, October
[1]
See RBA (2020),
Financial Stability
 Review
, October
[2]
See J Kearns, M Major and D Norman (2020),
 ‘
How Risky is Australian Household
 Debt?
’, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2020-05
[3]
See F Price, B Beckers and G La Cava (2019),
 ‘
The Effect of Mortgage Debt on Consumer
 Spending: Evidence from Household-level Data
’, RBA Research Discussion Paper No
 2019-06
[4]
