BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Summary
DATE: 14/10/2021
SPEAKER: Philip Lowe
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2014/sp-dg-211014-summary.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech Summary
Investing in a Low Interest Rate World
Philip Lowe
Deputy Governor
Address to the Commonwealth Bank of Australia's 7th Annual Australasian Fixed Income Conference
Sydney
–
21 October 2014
View the speech
Audio
26.15
MB
Q&A Transcript
The speech outlines some of the challenges faced in a world of low interest rates

 and focuses on two issues: how greater financial risk-taking can be transformed

 into greater risk-taking on the ‘real’ side of the economy, and

 recent developments in the Australian housing market.
The speech looks at attitudes towards risk over recent years. It explains that since

 the financial crisis, in a low interest rate environment, investors have begun

 to increase their financial risk-taking and purchase existing physical assets

 as they search for higher yields. However, it notes that the strong demand

 for assets and resulting price increases has not yet generated a strong appetite

 for the creation of
new
assets (which are needed to create growth and jobs). As such,

 central banks are said to have continued to implement expansionary monetary

 policies with the objective of supporting demand and encouraging investment

 in new assets that will support economic growth.
The speech then highlights two approaches to promote economic growth – the promotion

 of structural policies that encourage risk-taking in the real economy and increased

 spending on infrastructure. The challenges in financing infrastructure investment

 are then explored. And from a domestic perspective, the speech outlines how

 higher infrastructure spending could support the transition from the mining

 investment boom to other forms of activity.
The speech then turns to the Australian housing market and explains that increased

 demand for housing is translating into increased demand for
new
housing construction, which is assisting with the rebalancing

 of demand in the economy (as mining investment declines). However, the speech

 warns that some aspects of the housing market, such as loans to investors,

 have become ‘unbalanced’. It suggests that this sort of imbalance

 poses the risk of unsustainable housing price growth, which, if it were to

 correct suddenly, could have consequences for the economy. And the speech notes

 that the Bank has said that it is talking to the prudential regulator about

 possible ways to temper growth in this segment of the market.
View the speech
