BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Australian Securities Markets Through the Pandemic – Online
DATE: 23/11/2021
SPEAKER: Online
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2021/sp-so-2021-11-23.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Australian Securities Markets Through the Pandemic
Marion Kohler
[
*
]
Head of Domestic Markets Department
Keynote Address to the Australian Securitisation Forum
Online
–
23 November 2021
Audio
9.11MB
Download
521KB
Good afternoon. It's a pleasure to be here today with you, albeit virtually, and I want to thank the
 Australian Securitisation Forum for their invitation.
This has been a turbulent two years for everyone, including for financial market participants. Previous
 downturns have taught us just how important it is that funding continues to flow to households and
 businesses, through both banks and securities markets. When securities markets aren't working well,
 this ultimately weighs on employment and economic activity. And securities markets are, of course, key to
 the transmission of monetary policy. This is also true for the unconventional monetary policy measures
 that the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) has deployed since March 2020.
Today I'll be talking about how markets for non-government securities have weathered the past
 20 months, and how this has affected both the availability and the cost of funding for Australian
 businesses and households.
[1]
I'll also talk about a few things that we'll
 be watching in securities markets over the coming months and years.
The role of securities markets
Securities markets play an important role in the Australian economy. Graph 1 shows the composition of
 funding sources for different types of businesses. Both debt securities and listed equity funding are
 sourced through securities markets.
Graph 1
You can see in the first column that
non-financial corporations
source one-third of their
 funding from listed equity markets. Their funding via debt securities is relatively small, at less than
 10 per cent. This reflects the large role of the banking system in Australia, as bank loans
 account for most of corporations' debt. The second column shows
Australian banks
'
 funding. Banks source most of their funding from deposits. But around one-fifth of banks' total
 funding comes from debt securities markets (domestically and offshore). And there are, of course,
non-bank lenders
(in the third column), which rely heavily on debt securities markets to
 fund the loans they originate.
[2]
One function of securities markets that I'd like to highlight is their role in the transmission of
 monetary policy. The cash rate is an anchor for interest rates in other markets, including in securities
 markets, and so is a key determinant of the cost of funds for banks and other lenders. This, in turn,
 influences the interest rates paid by households and businesses on their loans. And for many large
 businesses, the cost of equity and some debt is determined directly in securities markets.
During periods of volatility, functioning of these markets can become strained, impeding the transmission
 of monetary policy. In particular, the effect of lower risk-free rates from policy easing on overall
 financial conditions can be offset if risk premiums increase sharply. Also, banks may reduce new credit
 if they are uncertain about the availability and cost of their funding. And, if firms are unable to
 obtain funding from banks or securities markets, they may be forced to reduce employment and investment.
 This highlights the importance of market functioning during times of stress. The lessons from previous
 episodes of financial turbulence were at the forefront of our minds when the impact of the
COVID-19
pandemic began to play out in financial markets.
Secondary markets
So how did markets react as the pandemic unfolded?
Concerns around the economic impacts quickly became evident in equity markets. On 16 March 2020, five
 days after the World Health Organization declared a pandemic, the ASX 200 declined by
 10 per cent. This was the largest one-day fall in over 30 years. As you can see from
 Graph 2, this wasn't just an Australian story. The S&P 500 declined by
 12 per cent on the same day. During this period, turnover in equity markets was very high.
Graph 2
Concerns were also evident in corporate bond markets. Bank and non-financial corporate bond spreads began
 to widen in mid-March, as shown in Graph 3. This reflected a reassessment of credit risks on top of
 general selling pressures as fund managers faced increasing redemptions. With a much greater number of
 market participants wishing to sell than buy, market makers ended up holding a lot of inventory and
 bid-ask spreads increased substantially. Similar issues arose in the market for asset-backed securities,
 where selling by offshore investors was particularly heavy.
Graph 3
Around the same time, policymakers in Australia and around the world announced a broad range of actions to
 support the economy. In Australia, the federal and state governments implemented several stimulatory
 policies targeted at businesses and households – notably JobKeeper – to cushion the impact of
 movement restrictions. On 19 March, the Reserve Bank Board announced a package of policy measures to
 keep funding costs low across the economy and ensure credit remained available. The aim of the measures
 was also to promote functioning of key financial markets. These measures included a lower cash rate, a
 target on the three-year government bond yield, bond purchases to address market dysfunction and the Term
 Funding Facility (TFF). The Australian Office of Financial Management (AOFM) announced it would provide
 support to securitisation and warehouse markets; this would assist small banks and non-bank lenders that
 could not access the TFF.
Conditions in financial markets began to stabilise shortly after, in late March. The ASX 200 reached
 a nadir on 23 March, around the same time as the S&P 500. Bank bond spreads, along with bid-ask
 spreads, started to decline in early April, as risk premiums declined. Non-financial corporate bond
 spreads started to fall in early May. By late 2020, both bank and non-financial corporate bond spreads
 (and yields) had reached very low levels relative to history.
Overall, the adjustment in pricing as the
COVID-19
pandemic spread was sharp,
 but also brief. During the global financial crisis, volatility in equity prices stayed elevated for
 several quarters, as did risk premiums for bonds and equities.
Raising funding – the primary market
I'll now turn to developments in primary securities markets, focusing first on the banking sector.
 Banks did not tap securities markets to any significant extent as the pandemic unfolded. In part, this is
 because the RBA provided repo funding through its daily liquidity operations at attractive rates and on
 longer terms than usual as uncertainty increased in March 2020. It also provided three-year funding via
 the TFF from early April. The aim of the TFF was to lower funding costs for banks and encourage them to
 continue lending at the height of the pandemic, benefiting households and businesses.
Banks have historically held a significant presence in the Australian non-government bond market. But the
 availability of both the TFF and ample low-cost deposit inflows meant that banks required less new
 funding from this market for an extended period. You can see this trend clearly in Graph 4. Bond
 issuance was well below the average of previous years until quite recently, after the TFF closed to new
 drawdowns in June this year.
[3]
You can also see that larger banks did continue to
 issue Tier 2 hybrids.
[4]
Issuance in mid-2020 achieved spreads close to 2019
 levels, and later issuance was at narrower spreads.
Graph 4
I'll now turn to non-bank lenders. Non-bank lenders rely heavily on securities markets. They use
 warehouse facilities to fund the origination of loans, and subsequently package the loans into
 asset-backed securities (ABS) to be sold to investors.
In the uncertainty of the early stages of the pandemic, many investors tried to sell their holdings of
 ABS, creating an overhang in the secondary market. This raised questions about the market's ability
 to absorb new issuance and, in turn, non-bank lenders' ability to fund new lending. If market
 conditions had not improved, non-bank lenders might have responded to their lack of funding by tightening
 their lending standards or increasing their interest rates so as to slow the flow of new loans.
 Ultimately, this turned out not to be necessary. And, to the extent it did occur, it did not last for
 long.
Market conditions improved, at least in part, because of the Structured Finance Support Fund, through
 which the AOFM invested in public and private securitisation markets. This participation reassured
 investors that deals were likely to be a success, and helped to restore confidence in the market.
Volumes of ABS issuance by non-bank lenders picked up by the second half of 2020. Graph 5 shows that
 it has remained high throughout 2021, with a record volume of non-bank lender issuance seen in the most
 recent quarter. Spreads have also narrowed to their lowest levels since 2007. The low levels of bond
 issuance by banks have reportedly contributed to these narrow spreads, as investors moved into
 residential-mortgage backed securities (RMBS) instead.
Graph 5
What about non-financial businesses? Non-financial businesses first turned to banks for liquidity. Facing
 a potential decline in cash flow, some firms temporarily drew down existing lines of credit and some
 sought higher credit limits as a precaution. The TFF supported banks in providing business credit, in
 particular. Most businesses had repaid these temporary drawdowns by mid-2020.
In late-March 2020, listed firms began to raise equity in large volumes. Firms issued equity primarily to
 increase liquidity and to shore up their balance sheets. Activity was dominated by firms in the
 ‘Other’ category in Graph 6, which includes sectors such as industrials, real estate and
 consumer discretionary. These sectors had some of the largest initial share price falls.
Graph 6
Several non-financial firms postponed bond issuance that they had planned for February and March 2020. In
 addition to the general increase in spreads, there was a high degree of uncertainty about how much
 funding firms could raise, and at what price.
[5]
In May 2020, the RBA broadened the range of eligible collateral for open market operations to include
 non-bank bonds with an investment grade credit rating (BBB- or above), rather than a AAA rating. This
 change in policy aimed to assist with the smooth functioning of Australia's private-sector bond
 markets. Liaison suggests the change boosted sentiment among some issuers, although it's difficult to
 quantify the effect on issuance or pricing.
[6]
In any case, corporate bond issuance in the domestic
 market started to pick up soon after the RBA announced the change.
In 2020 as a whole, bond issuance by non-financial corporations in the domestic market was above the
 average of the past decade, as can be seen in Graph 7. You can also see that roughly half of the
 issuance in 2020 was at a tenor of 10 years or more, which is a much greater share than usual.
 Notably, the domestic corporate bond market recovered more quickly than it did after the global financial
 crisis (when issuance didn't recover until the second half of 2009).
[7]
Graph 7
Securities markets in the years to come
That brings me to the end of my discussion of Australian securities markets through the pandemic. I'd
 now like to turn to the future and discuss a few areas in securities markets that we at the RBA will be
 keeping an eye on over the coming months and years.
One area of focus stems from the current historically very low interest rates. Asset prices increase when
 risk-free rates are low, and this is part of the monetary transmission mechanism. However, as we've
 highlighted in recent
Financial Stability Reviews
,
[8]
over time it also raises the
 prospect of ‘search for yield’ behaviour, where investors bid up the price of risky assets to
 the extent that risk may no longer be adequately priced. This, in turn, increases the risk of a sharp
 correction down the road. So, it's important to closely monitor risk premiums to judge whether asset
 prices appear to be sensibly valued. While bank bond spreads are around their lowest level in over a
 decade, it's difficult to know whether this is not aligned with fundamentals. Measures of equity risk
 premiums remain within their typical range.
Another area of focus will be possible changes in supply and demand in security markets as the Committed
 Liquidity Facility (CLF) is being phased out. Over the past two years, the stock of government debt has
 increased sharply, funding the fiscal response to the economic effects of the pandemic. This increase in
 High Quality Liquid Assets (HQLA) has allowed the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority to phase out
 the use of the CLF over the coming year. The facility, which is provided by the RBA, allows banks to hold
 collateral other than HQLA, including bank bonds and RMBS, to fulfil their required liquidity coverage
 ratio. Given the changes in the CLF, banks might decrease their holdings of these securities. At the same
 time, banks are likely to increase their holdings of HQLA, which could be funded in part by increased
 bond issuance.
A third area of focus is the bank bond market and the refinancing of the TFF. As you can see in
 Graph 8, the TFF maturities are large and concentrated in the September 2023 and June 2024 quarters.
 Banks can meet this refinancing task in a number of ways, including sources of funding such as deposits.
 But it's likely that they will raise a sizeable amount of funds from bond markets to repay TFF
 funding.
[9]
If banks issue new debt to replace TFF drawdowns in the quarter of maturity, this would require quarterly
 issuance as a share of assets at levels not seen in over a decade. However, in liaison banks have
 indicated plans to issue bonds earlier than, or ‘pre-fund’, scheduled TFF maturities. Banks
 can also repay TFF funding early without any additional cost. These strategies would allow banks to
 spread the refinancing task over a period of time, and would serve to reduce the effect of refinancing on
 market conditions.
Graph 8
This brings me to the end of my talk today. Concerns around the economic effects of
COVID-19
and the associated rise in uncertainty caused a sharp adjustment in
 securities prices, although the period of volatility was brief. Risk premiums have increased in the
 initial phase by much less than during the global financial crisis, and were elevated for a shorter
 period.
Public policies have played a large role in ensuring that markets continued to function well. Fiscal and
 monetary policies have also played a large role in cushioning the economic impact on households and
 businesses. In particular, the RBA's package of measures has lowered funding costs across the economy
 and supported the availability of credit for households and businesses.
Thank you.
Endnotes
I thank Claire Johnson, Kevin Lane and Nina
 McClure for their invaluable help in preparing this speech.
[*]
For a discussion of conditions in the market for
 Australian Government bonds, see Finlay R, C Seibold and M Xiang (2020), ‘
Government
 Bond Market Functioning and
COVID-19
’, RBA
Bulletin
, September.
[1]
There are many benefits to funding through
 securities markets. For example, issuing bonds may allow non-financial businesses to obtain
 larger volumes and longer tenors than is available through bank credit. Securities markets may
 also provide funding where the owner retains more control over the business than with other
 sources of capital, such as private equity. In addition, securities markets provide competition
 to bank funding, and allow firms to diversify their funding sources.
[2]
January is typically a month with high bank bond
 issuance. Issuance in January 2020 was unusually high, which provided banks with some buffer for
 the following months.
[3]
Hybrid bonds have a mixture of debt and equity
 features, and so can be used to meet certain capital requirements. These capital requirements are
 set to increase in 2024.
[4]
A few Australian firms issued into overseas
 markets, particularly in euros, in March and April 2020. Australian firms often access offshore
 markets in normal times. And, at this point, these markets were performing well, helped in part
 by purchases of corporate bonds by central banks such as the European Central Bank and the US
 Federal Reserve.
[5]
Conditions in the secondary market had started to
 improve at around the same time, although – because the market was so volatile – it
 is difficult to definitively judge how much effect the change in repo eligibility had on the bond
 market. See Lim J, E Liu, N Walsh, A Zanchetta and D Cole (2021),
‘Corporate
 Bonds in the Reserve Bank's Collateral Framework’
, RBA
Bulletin
,
 June.
[6]
For a discussion of fixed income markets
 throughout the global financial crisis, see Black S, A Brassil and M Hack (2010),
‘The Impact of the Financial Crisis on
 the Bond Market’
, RBA
Bulletin
, June.
[7]
RBA (2021),
Financial Stability Review
, October.
[8]
For more discussion of the TFF, including the
 refinancing task, see Black S, B Jackman and C Schwartz (2021), ‘
An
 Assessment of the Term Funding Facility
’, RBA
Bulletin,
September.
[9]
