BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Priorities of EMEAP and Update on Global FX Code of Conduct – Virtual Conference
DATE: 09/09/2021
SPEAKER: Virtual Conference
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2021/sp-dg-2021-09-09.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Priorities of EMEAP and Update on Global FX Code of Conduct
Guy Debelle
Deputy Governor
ASIFMA Compliance Week 2021
Virtual Conference
–
9 September 2021
Download
187KB
Thank you for giving me the opportunity to summarise the current focus areas of EMEAP.
[1]
I will
 also take the opportunity to talk about the recent update to the FX Global Code, in my capacity as Chair
 of the Global Foreign Exchange Committee (GFXC).
Two focus areas of EMEAP are sustainable finance and fintech. Collectively as well as individually, the
 central banks of EMEAP are doing a lot of work in both of these spaces.
Sustainable finance
The central banks of EMEAP have been increasing their focus on sustainable finance for some time now. We
 are now all members of the Network for Greening the Financial System (NGFS).
[2]
A number
 of us have contributed to the output of the NGFS.
Our work in sustainable finance has a number of elements:
Conducting climate risk assessments
. Increasingly, we are all integrating climate risk
 into our supervisory activities. In that regard, we are embarking on climate vulnerability
 assessments of the financial system using scenarios based on the NGFS scenarios. At our recent
 meetings we have shared insights from our experiences in developing and implementing climate risk
 stress tests and scenario analyses for banks, and discussed the challenges they pose.
Taxonomies
. There is a need to develop taxonomies that are appropriate to the various
 circumstances facing our economies, rather than having one being imposed that does not take into
 account the particular challenges facing economies in the EMEAP region. In particular, we are
 discussing the development of a transition taxonomy or taxonomies for economies in the region, as it
 is necessary to not just invest in things that are currently ‘green’, but also to direct
 financing in a way that supports the transition to a sustainable future.
Developing green finance
. How we can facilitate the further development of green finance
 is one of the other main priorities of our sustainable finance agenda. As a start, EMEAP members have
 agreed to promote investment in green bonds through the Asian Bond Fund, such as revising the bond
 index rules.
A common issue we have encountered in our work is the lack of data. This is being addressed at the
 global level by the International Monetary Fund (IMF) and the NGFS. Another issue is that stress
 testing and scenario analysis can be methodologically difficult because of the long time horizons
 associated with climate risks. But at the same time, climate change is having near-term implications
 in a number of our economies. While these exercises are challenging, we all agree that there is
 benefit in conducting them. It is important that the perfect doesn't get in the way of the good.
Fintech
EMEAP has been discussing a number of different aspects of Fintech in our recent meetings. One particular
 area of focus has been in cross-border payments.
Many EMEAP members have initiatives underway to improve cross-border payments, including collaborations
 with other EMEAP members. We have been discussing how EMEAP could best contribute to the G20 roadmap
 on enhancing cross-border payments.
While traditional services for cross-border payments have been costly, slow and non-transparent, we are
 seeing the emergence of some new technology-enabled providers of cross-border payments, which are
 bringing much needed innovation and competition to this market. But there are still some key challenges
 to improving cross-border payments. These include: (i) systems integration difficulties where countries
 are at very different stages of payments system development, and (ii) the cost of meeting regulatory
 compliance requirements, for example those relating to anti-money laundering and counter-terrorism
 financing (AML/CTF), as rules can vary greatly between payment originating and receiving jurisdictions.
 The latter is a particular issue when it comes to remittances. This poses challenges to some EMEAP
 economies and particularly some smaller nations in the Pacific area. We are working individually and
 collectively to try to address this challenging situation.
One other noteworthy development is that several EMEAP members are collaborating with the Bank for
 International Settlements (BIS) Innovation Hub and each other to develop bilateral and multilateral
 linking of real-time retail payments systems. This will reduce the reliance on existing cross-border
 banking arrangements. There are a number of examples of this:
Project Nexus provides a blueprint for scalable connectivity of countries' domestic fast payment
 systems, which will make cross-border payments faster, cheaper, easier to access and more
 transparent.
[3]
The linkage of Singapore's PayNow and Thailand's PromptPay real-time retail payment
 systems.
[4]
Project Dunbar, which involves the RBA, Bank Negara Malaysia, the Monetary Authority of Singapore,
 the South African Reserve Bank and the BIS Innovation Hub. Project Dunbar will develop prototypes of
 a common multilateral settlement platform that will enable international settlements with digital
 currencies issued by multiple central banks (as opposed to reliance on existing payment systems).
[5]
FX Global Code
The FX Global Code was launched in May 2017. The Code set out global principles of good practice in the FX
 market to provide a
common
set of guidance to the market. The 55 principles in the Code
 cover ethics, information sharing, aspects of execution including e-trading and platforms, prime
 brokerage, governance, risk management and compliance, and confirmation and settlement.
The Code is maintained by the Global Foreign Exchange Committee (GFXC) which I currently chair. The GFXC
 consists of the various Foreign Exchange Committees (FXCs) across the globe. It comprises all the top FX
 markets by turnover, both advanced and emerging markets. The members of the GFXC are both central banks
 and market participants drawn from all parts of the markets: from the buy side, including corporates and
 asset managers, and the sell side, along with trading platforms, ECNs and non-bank participants.
When we launched the Code, it was agreed that the Code would be reviewed by the GFXC every three years to
 ensure it remained appropriate and to also ensure it stayed current with the ongoing evolution of the FX
 market.
Hence, around two years ago, the GFXC surveyed market participants to assess what areas of the Code needed
 to be reviewed.
[6]
The primary response of market participants was that
 the Code remained fit for purpose and changes should only be made as necessary. The GFXC identified a few
 key areas requiring review to ensure that the Code continues to provide appropriate guidance and
 contributes to an effectively functioning market, and remains in step with the evolution of the
 market.
[7]
Over the past 18 months, various working groups of the GFXC, drawing on a diverse group of market
 participants and central banks, have been working on the review. The proposed updates to the Code have
 been through a number of rounds of feedback with market participants through the FXCs round the world, as
 well as a public feedback process.
Following this process of review and consultation with industry, the GFXC has published the updated
 version of the Code.
[8]
The July 2021 version of the Code replaces the
 earlier, August 2018 version.
[9]
In total, 11 of the Code's 55 principles
 have been amended.
The GFXC has also developed disclosure cover sheets and templates for algo due diligence and transaction
 cost analysis (TCA) to assist market participants in meeting the Code's principles for disclosure and
 transparency. Additionally, the GFXC has published guidance papers on the practices of Pre-Hedging and
 Last Look to support market participants in applying the Code's principles in these areas.
Almost 1,100 entities globally have signalled their adherence to the Code's principles by signing
 a Statement of Commitment. With the publication of the updated Code, the GFXC is encouraging market
 participants to consider renewing their Statements of Commitment, having regard to the nature and
 relevance of the updates to their FX market activities.
The GFXC acknowledges that the changes to the Code will affect certain parts of the market more than
 others. For those most affected by the changes, we would anticipate a period of up to 12 months for
 practices to be brought into alignment with the updated principles. We would expect that the disclosure
 cover sheets would be posted alongside the Statement of Commitments on a similar timeframe, if not
 sooner.
To conclude, the GXFC has completed the three-year review of the FX Global Code. The Code has been updated
 to remain current with the ongoing evolution of the FX market. It will continue to serve its important
 role of setting the standard for good practice.
But to do so, it requires that you as market participants continue to reflect the principles of the Code
 in your activities in the FX market. I would strongly encourage you to familiarise yourself with the
 changes to the Code, and particularly to make good use of the disclosure templates.
Endnotes
Executives' Meeting of East Asia-Pacific
 Central Banks. EMEAP is a co-operative forum of 11 central banks and monetary authorities in
 the East Asia and Pacific region comprising the Reserve Bank of Australia, the People's Bank
 of China, the Hong Kong Monetary Authority, Bank Indonesia, the Bank of Japan, the Bank of Korea,
 Bank Negara Malaysia, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Bangko Sentral ng Pilipinas, the Monetary
 Authority of Singapore and the Bank of Thailand.
[1]
<https://www.ngfs.net/en>
[2]
Monetary Authority of Singapore (2021),
 ‘BIS Innovation Hub and Monetary Authority of Singapore publish proposal for enhancing
 global real time retail payments network connectivity’, Media Release, 28 July.
 Available at
 <https://www.mas.gov.sg/news/media-releases/2021/bisih-and-mas-publish-proposal-for-enhancing-global-real-time-retail-payments-network-connectivity>.
 See also <https://nexus.bisih.org/>.
[3]
Monetary Authority of Singapore (2021),
 ‘Singapore and Thailand Launch World's First Linkage of Real-time Payment
 Systems’, Media Release, 29 April. Available at
 <https://www.mas.gov.sg/news/media-releases/2021/singapore-and-thailand-launch-worlds-first-linkage-of-real-time-payment-systems>
[4]
Bank of International Settlements (2021),
 ‘BIS Innovation Hub and central banks of Australia, Malaysia, Singapore and South Africa
 will test CBDCs for international settlements’, Press Release, 2 September, available
 at <https://www.bis.org/press/p210902.htm> and Reserve Bank of Australia (2021), ‘BIS
 Innovation Hub and central banks of Australia, Malaysia, Singapore and South Africa will test
 CBDCs for international settlements’,
Media
 Release 2021-18
, 2 September.
[5]
GFXC (2020), ‘GFXC 2019 Survey
 Results’, January. Available at
 <https://www.globalfxc.org/docs/gfxc_survey_results_Jan20.pdf>.
[6]
GFXC (2019), ‘GFXC Priorities for the
 3-Year Review of the FX Global Code’, 6 November. Available at
 <https://www.globalfxc.org/events/20191204_summary_3_year_review_feedback.pdf>.
[7]
Global Foreign Exchange Committee (2021),
 ‘GFXC updates FX Global Code, publishes new templates for disclosures and guidance paper on
 Pre-hedging’ Press Release, 15 July. Available at
 <https://www.globalfxc.org/press/p210715.htm>
[8]
Global Foreign Exchange Committee (2021),
 ‘FX Global Code’. Available at <https://www.globalfxc.org/docs/fx_global.pdf>
[9]
