BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Remarks to the Mortgage Finance Industry Association, Industry Leaders Panel Forum – Melbourne
DATE: 09/07/2022
SPEAKER: Melbourne
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2009/sp-ag-220709.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Transcript of Question & Answer Session
Remarks to the Mortgage Finance Industry Association
Guy Debelle
Assistant Governor (Financial Markets)
Remarks to the Mortgage Finance Industry Association,

 Industry Leaders Panel Forum
Melbourne
–
22 July 2009
Audio
3.43MB
Download
24KB
Mr Switzer
Let's start with the most exciting guy in

 the room because, you know, at the core of our whole financial system is the

 Reserve Bank. We hang on every word that they utter, particularly now; and

 Guy, you've got a fantastic name – Guy Debelle – Guy “a

 beauty”. And we all said “you little beauty” yesterday when

 the Reserve Bank Minutes came out. Is the economy looking a lot better now

 than it was, say, 12 months ago?
Dr Debelle
Well, as you said, we put out the Minutes of the

 last Board meeting yesterday. I'm not going to say much more than what

 was in that but - - -
Mr Switzer
No, of course. You repeat and we'll celebrate

 it.
Dr Debelle
Yeah, I'll regurgitate it for you. The economy

 is looking better than we thought it might a few months ago; that's certainly

 true. Certainly, the world is looking a better place than it was looking last

 October when it wasn't looking a great place. And, here, the China story

 has really helped, combined with the fact that – we're the only –

 basically, the only major country which actually recorded export growth around

 the world, and that's a China story. But the other thing is that the stimulus

 – we've had a lot of stimulus put in on both the monetary and the

 fiscal side. As Vernon mentioned earlier, home loan rates are as low as they've

 been for 30, 40 years and that's actually working here.
So monetary policy and fiscal policy are working here – and that's not

 necessarily been the case in other countries. So – as was said yesterday,

 the situation is looking somewhat better than it was looking. The risks are

 more evenly balanced than they were. The risks are still out there, but they're

 certainly more evenly balanced than they were looking a few months back.
Mr Switzer
When you were sitting at home not being a Reserve

 banker and you saw a lot of the bad news about China and about views on the

 Aussie economy, did you sometimes get really cranky but, no, you had to sort

 of contain your crankiness because things were – we were a good chance

 of ending up where we are now?
Dr Debelle
No. What happened in the last part of last year

 was pretty much unprecedented in terms of the whole world slowing dramatically

 all at once. We've never really seen that before. We had always thought

 we'd do better than the rest of the world but, when the rest of the world

 is sort of contracting – the US economy is contracting 5 or 6 per cent

 and unemployment is rising to 10 per cent – doing better than that is

 not necessarily setting an incredibly high bar. But, nevertheless, we thought

 we would do better. And there was that synchronised collapse. I think everyone

 looked at the events which happened in the US in September. Businesses pulled

 their heads in; households pulled their heads in; financial markets completely

 pulled their heads in; and things weren't looking great there for a while.

 And that was true probably through to the end of the year. But I think what's

 shown through is that parts of the world have been able to get out of this

 okay because they didn't go into the situation with as many problems as

 countries like the US. And so countries like China have been able to impart

 a lot of stimulus to their economy. We've been able to do the same. It's

 been effective and we're sort of seeing some of the benefits of that now.
Mr Switzer
I guess everyone in this room, they know you have

 to be political and careful about what you say, but one area of your expertise

 where everyone would love to hear what you think might happen is in the area

 of credit markets and securitisation. So we'd love you to say, “Oh,

 securitisation will get better next month,” but what is the true story?
Dr Debelle
Well, securitisation actually I think is getting

 better. I mean, I think I can say it's going to get better next month because

 it's actually getting better month by month. Now, one thing I think which

 everyone in this room probably should be aware of, and probably are aware of,

 is the market is not going to be back to where it was in June 2007. That's

 not going to happen. One thing – and it relates to something Vernon was

 talking about earlier about the offshore buying of mortgagebacked securities

 in this country – a lot of them were bought by SIVs. Now, if I would

 have said “SIV” two years ago, none of you would have known what

 the hell I was talking about, but they're now reasonably well known. So

 a lot of those structured investment vehicles, they just don't exist any

 more. And they were a decent buyer of Australian RMBS offshore. And they're

 not around any more to buy them going forward, so some chunk of the demand

 for the Australian RMBS from that part of the market just ain't there any

 more. I think, however, from what we can – because there hasn't been

 many new RMBS written over the last two years – in fact, there really

 hasn't been any outside what the AOFMs bought – but everyone keeps

 on paying off their mortgages, the actual stock of outstanding RMBS –

 of Australian RMBS is down about 40 per cent from where it was two years ago

 which means, if you think about investors out there looking to buy this stuff,

 they have 40 per cent less of it than they did two years ago so, at some point,

 they're going to start to want to buy some more.
And I think every day we're getting closer to that point, but it's not going

 to be as big a market probably, at least in the short term, as it was a couple

 of years ago. You know, our general sense is that sort of secondary market

 – that overhang of the sort of stock which have been out there is getting

 close to be being run off. The SIVs have basically closed down and sold all

 their stuff back into the market. That process is basically finished. So I

 think once that process is finished then we're closer to the point where

 people are going to be looking for new mortgage-backed securities to buy.
Mr Switzer
Okay. Are we actually short of funds at the moment

 for the housing market?
Dr Debelle
No at the moment – we've got reasonable

 growth in credit for housing. It's not the 20 per cent we had a few years

 back but it's travelling at about 8 per cent at the moment, which is a

 decent pace. So there's not a shortage of housing credit out there at the

 moment.
Mr Switzer
It's just concentrated in the big four banks

 because they're in the much stronger position to buy and also get the profits.
Dr Debelle
Yeah. So the share of the mortgages – as

 everyone in this room I'm sure is well and truly aware – the share

 of mortgages being written by the four largest banks has gone up considerably;

 that's certainly the case.
Mr Switzer
Guy, do you have any views on how we could see

 funding increase in an alternative way rather than waiting for securitisation

 to improve?
Dr Debelle
I mean, one – as I said, I think the main

 realisation a lot of people have – and a lot of participants in the industry,

 not necessarily on the broking side but more on the aggregation side –

 is the point I made at the beginning, which is the industry is not going to

 be the same as it was – and as the point Phil made. The industry is not

 going to be the same as it was a couple of years ago. So if you want to go

 back – if you think you can go back to the funding model you had two

 years ago, you're probably kidding yourself. I mean, that's true for

 a major bank, just as it is for the smallest non-bank. You know, the world

 has changed. Funding is not going to be as readily available. It's not

 going to be as cheap as it was a couple of years ago. So every participant

 in the industry has got to be aware of the fact that the situation has changed.

 So you have to look at putting in place a sustainable funding model, and that's

 going to vary depending on who you are. So, as I said, I think the main realisation

 everyone has got to come to is the point that it's not going to be the

 same. But, there is out – we have seen again in the last few months that

 the credit unions and building societies, for instance, have picked up a bit

 of market share so, those guys, which are primarily deposit-funded –

 there were some – some part of that sector did rely on securitisation,

 not all of it, and they are able to sort of provide an alternative source.

 The non-banking sector, as I said – it's basically, at this stage,

 is a question of when that securitisation market comes back for them to be

 a viable source of competition. But the other point I suppose is that one thing

 that the experience over the last – well, Vernon would probably say 30

 years, but at least since the early to mid-90s is that, as we went on from

 there, we saw a lot of players come into this market so, ultimately, the ability

 of people to come in and provide that competition was there. Some of those

 people who came in towards the end, their ability to compete has probably been

 fundamentally undermined but, if margins were to start to increase, there is

 the scope for people to come in and provide that competition, just as they

 did through the '90s.
Mr Switzer
So for people in this room who want to look to

 the economic or money market indicators that might say that the potential for

 securitisation to get better – what are those indicators? Are they a

 much greater improvement of the US economy with Treasury yields low so people

 feel secure and then they'll take their money out of government bonds and

 want to put them into securities products?
Dr Debelle
Yeah. I think one other point – one point

 which is worth highlighting: there's never been an issue with the credit

 quality of mortgage-backed securities in this country. In fact, no one has

 actually lost any money on a mortgagebacked security in this country, unlike

 the US. But, unfortunately, the word “mortgage-backed security”

 has been tarred with the reputation of what happened in the US, even though

 the quality of Australian mortgage-backed securities is considerably higher.

 And so I think you have to get past the point where investors or – if

 you're a fund manager out there and you go and tell your pensioner who's

 got their funds with you, “Oh, by the way, I've just invested a chunk

 of your funds in mortgage-backed securities” – whereas a few years

 ago they were very happy about that because they got a nice fat return out

 of it – now, they say, “Oh, mortgagebacked securities equals bad.”

 So the investor mentality has got to change back again to recognising the quality

 of the Australian mortgage-backed security which has continued to perform right

 throughout this whole episode. So it does – and it partly relates to

 what you said, Peter, that people have to be – they're getting low

 yields on their supposedly very safe investments and they need to be looking

 to move beyond that again, and that's going to take time. I mean, investor

 confidence was shot in October and we're six, eight, nine months on from

 that now and it's certainly improved, and one hopes it continues to improve,

 but it is going to take a little more improvement to get people comfortable

 with investing in it. But, as I said earlier on, every day we're one day

 closer to that.
Mr Switzer
From the bank's point of view, on your radar

 screen is a 40 per cent fall in real estate prices showing up in any of the

 economic indicators you guys look at?
Dr Debelle
Well, I mean, I can only say what we've seen

 about what's happened so far but house prices this year have been rising

 so – and for a while there we saw the top end of the market come off,

 but now the whole market is basically rising. And one point on the first home

 owner's scheme is that the first home owner share has been high over the

 last few months, and I'm sure all the people in this room have seen a disproportionate

 number of them walking in the door, but the other thing to remember is a lot

 of the first home buyers weren't in the market for the previous five, six

 years almost throughout – for the bulk of this decade actually, because

 house prices were higher relative to incomes, because interest rates were higher.

 So, to some extent, those people were shut out of the market, relatively speaking,

 for a while, and they've come back into the market now, obviously encouraged

 by the first home owner's grant but also by where interest rates are and

 the fact that house prices had not done a lot for a few years made it –

 housing affordability had certainly improved. So some of those people have

 probably brought forward their purchase, but some of them are also catching

 up on a purchase they haven't been able to do for a while.
Mr Switzer
So clearly there were years were first home buyers

 were very low so, on average, it's probably not all that different.
Dr Debelle
Yeah.
Mr Switzer
So questions – one here.
MR ANTOS
Paul Antos, Mayfair Finance Group – I'm

 also an advisor as well as a broker. My question is really towards Guy in relation

 to the Reserve Bank's view on the establishment, or whether or not it is

 feasible, of a people's bank, as has been labelled in the media lately.

 We – I think, from a broker's perspective, we want to see more competition

 from the banks and from the non-bank sector, so I'd like to see what his

 thoughts are about that.
Dr Debelle
Yeah. I thought one interesting response was the

 credit unions and building societies coming up and saying, “Hang on;

 what about us?” You know, so there is this sector out their called the

 credit unions and the building societies which do business with you guys which

 are somewhat community-oriented and sort of have that local presence. Beyond

 that one I'm not sure I'm going to stray too far down that track.
Mr Switzer
I guess the RBA line would be: if it's there,

 you're happy to regulate them.
Dr Debelle
Well, I mean, APRA regulates the banks; we don't.
Mr Switzer
Yeah. Well, okay - - -
Dr Debelle
So - - -
Mr Switzer
- - - indirectly affect their life - - -
Dr Debelle
Yeah. Yeah. So there are a bunch of financial

 institutions out there, you know, called credit unions and building societies,

 as well as the banks like Glenn's outfit (Dr Debelle refers here to Glenn

 Baker, Chief Investment Officer of ING Direct, who was also a panel discussant)

 and the regional banks, obviously. So there are not just four providers of

 housing finance in this country.
