BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Recent Economic Developments – Sydney
DATE: 09/03/2022
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2022/sp-gov-2022-03-09.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Recent Economic Developments
Philip Lowe
[
*
]
Governor
AFR Business Summit
Sydney
–
9 March 2022
Audio
47.7MB
Q&A Transcript
Download
876KB
Thank you for the invitation to participate in this year's AFR Business Summit. It is very good to be
 with you again.
I would like to cover four issues today:
The resilience of the Australian economy and some of the major uncertainties, including the invasion
 of Ukraine by Russia.
The journey towards full employment in Australia.
The recent inflation data.
The implications of these developments for monetary policy in Australia.
The resilience of the Australian economy
Last week we received further evidence of the resilience of the Australian economy. In the December
 quarter, GDP increased by 3.4 per cent, which was one of the biggest quarterly increases on
 record. Over the final months of the year, there was a very strong bounce-back in household consumption
 following the mid-year Delta lockdowns. Over 2021 as a whole, the economy grew by 4.2 per cent,
 taking the level of GDP to 3½ per cent above its pre-
COVID-19
level (Graph 1). This is a very good outcome by global standards, which is something we should not
 forget.
Graph 1
The data available so far for the March quarter suggest a continuation of positive growth, despite the
 setback caused by the Omicron outbreak. As COVID infection rates have declined, spending and hours worked
 have both bounced back quickly. The flooding in eastern Australia is causing severe disruptions in some
 areas at the moment, but GDP is expected to increase by around 4¼ per cent this year. This
 outlook is being supported by the opening of Australia's international borders, the substantial
 accumulation of savings by households over the past two years, a large pipeline of construction activity
 and ongoing support from macroeconomic policy.
Against this generally positive outlook, the main sources of uncertainty are
COVID-19
– which is not yet behind us – and the tragic war in
 Ukraine. This war is first and foremost a catastrophic event in human terms, but it is also a new major
 risk to the global economy. It is difficult to know what the full implications are, but from today's
 viewpoint, the main economic effects stem largely from higher commodity prices. The most obvious of these
 is the price of gas in Europe, which has more than doubled since the start of February (Graph 2).
 Oil prices are also up by 40 per cent, as are thermal coal prices. The prices of many base
 metals, including nickel and aluminium, are also up sharply. The prices of agricultural commodities have
 also been affected, with the price of wheat in global markets up by 40 per cent since the start
 of February.
Graph 2
For the countries in Europe, this rise in commodity prices represents a negative shock to their terms of
 trade and thus to their national income. This alone will cause a slowdown in economic activity. It will
 also cause CPI inflation to be higher than it would have otherwise been.
Australia is in a different position because we export many of the commodities whose prices are rising.
 This means that our terms of trade will rise over the months ahead, which will provide a boost to our
 national income. This boost is likely to be evident mainly in the form of higher profits for companies in
 the resources sector and higher tax revenue. At the same time, the rise in global oil prices is causing
 higher petrol prices at the bowser. This will eat into household budgets, push up costs for many
 businesses and crimp spending in some areas. Given this, I expect that most of this extra national income
 will be saved, rather than flow through into higher spending.
Looking beyond the impact on commodity markets, the war in Ukraine poses other significant downside risks
 for the global economy. From both a humanitarian and economic perspective, there is a lot riding on how
 events develop here.
The journey towards full employment
I would now like to turn back to the more positive story – that is the resilience of the Australian
 economy, which is especially evident in the labour market. At the start of last year, our central
 forecast was that the unemployment rate would now be at 6 per cent. Yet over recent months, the
 unemployment rate has been 4.2 per cent and underemployment has fallen to the lowest rate in
 more than a decade (Graph 3).
Graph 3
We expect this improvement in the labour market to continue. There was, however, a setback in January,
 with total hours worked in Australia declining by nearly 9 per cent, as many people isolated
 due to Omicron and others took holidays that had been put off last year. Looking forward, the high level
 of job vacancies and the information from our business liaison program both suggest that there will be
 strong growth in hours worked and the number of jobs over the months ahead.
Our central forecast is that the unemployment rate will fall to below 4 per cent over the course
 of this year and remain there next year. The last time that the unemployment rate was that low was almost
 half a century ago (Graph 4). If we reach this milestone, it would be a significant achievement.
Graph 4
This raises the question of what constitutes full employment in Australia in the early 2020s. We don't
 have a predetermined answer here – we are being guided by the evidence, particularly the outcomes
 for wages and prices. There is a lot of uncertainty surrounding estimates of the Non-Accelerating
 Inflation Rate of Unemployment (NAIRU), and our estimates have trended lower over recent years as more
 evidence has become available. I hope, and expect, that a period of sustained economic growth can further
 lower estimates of the unemployment rate associated with full employment. But time will tell.
I was reminded of the changing nature of full employment last year when Michael Stutchbury, the editor-in-chief of
 the
Australian Financial Review
(AFR)
,
sent me a copy of the front page of the
 AFR published back on 22 August 1963 – nearly 60 years ago (Figure 1). On that day,
 the paper led with the headline ‘Reserve Bank Claims Unemployment Still Too High’. At the
 time, the unemployment rate was just 2 per cent! Reading the AFR from 1963 served as a reminder
 that what we consider as achievable changes over time, and is influenced by the structural features of
 our economy. It was also a reminder that the RBA has long had a focus on full employment, which is one of
 our three broad objectives set out in the
Reserve Bank Act 1959
.
Figure 1: Front page of
The Australian Financial Review
, 22 August 1963
The AFR's headline was prompted by the introduction to the RBA's 1963 Annual Report, which was
 released the day before. From today's perspective, that introduction is remarkable in that it does
 not mention the word ‘inflation’ or the CPI, but just has a vague reference to the notion of
 price stability. The final sentence of that introduction, though, is more timeless. It is just as
 relevant today as it was back 60 years ago when it was written. That final sentence reads:
‘In the longer-run, growth depends on many factors; but with the advance of science and
 technology, standards of education and the up-grading of skills have become of increasing
 importance.’
These words from the past serve as a timely reminder that science, education and the development of skills
 are key to our future prosperity and rising real incomes. As Australia charts its way back to full
 employment, it would be wise to keep this counsel from 1963 in mind. Investment in these areas will also
 help build the resilience that we need to guard against future shocks, wherever they come from.
Inflation
I would now like to move to the other issue of the day – and that is inflation.
After many years in which concerns about high inflation were at the periphery of the radar screen, they
 have now moved to the centre in a number of countries. This is especially so in the United States, where
 the CPI increased by 7½ per cent over the year to January, which is the fastest rate in
 40 years. Inflation rates in the United Kingdom, Germany, Canada and New Zealand are also at their
 highest in decades (Graph 5).
Graph 5
Rightly, this increase in inflation is receiving a lot of attention. It is important, though, to recognise
 that inflation rates in much of Asia remain low and not much different from before the pandemic. In
 China, CPI inflation is running at just 0.6 per cent and in Japan it is 0.5 per cent.
Australia sits somewhere in the middle, but closer to the experience in Asia. Headline inflation here is
 3½ per cent, less than half the rate in the United States. In underlying terms, inflation is
 running at 2.6 per cent. This is the first time in more than seven years that it has been
 above the midpoint of medium-term 2 to 3 per cent target band.
There are a few factors that explain this difference with the United States. I would like to mention three
 of these.
The first is the different developments in the gas and electricity markets. In the United States,
 household gas prices are up by nearly 25 per cent over the past year and electricity prices are
 up by more than 10 per cent (Graph 6). In contrast, the prices that Australian households
 pay for energy have risen only modestly. Our gas and electricity markets are not closely connected with
 those in the rest of world and the increased capacity from wind and solar generators has put downward
 pressure on wholesale electricity prices.
Graph 6
A second factor is the different behaviour of goods prices. In the United States, goods prices (excluding
 energy) are up by 9 per cent over the past year. In Australia, they are up by
 3 per cent (Graph 7). In the United States, there was a very strong surge in demand for
 goods during the pandemic and firms had trouble meeting this due to supply-chain problems and, in some
 areas, a shortage of workers. The result has been a big increase in prices. The same general dynamic has
 been at work in Australia, but the surge in demand for goods has been less pronounced here and the
 pandemic has not had the same effect on the availability of workers.
Graph 7
A third and more enduring factor is the different trends in labour costs. In the United States, and the
 United Kingdom, wages are rising much more quickly than they were previously (Graph 8). In contrast,
 in Australia, but also in Japan and some European countries, wages are increasing at a similar rate to
 before the pandemic. One factor contributing to these differing experiences is the different trends in
 labour force participation. In the United States and the United Kingdom, labour force participation is
 still below its pre-pandemic level. In contrast, in Australia, we are near record highs in terms of
 participation. The JobKeeper program helped workers remain attached to their employers during the
 pandemic and this has helped the labour market recover with fewer strains than in the United States. It
 is worth noting that participation rates have also recovered in many Asian nations, including Japan.
Graph 8
The point I want to make here is that while there is a common thread to inflation stories across many
 economies, there are important differences as well. These differences are relevant to the setting of
 monetary policy, to which I will now turn.
Monetary policy
Now that the bond purchase program, the yield target and the provision of new funding under the Term
 Funding Facility have come to end, the focus of the Reserve Bank Board's monthly monetary policy
 decisions has once again returned to the level of the cash rate.
[1]
Since the onset of the pandemic, the Board has said that it will not increase the cash rate until
 inflation is sustainably in the 2 to 3 per cent target range. It has indicated that it
 wants to see evidence that inflation will be sustained in this range, rather than simply be forecast to
 do so. This focus on outcomes and evidence reflects both the uncertain times we are living in, which has
 made forecasting more difficult than usual, and the persistent undershooting of the inflation target over
 earlier years.
The recent lift in inflation has brought us closer to the point where inflation is sustainably in the
 target range. So too have recent global developments. But we are not yet at that point. In underlying
 terms, inflation has just reached the midpoint of the target band for the first time in over seven years.
 And this comes on the back of very large disruptions to supply chains and distribution networks, some of
 which are still expected to ease. It also comes at a time when aggregate wages growth is no higher than
 it was before the pandemic, which was associated with inflation being persistently below target.
In these circumstances, we have scope to wait and assess incoming information and see how some of the
 uncertainties are resolved. We can be patient in a way that countries with substantially higher rates of
 inflation cannot.
There are two issues, in particular, that we are paying close attention to. The first is the persistence
 of supply-side price shocks and the extent to which developments in Ukraine add to these supply-side
 inflation pressures. The second is how labour costs in Australia evolve.
Prior to the war in Ukraine, there was some evidence that the supply-side issues in the global economy
 were gradually being resolved (Graph 9). Delivery times had shortened a bit, global car production
 was increasing again and the prices of semiconductors had come off their peaks. Businesses were also
 responding with new investment and changes in processes to ease capacity constraints. These developments
 were providing a basis for expecting that supply-side inflation pressures would ease over time, both
 globally and here in Australia.
Graph 9
But, now, the war in Ukraine and the sanctions against Russia have created a new supply shock that is
 pushing prices up, especially for commodities. This new supply shock will extend the period of inflation
 being above central banks' targets. This runs the risk that the low-inflation psychology that has
 characterised many advanced economies over the past two decades starts to shift. If so, the higher
 inflation would be more persistent and broad-based, and require a larger monetary policy response. At the
 moment, financial market pricing suggests that CPI inflation will decline from its current high rates in
 the North Atlantic economies to around 2 per cent without real interest rates ever going into
 positive territory. A shift in inflation psychology would challenge this view, so this is a critical
 issue.
The second issue we are watching closely is the evolution of domestic labour costs. The latest data
 confirmed that aggregate wages growth remains modest. The Wage Price Index (WPI) increased by
 2.3 per cent last year, with the broader measure including bonuses increasing by
 2.8 per cent (Graph 10). The national accounts measure of average hourly earnings
 increased a bit faster than this at 3.3 per cent. This measure is more volatile than the WPI as
 it captures changes in the composition of employment, which have been large during the pandemic. There
 are certainly pay rises that are much larger than 3 per cent taking place for some jobs, but
 the evidence is that most working Australians are still experiencing base wage increases of no more than
 2-point-something per cent. This is also consistent with what we are hearing through our business
 liaison program.
Graph 10
The RBA's central forecast is for growth in aggregate labour costs to pick up further as the labour
 market tightens. This pick-up is likely to be gradual, though, given the multi-year enterprise
 agreements, the annual review of award wages and public sector wages policies.
There are, however, uncertainties about the future growth of labour costs. This is partly because we have
 no contemporary experience of a national unemployment rate below 4 per cent. The closest
 experience we have is that in the years leading up to the pandemic some of the larger states had
 unemployment rates around 4 per cent and wages growth hardly moved. It is also unclear, at this
 stage, what effect the opening of the international borders will have on the balance between supply and
 demand in the labour market. There is also the question of how wages respond to the current higher rates
 of headline inflation. There is a risk if these higher inflation rates are sustained as a result of a
 sequence of negative supply shocks, that wages growth picks up more quickly than forecast as workers seek
 compensation for the higher inflation.
In this uncertain environment – and with the starting points for wages growth and underlying
 inflation in Australia – we can take the time to assess the incoming information and review how the
 uncertainties are resolved. Given the outlook, though, it is plausible that the cash rate will be
 increased later this year.
I recognise that there is a risk to waiting too long, especially in a world with overlapping supply shocks
 and a high headline inflation rate. But there is also a risk of moving too early. Australia has the
 opportunity to secure a lower rate of unemployment than has been the case for some decades. Moving too
 early could put this at risk. There are benefits to the economic welfare of Australia of a period of
 relatively steady growth in which people get jobs, have training and develop skills. This is one path to
 sustaining a lower unemployment rate than was thought possible just a short while ago – not as low
 as was thought possible back in 1963, but lower than was thought possible just five years ago.
I want to finish with the point that it is only possible to achieve a sustained period of low unemployment
 if inflation remains low and stable. Recent developments in Europe have added to the complexities here.
 The Reserve Bank will respond as needed and do what is necessary to maintain low and stable inflation in
 Australia.
Thank you for listening and I am happy to answer questions.
Endnotes
I would like to thank Tomas Cokis, David Norman,
 Penny Smith and Neya Suthaharan for assistance in preparing this talk.
[*]
At its meeting in May, the Board will decide on
 its approach to the reinvestment of the proceeds of bond maturities.
[1]
