BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Role of the Financial Sector in Sustaining the Recovery – Remarks to G20 Meeting in Indonesia – Online
DATE: 19/02/2022
SPEAKER: Online
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2022/sp-gov-2022-02-19.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Role of the Financial Sector in Sustaining the Recovery – Remarks to G20 Meeting in Indonesia
Philip Lowe
Governor
Remarks to G20 Meeting in Indonesia
Online
–
19 February 2022
Audio
18.9MB
Philip Lowe
Thank you very much Luigi and good morning, everybody. I'd like to thank Bank Indonesia and
 particularly my good friend, Governor Perry, for the opportunity to participate. I'm really sorry, I
 can't be in the room with you, rather I'm still here in Sydney and I hope to be in Indonesia
 later in the year for the next G20 meeting.
As others have already said, this symposium addresses a really important issue. How do we recover
 together? And then how do we make sure that the momentum that we currently see in the global economy is
 maintained once we're through the pandemic? But both Mattias and Perry have spoken very well about
 the role of productivity reforms. I'd like to mainly talk about the role that the financial sector
 has to play in this important mission of recovering together and sustaining the recovery and I'll
 touch on some financial stability issues, as I do that.
I want to focus my remarks on four ways that the financial sector can support the recovery. The first, is
 to be an absorber of economic shocks, not an amplifier of shocks. The second is to be a source of finance
 for new productive investment, including the transition to a green economy. And the third is the role
 productivity improvements within the financial sector itself can play in promoting growth, including
 through the development of new forms of money and new forms of payment. And the final thing that I want
 to talk about is the role that finance can play in improving inclusion and reducing inequality in our
 societies. So I plan to say a few words about each of those four issues.
First, if we are to recover together, then we need the global financial sector to be an absorber of
 shocks. Here, I think it's useful to compare the 2008 global financial crisis with the pandemic. In
 the financial crisis, the global financial sector amplified the shocks and it made things worse, and the
 result was severe economic pain in most of our countries. In the pandemic, the reverse has been the case.
 The financial sector has acted as a shock absorber. Banks gave repayment holidays to borrowers, which
 helped. They extended repayment terms and they made credit available at low interest rates to borrowers
 who needed it. As a result, the banks lessened the shock, they helped limit damage to our economies, and
 it's one of the reasons that many of our economies have been quite resilient.
Banks were able to play this role because of the reforms to capital and liquidity over the previous
 decade. The G20, the FSB and the standard-setting bodies all played important roles in the development of
 these reforms. It is a really good example of what can be achieved when we work together. In this case,
 by working together, we developed a safer global financial system.
Looking forward, we can't be sure where the next shock's going to come from. I think we can be
 sure, there will be another shock. We've already talked this morning about the prospect of rising
 interest rates around the world. This increase in interest rates is occurring in an environment where
 debt levels are much higher than they were before, particularly in the advanced economies. And it's
 also occurring after a very big run-up in asset prices, including the cost of housing in many countries.
 So rising interest rates on high debt with high asset prices – you can see the fault lines here.
I think it's also relevant that the increase in interest rates is not likely to be synchronised across
 countries, given there are very different inflation dynamics in our countries, and Perry talked about
 this earlier. The US and many European countries have quite high inflation at the moment, but here in
 Asia, inflation is not particularly high. In Australia, our core measure of inflation has only reached
 the midpoint of our target range for the first time in seven years. And in much of Asia, inflation is not
 particularly high. I think we know from previous experience that when countries are on different paths,
 in terms of interest rates, stresses do emerge in the global financial system. So I think it's quite
 possible, in fact, probable, that there'll be stress points over the next couple of years. In this
 environment, we need to make sure that the post-crisis financial reforms are maintained and where they
 still haven't been fully implemented, that they are implemented. Building this resilience is going to
 be really important over the next few years.
The second issue I wanted to talk about was the role of the financial sector in providing finance for
 productive investment, including for the transition to the green economy. If we are to have a durable
 recovery from the pandemic, we need businesses and governments to invest. If they don't invest, the
 recovery is only going to be lacklustre, once the snapback from the pandemic is over. If they don't
 invest, real interest rates will stay low, savers are going to get low returns, real incomes will not
 grow very much and we will all pay the price for that. So the expansion of our productive capital stock
 is crucial to our collective prosperity. Some of this expansion can be financed from firms' internal
 resources, but much of it needs to come from external resources, including from banks and from the bond
 and the equity markets. One area that we'll need major investment is the restructuring of our energy
 systems, including the way we produce and use energy, the way we store energy and the way our energy
 distribution networks are configured. The financial sector is key to this investment.
I think we all know, people in this area need to make decisions under considerable uncertainty. It's
 really hard to know exactly how our climate's going to evolve. It's hard to know what new
 technologies will emerge, and it's probably hard to know what the future policy environment will be
 as well. Given this uncertainty, participants in financial markets need the information now to be able to
 assess and price climate risks and opportunities so that they can fund the investments that are needed
 for the transition to a lower emissions' economy. The FSB and the standard-sitting bodies are rightly
 setting supervisory expectations for the measurement and management of financial risk and climate change.
 Regulators, including here in Australia, are conducting climate stress tests to help measure the
 exposures in the financial system. And there are many international efforts underway to improve the
 quality, consistency and breadth of climate risk disclosures.
Some countries are also developing green finance taxonomies to define what is sustainable and to direct
 investment towards these activities. It's important that these taxonomies don't just focus on
 activities that have an immediate benefit, but also include activities that are necessary to ensure the
 transition to net zero over time. So Australia very much supports Indonesia, in placing the financing of
 this transition to a green economy on the GT20 agenda. If we don't get this right, it'll be
 a source of future instability in our financial systems and our economies.
The third issue I wanted to talk about is the role of finance as a source of innovation itself, and that
 innovation can help improve our collective living standards, because we all know finance is in many ways
 at the forefront of many of the new technologies that have been developed over the past decade. Think
 artificial intelligence, big data analytics, and distributed ledger technologies. These changes in
 technology are also reshaping how we think about money. If you look back through the broad sweep of
 history it's pretty clear that what societies uses money is shaped by technology.
Sometime back in history, people used silver and gold coins for money. Then they use paper instruments,
 then they used paper banknotes. In Australia, we use pieces of plastic polymer banknotes with the
 sophisticated holograms on them. And in many countries, the main form of money now is electronic bank
 deposits that can be moved over the internet almost instantaneously. So as technology changes, so does
 what we use as money change. We can't be sure what the next innovation in money will be, but I think
 there's a fair chance that it will be a form of digital token that sits in a digital wallet or a
 digital device. If that's what happens, it offers the potential for lower costs and for more flexible
 payments for people, and I think it'll be more inclusive. It's hard to know where this is going
 to end, but I think there are significant opportunities here.
If money does evolve along these lines, it needs to be supported by a really strong regulatory regime. One
 option that's on the table is for these digital tokens to be backed by central banks, just as central
 banks today, back the banknotes. So you could think of this as a form of central bank, digital currency
 that's available for retail use. Another possible option, is the tokens are not backed by central
 banks, but are backed by private entities. This would be some form of stable coin against our national
 currencies. If this is what happens, then I think we really need to give close attention to the design
 and the collateral banking of this privately issued money.
I say this because history is littered with examples where private money worked really well for a time,
 but then something happened, confidence is damaged and it all ends in disaster and financial crisis that
 hurts people. And that's the reason I think why our currencies today are backed by the state and that
 we have state-sponsored deposit insurance. So, the collateral underpinning of this and the regulatory
 regime is really important. Things that seem like they're working well for a while, if they're
 not backed adequately can turn out to be very bad for the society if there's damage to the
 confidence. So the challenge here for us all is to develop a regulatory regime that promotes innovation,
 but that can also deal with the stability issues that can arise with new forms of money, particularly
 stable coins. The central banks, the FSB and the G20 are all working on this and it's a really
 important part of our agenda for the future.
Beyond the notion of money, there are many other opportunities for innovation and productivity
 improvements in the financial sector to lower costs and to develop new products that help people. One of
 the reasons that financial intermediation can be expensive now, and it can often be limited to borrowers
 who already have well-established connections, is that there are often acute information asymmetries,
 which the lenders can't easily overcome. This is particularly an issue for the micro and small
 businesses that are an important source of dynamism in our economies.
Some of the new technologies can lessen these information asymmetries by increasing the available sources
 of data and making it easier to process that data, easier to collect the data and to monitor the loans.
 As a result, in many countries now we're seeing new lenders emerging who are using this new
 information technology. These new lenders are lowering costs and making finance easier to get for micro
 and small businesses. In some cases, it's the market-based financing that Luigi talked about. So I
 think this is an exciting area too. We need to make sure that the regulatory arrangements are supporting
 stability in this area, but that they also continue to encourage the innovation that's possible by
 this new financial technology.
The last thing that I wanted to talk about was the role of finance, in promoting inclusion and reducing
 inequality. And this is one area I think we all have a lot to learn from Indonesia on, particularly
 – its financial inclusion agenda. There's a lot of innovation occurring here, including
 development of fast payment systems, the increasing use of open APIs and the adoption of QR codes, which
 lower payments costs for micro businesses. I think more broadly, the hope is that improvements in
 information technology and data processing will help small businesses that haven't been well served
 by the financial institutions. It will help overcome these information asymmetries, and given those
 asymmetries are most acute for micro and small businesses, they're the ones who could potentially
 benefit most.
One other area, where there is considerable scope for improvement that would enhance inclusion is cross
 border payments. We spoke about that in the first session. For many people, cross border payments are
 still too costly, they're too slow and they're too inconvenient. And in Australia we see
 firsthand how this disadvantages people who are less well off. It's a really major issue in the South
 Pacific, where the cost of remittances is very high. Poorer people pay these costs to their disadvantage
 and to the disadvantage of their communities. It's a really important issue that we address.
The Reserve Bank of Australia and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand are working with the South Pacific
 central banks to try and address this, but it's proving hard to make progress. This means that
 it's really important to keep the focus on the G20's roadmap on cross border payments. This is a
 project with a lot of layers and it's going to take time to pay off. And we really welcome the
 Indonesian Presidency support for this work. It's particularly important for people who are less well
 off. It's certainly possible that a central bank digital currency will help here. So too, might the
 various initiatives that are underway to improve payments infrastructure, including ideas to link up fast
 payment systems, especially in this part of the world. This is an area that's important that the
 central bank community and the private sector keep working on.
So in conclusion, I want to thank again the Indonesian Presidency for putting this item on the agenda.
 It's important that we recover together. And once we are past the economic snapback from COVID, that
 the economic recovery can be sustained. The financial sector can help us do this. It can do this by
 maintaining buffers against future problems. It can do it by financing business investment, including the
 transition to a green economy. And it can do that by being innovative and by being supported by a
 regulatory regime that promotes this innovation, but also protects people and it can address the
 financial stability issues that can come with new forms of money. And finally, the financial sector can
 help by bringing more people into the system in a way that they can afford, and that suits them and helps
 improve their own situation. So thank you, and I look forward to our subsequent discussion.
Question & Answer Session
Moderator
Thank you very much, Governor Lowe, for your various, very insightful comments
Now, we are supposed to have a question and answer session. We've actually
 theoretically reached the
 end of our allotted time. But since we started with some delay, I think that we can
 allow, I would say,
 not more than a couple of questions from the audience, if there are any, and then I will
 give the floor
 to the speakers for answering those questions or commenting on each other's
 speeches, if they want
 to. Are there any questions from the floor? Please, the lady in the second row.
Female
Thank you. Thank you for all the very good presentations. I have very short questions.
 Thank you, I
 already heard how Financial Stability Board is doing to try to figure out that digital
 transformation
 will benefit the society at large. My question is, aside from what you've mentioned
 about our live
 learning process, you've mentioned about all the financial inclusion and so forth,
 there are novel
 risks of security issues, new and advanced faster accelerated technology issues and so
 forth. Is there
 any study that the Financial Stability Board have already done? I just want to know
 about that because I
 always follow all the issues. And secondly, how about you Dietrich, maybe I can ask you
 a question
 because as we all know that the acceleration of the digitalisation, especially CBDC,
 central banks have
 been one of the leading sectors to adopt this new technology. Do you think there are any
 other very short
 answers for future actions needed, future strategy, so the CBDC that are going to be
 issued or going to
 be introduced by some countries will benefit others rather than upsetting others who are
 not yet ready to
 issue CBDC. Thank you.
Moderator
Thank you very much. Maybe one other question, if there is one. I don't see any hands
 raised. So in
 that case, I would like to give the floor first to Dietrich. I think that he was the
 one, there was a
 question that was addressed to, you Dietrich, and then the others will have a chance to
 make a few final
 comments. So Dietrich and answer the question.
Dietrich Domanski, Secretary General, Financial Stability Board
Thanks, Frederico, and thanks for this question. Well, the FSB has through a dedicated
 group followed
 rapid advances in financial technology over the past couple of years, and on a number of
 occasions,
 published reports that provide an overview of trends or look into specific areas. Our
 current focus, as I
 mentioned, is on the crypto asset ecosystem in its various forms and guises, and we just
 published our
 risk assessment on financial stability risks from crypto assets. Now I think looking
 ahead what seems to
 be the case is that decentralised finance brings together many of new technological
 applications –
 smart contracts, AI applications and decentralised ledger technology. So we'll be
 working in terms of
 analysis with a focus on that in the coming months and share any insights that we gain
 from that with our
 members at G20 and, of course, also with the wider public. Thank you.
Moderator
Thank you. Juda, do you want to intervene now?
Juda Agung, Deputy Governor, Bank Indonesia
Yeah. I think everybody is now preparing for the CBDC. It's kind of something that we
 cannot avoid in
 the future because digitalisation in the economy and financial sector has been growing
 very fast. That is
 why the central bank needs to facilitate the transaction in the future. That's why
 CBDC is something
 that we have to prepare. And if we look at the BIS paper survey on the countries that
 80 per cent of central banks have been conducting research, preparing for the
 CBDC. In terms of
 technology, I think there are many options and also whether wholesale versus retail CBDC
 is still under
 discussion, the pros and cons, of course, and benefit of that.
And we are, in Bank Indonesia, also already started this study on the CBDC as well as the
 implications for
 the monetary policy, implication on the financial stability and so on. So because the
 design of CBDC will
 determine how we conduct monetary policy. For example, whether CBDC is a kind of
 interest-bearing asset,
 or zero interest. This, of course, will affect the way we conduct the monetary policy
 and the implication
 on the financial stability of assets. If the interest is positive, then, you know, there
 is a risk of
 this intermediation from commercial to the central bank. So this discussion still going
 on in Bank
 Indonesia and of course, we need to share the experience from countries that already
 have kind of pilot
 projects on this, like China and the Swedish central bank and other central banks, like
 Bahamas, Eastern
 Caribbean and so on, would be my answer.
Moderator
Okay. Thank you. And as I said, I very much agree with you that we need a further
 reflection on that to be
 not just the first round, but the second round, the third round implications of this
 with this kind of
 operation. Philip, I don't know whether you want to add some final remarks?
Philip Lowe
I can thank you. I want to also thank you for recognising the Aboriginal art behind me
 because I think the
 First Nations People of Australia have a huge amount to teach us about sustainability. I
 hope you also
 noticed the Memorial Pole between the Australian flag and the Aboriginal flag. That
 comes from East
 Arnhem Land, which is up in the northern part of Australia and in fact, it's closer
 to where you are
 in Jakarta, than where I am in Sydney. I think it's a symbol of the connection
 between our countries.
In terms of the substance of the issues we've been talking about, I just want to
 follow up a couple of
 points. The first of those is on climate change and financing climate change, Dietrich
 talked about this.
 The financial sector has a huge role to play here, but we know that the financial sector
 can only play
 that role if it's got the information. We've got many years of experience where
 financial
 institutions can't play their role properly if they don't have the information
 and when they
 don't have it, they restrict credit or they price it inappropriately and there's
 a real risk that
 that can happen in this space as well. So the collective effort we're all pursuing
 at the moment to
 improve information in this space is really important. That involves the work that
 central banks are
 doing on stress tests, the disclosure by private companies about how they're
 managing climate risks
 and the taxonomies. So I think as a group, we need to keep a focus on those things,
 otherwise the
 financial sector will not be able to play the role that it can play in financing the
 transition to the
 green economy.
The last point I wanted to make was on central bank digital currencies. The Reserve Bank
 of Australia,
 like many other central banks, is undertaking a lot of experiments. I think we're a
 long way from the
 point of issuing a central bank digital currency for retail purposes. There are still
 technology issues
 to work out, but as Luigi's been saying there are significant public policy issues
 to work through as
 well. I think the most likely cases for central bank digital currencies are going to be
 in the wholesale
 space. In a way central banks already issue a digital currency, that's electronic
 settlement
 balances. So it's not too far a stretch to issue other forms of settlement balances
 that can be used
 in closed systems, either with smart contracts or some other set of arrangements. So we're
 currently
 exploring how that would work for wholesale purposes and the exploration we are doing
 suggests there are
 some business cases that might be worth developing there. But on the retail level, I
 think it's still
 some way away. Thank you very much.
Moderator
Thank you. And I would like to thank the participants in this panel discussion. Philip
 Lowe, Dietrich
 Domanski and Juda Agung. I think, well, first of all, as moderator for the very good
 self-discipline in
 sticking to the allotted time. So even if we started with some delay, we have not added
 to the delay
 during our discussion, but above all for the various interesting and thought-provoking
 remarks that they
 made, which I think leave every one of us a bit wiser than before. So if you want
 to show your
 appreciation for the panellists, please do so now, and let me add that I wish to thank
 very much the
 Indonesian Presidency for convening this. First of all, for the organisation of this G20 meeting,
 but also for convening this event of ours, which I think we profited from, every one of
 us. Thank you
 very much and have a good day.
