BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Panel Participation at the ASIC Annual Forum on ‘Wholesale Market Conditions and Resilience’ – Sydney
DATE: 03/11/2022
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2022/sp-so-2022-11-03.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Panel Participation at the ASIC Annual Forum on ‘Wholesale Market Conditions and Resilience’
Jonathan Kearns
Head of Domestic Markets
ASIC Annual Forum
Sydney
–
3 November 2022
Audio
26.9MB
Transcript
Calissa Aldridge (ASIC)
All right, we might kick off. I think we’ve got most people in and sitting down, a few more

 might trickle through as we go along. Good afternoon, everyone. You’ve done well to make it

 through to the end of the day, for those of you who have been here all day, and thanks for joining us

 for this session on ‘Wholesale market conditions and resilience’. You may be wondering

 where Greg Yanco is. You’re right, I don’t look like a Greg. Unfortunately, he’s

 fallen ill, so I’m stepping in for him today to moderate this session. My name is Calissa

 Aldridge. I head up our Market Supervision team at ASIC. We oversee trading or exchange and

 over-the-counter markets and also supervise market intermediaries.
I’d like to start by acknowledging the traditional custodians of the lands on which we meet

 today, the Gadigal People of the Eora Nation, and pay my respect to their elders past and present.

 I’m delighted today to be joined by such an esteemed panel: Michael Bath, Nell Hutton and Dr

 Jonathan Kearns. Michael is the Acting CEO and Head of Global Markets and Business Strategy at

 the AOFM, the Australian Office of Financial Management, responsible for issuing and managing

 Australian Government Securities. Michael led the establishment of the Securitisation Fund and

 Structured Finance Support Fund, which have proved to be critical during market stress in supporting

 the market, and Michael is recognised for this work in the Queen’s Birthday Honours List, which

 is a great testament to his contribution to public service. Nell Hutton is General Manager of

 Financial Markets at Westpac Institutional Bank and is responsible for fixing calm currency

 commodities and carbon markets globally and I’m sure that you’re very busy facilitating

 clients and the market to transition to this next extraordinary phase of wholesale markets. I have to

 also call out that Nell was the first woman to run a global financial markets business in Australia

 which is a real testament to you, a great feat, so well done on that. And Jonathan recently moved

 into Head of Domestic Markets at the RBA, I was going to suggest three or so months ago, but he tells

 me that it’s only six weeks, so he’s brand new into that new role. He leads the analysis of

 domestic financial markets and the Bank’s open-market operation, so you’ve an interesting

 career ahead as you manage the unwind of pandemic measures into the market. Jonathan also leads the

 carbon markets, the climate work for the Bank, which we heard this morning—for those of you who were

 there—is the third pillar, next to fiscal and monetary policy, for central banks; I don’t know

 whether Jonathan agrees with that or not. And also you may have come across Jonathan’s published

 research on international finance and macroeconomics. So welcome, Panel. Thank you for taking the

 time today.
We’ll run the panel in the usual way. The panellists will have a bit of a discussion and question

 amongst ourselves. We’ll open up to questions in the audience towards the end. I do ask that, if

 you have a question, you put your hand up. There will be people wandering around or perhaps standing

 at the back who have a microphone, so just make sure that you have a microphone before you start.
We’re here today to talk about wholesale markets, pretty important stuff for financial stability

 and also for funding the real economy and it’s really important that they operate fairly and

 efficiently. And they’re in a period of change, we’re seeing rapid growth; there’s

 more automation, the investor base is changing, and we’ve obviously had periods of stress just

 recently as well. And who would have anticipated that we’d be in this economic environment that

 we’re in now, which obviously is very impactful for fixed-income markets as well. We have rising

 inflation and rates, we’ve got geopolitical tensions, supply-chain shocks impacting commodities,

 energy and other parts of the economy. And then, following that extensive period of pandemic

 stimulus, we’re now entering an unwind phase, which much of it gets managed through the

 wholesale markets. So it’s been an extraordinary time for the debt market, part of the market

 that for a period was almost non-existent in the government space at least some time ago, to have

 grown to the size that it has. So there’s a lot of interesting discussion for us to kick off

 with today.
Maybe we’ll start by looking back at what’s changed since the GFC and over the more recent

 period. So, Nell, since you’re at the frontline and have visibility of some of these dynamics,

 can you just kick us off with some of the observations that you’ve seen in key trends in

 fixed-income markets and wholesale markets over the last little while, including during the pandemic?
Nell Hutton (Westpac)
Sure. Obviously, most of the last decade was characterised by the trend lower in growth and

 inflation, falling interest rates, and various accommodative policies from global central banks,

 which led investors to move further out the risk curve to seek yield and also damped volatility.

 Obviously, that’s changed pretty rapidly in the last 12 months, but that’s what’s

 characterised most of the last decade. And that culminated in the COVID crisis, where you had

 synchronised global efforts to implement emergency fiscal and monetary policy, and that has somewhat

 led to the rapid reversal that we’ve had in the last year.
In terms of COVID and the impact it had specifically, COVID did accelerate a lot of different trends,

 as we all know, and a couple of them that I’d call out would be the focus on social and

 environmental concerns. And, certainly, we’ve seen a real acceleration in sustainable finance

 markets since the start of the crisis, and that’s generated from both investor demand and also

 issue of focus on sustainable financing.
The other thing I’d call out is a focus from investors on the role of fiscal policy in supporting

 sustainable economic growth. And we saw that most recently with events in the UK, where Liz

 Truss’s mini budget generated a very violent response in UK interest-rate markets. And I think

 that’s a theme that we’re going to see - which is global investors focused on appropriate

 fiscal policy to support sustained economic growth, but Michael might want to comment on that later.
Calissa Bath (ASIC)
So it’s obviously been a really interesting period during COVID but even just more recently with

 some of the economic conditions, we’ve mentioned rising rates and inflation and the rest. How is

 the market coping with some of those changes to the [inaudible]?
Nell Hutton (Westpac)
Yeah. So it’s been a pretty rapid reversal we’ve seen this year, and I would say,

 generally, higher interest rates are good for fixed-income markets. But a move this fast generates a

 lot of uncertainty, and also the general uncertainty we have at the moment about the economic outlook

 makes it hard for both investors and issuers to assess what is fair value, both in risk-free markets

 and in credit spreads. And so what that generates is an increased risk premium, as investors demand a

 higher return on capital to invest. And so what we’re seeing is that the primary market has been

 characterised by probably a more defensive approach, either smaller volume, higher new-issue

 concession, potentially shorter tenures in the sort of three- to five-year sector or moving up the

 capital stack—so secured issuance or RMBS issuance—so I’d say the markets have been slightly

 more defensive. We’ve seen less corporate issuance, but corporates have benefited from liquidity

 in the loan markets, and loan pricing has been much tighter than bond-market pricing. The loan

 markets have lagged the move wider in bond markets, and so corporate issuers haven’t had to come

 to the market; they’ve been able to benefit from that continued liquidity in the loan market.
But, overall, the market has been very resilient and, that’s been a feature, I’d say, over

 the last 10 years that, despite some of the volatile times we’ve seen, it’s been very

 rare to see any sort of prolonged disruption in the market. And so I’d say, broadly speaking,

 the Australian domestic market is very resilient.
Calissa Aldridge (ASIC)
Okay. Well, that’s fantastic to hear. So, Michael, the government obviously needs to fund its

 spending and, during COVID, it spent a lot, and that funding is still coming through. So

 the AOFM is holding lots more bonds on issue than it has for a long time or potentially ever.

 What are some of the challenges that Australia’s biggest issuer or any issuers are facing in

 this current environment?
Michael Bath (AOFM)
Well, as Nell said, the reflation of risk premia causes investors to wait and see, I suppose, and it

 also coincides with quite a bit of volatility. So I might just walk us through, I guess, the recent

 potted history. What we found in 2020 was that a fair bit of stock came back onshore from offshore

 investors, and that prompted the RBA to do a little bit of intervention at the time to maintain an

 orderly market. But what’s probably less known is that the domestic banks absorbed a lot of

 stock onto their balance sheet. I think it reached a peak of about 26 per cent of

 outstandings by about September 2020. But then, as the RBA moved into a more what I’ll

 call ’systematic’—but Jonathan might want to correct me—but, essentially, moved into—it had

 already established yield curve control but it had—well, colloquially known as ’yield

 curve’—sorry, ’quantitative easing’ and started to accumulate our bonds and built up to

 well over 30 per cent of the stock of debt, that tended to displace both foreign investors,

 who fell from 57 per cent of our holdings in December 2019 to around 45 per cent

 throughout this year.
But, having said that, foreign investors still stay engaged with the market and we’ve

 got … Well, essentially, about seven per cent of our staff are offshore at the moment,

 talking to investors, and another seven per cent will be getting on a plane on Sunday. So, we

 are still pretty popular globally.
And the other thing I’d note is that, as the holdings of the RBA grew, the holdings of the banks

 have fallen. So, while they reached a peak of 26 per cent in 2020, this year they’ve

 fallen below 10 per cent, which is actually lower as a share of the stock of AGS at any

 time since prior to the establishment of the Basel-3 liquidity regime. So that reflation-of-risk

 premium-market volatility, it created some challenges. Moreover, some central banks have been

 defending their currencies, and that has a tendency to impact the volatility of US Treasury markets

 and that can flow into our market as well.
But, by and large, as Nell said, we’ve seen markets as being resilient and we’ve signalled

 our intention to bring a new 12-year bond to the market next week, subject to the usual caveats about

 market conditions. So we continue also to hold sufficient liquidity at the RBA so that, if we need

 to, we can absent ourselves from markets for an extended period, but we haven’t needed to. But

 then it tends to be the case that the sovereign is the last part of the market that loses access to

 finance, so probably the more interesting question is in that credit space.
Calissa Aldridge (ASIC)
Okay. Look, that’s really interesting. There’s a couple of points there I think we’ll

 come back to, when we talk about investors. I think, the fall in the bank holdings, but they’ve

 got very significant holdings in the semis, for example and maybe coming back to have a look at some

 of those foreign investment dynamics. But maybe, Jonathan, if I move on to you, the RBA took

 unprecedented action during that COVID pandemic period to support the market, the Term Funding

 Facility, the Bond Purchase Program; the Committed Liquidity Facility, which was already in place but

 continued to support the market. Now we’re seeing unwinding of some of those measures. If you

 just step back and look at RBA’s role, how do you see that it’s evolved over time?
Jonathan Kearns
Well, there’ve been a range of elements of that. I mean, taking a step right back into sort of

 why we actually care about this, I mean the financial markets are critical for the operation of the

 economy, so it enables the investments. You need savers to be able to get their funds to investors so

 that investors can use them for productive purposes, and financial markets are at the heart of that,

 bond markets, and government debt markets in particular, are at the heart of that. So the government

 bond curve in particular, which is often what’s the focus for the RBA, that’s the risk-free

 interest rate in the economy, and the risk-free interest rate feeds into the pricing of everything,

 all of the debt-market equities, property, everything. So it’s really critical to have a

 well-functioning government debt market because that’s underpinning everything.
So you can look at our interventions in March 2020 in that light. This was the heart of the financial

 system, which was misbehaving, there was dysfunction in that market. So, there’s the practical

 measure in terms of what’s the government debt market, what’s the risk-free rate, in terms

 of the implications for the economy, and there are also more practical measures in terms of the

 government debt is used as collateral for so much of the financial system and so, if there’s

 disquiet about the use of collateral in that sense, then that’s significantly a problem.
The other point I would make is that broadly, I think, we can see the instability in financial markets

 is really bad for economic outcomes. You only have to compare. If we go back to the GFC, where we see

 the havoc that financial instability can really cause to your economic activity, most of the advanced

 economies suffered fairly significant recessions, and that was just because of financial instability.

 There wasn’t any real shock, there was just the shock in financial markets that was amplified by

 financial markets. But then, if you jump forward to the pandemic, you’d had a great deal of

 reform and regulation changes over that time that had been designed to make the financial system more

 resilient and more robust. And then, in the pandemic, we had a real shock—not just something

 happening within the financial market but a real, actual shock—and yet the financial system

 didn’t amplify that, it, by and large, worked to be able to modify it, to dampen that shock.

 Financial systems were able to smooth things out.
So, if you want to have a thought experiment of how bad things could be, imagine if you’d had the

 pandemic back in 2007 with the fragility of the financial market there and you had a real economic

 shock that hit when the financial market was not even able to withstand an internally generated

 shock. So I think that highlights just how critical a well-functioning financial market is for the

 operation of, the economy and, ultimately, that’s what we care about because that leads to

 people’s welfare and standard of living. So it’s really important for those fundamental

 reasons.
Calissa Aldridge (ASIC)
And, now that the RBA is going through a period of having to unwind some of those measures, how might

 current market conditions, and, if we think about some of the current market

 conditions … Obviously, you’ve talked about it being a well-functioning market;, but,

 when you’re factoring in what’s happening with inflation and rates and spreads in the

 market, including in swaps and other things, how is that going to impact that process of unwinding

 some of those measures?
Jonathan Kearns
So we do have a lot of unwinding to do, obviously, and a lot of that is pre-announced, so the

 unwinding of the Term Funding Facility, as you highlighted. The Governor has said that we will hold

 onto our bonds that we purchased under the Bond Purchase Program and yield curve control, and so that

 provides a degree of certainty for the market as well. But current conditions are obviously very

 important. So, we’re currently seeing what really is probably an unprecedented tightening by

 central banks globally. When you think about the speed of the tightening, it certainly compares in

 most circumstances to 1994, and the coordination of tightening across countries is really quite

 remarkable. And so that’s a potentially sensitive backdrop to think about things.
Fundamentally, if you think back to, say, the ’taper tantrum’ in 2013, where even the

 suggestion that the Fed was moving caused a degree of dysfunction in markets, the fact that

 we’ve had so many central banks tighten so significantly at a rapid rate and yet markets have

 continued to function pretty well, I think that’s actually a pretty positive thing at the

 moment. There are obviously some areas of illiquidty or dysfunction at times. I mean, we see that

 most strikingly in the swap spread at the moment, which is a little bit of a disruption.
But, overall, from what we can see, I think sort of market conditions are coping pretty well with the

 environment we’ve seen. We have had a well-structured timetable for how things are going to

 unwind, and I think that a notice period is very helpful. So, the banks know when the TFF is

 unwinding and that they will need to repay that, and so they’re able to plan accordingly, the

 banks can issue debt in advance of the unwinding of the TFF. So that notice period helps a lot for

 planning.
Calissa Aldridge (ASIC)
And you mentioned that you’re not going to be selling down the bonds, you’ll sort of watch

 and hold them through to maturity, that’s not the case in some other jurisdictions. And that

 point you were making about international stability, is that the key driver for choosing to hold on

 to them until maturity?
Jonathan Kearns
So the key driver for saying that we were going to hold them on for maturity is really thinking about

 how effective the bond purchasing is in the first place. So the expectation is that, if you tell

 markets you’re going to hold them, then they price them accordingly, whereas, if markets think

 that you’re going to sell them down in a short period of time, the price impact might be less.

 One of the things that’s different in Australia versus some other countries is the maturity of

 the bonds that we’ve purchased, and we generally have a shorter maturity than in some other

 countries, which means that it is going to wind off our balance sheet sooner.
Calissa Aldridge (ASIC)
Okay. Interesting, a really interesting period for you ahead and for the market. Maybe, Nell and

 Michael, just off the back that, what are your views on the impact of the unwinding, the likely

 impact on the market? Have you got anything to sort of add there in terms of whether its specific

 bond yields?
Michael Bath (AOFM)
Look, we tend to think in terms of gross issuance tasks more than net. So a buy-and-hold investor who

 is going to let them roll off in time is probably the best outcome from a dampening market impact.

 However, what I would say is that there are some lines that are pretty tightly held. And so, when we

 think about things like the free float, that is quite low for some of the bonds. So it has meant

 that, over the last year or so, we’ve probably issued some of the shorter bonds, so sort of

 maturing in the next three years or so, to a greater degree than we might have if there wasn’t a

 shortage in the market. So, far from there being an indigestion problem, like we saw in 2020—where

 the RBA was stepping in initially to maintain market integrity—now, to the extent that there are

 issues, it’s a lack of free flow. And so we have sometimes competing but normally aligned

 objectives of maintaining the market and supporting the market but also meeting a

 portfolio-management objective. And when yields are very low, like they were until a year ago and,

 more importantly, the term premium is low before it reflated—that’s associated with QE and

 various other things globally—it tends to push our issuance bias longer. And so those two objectives

 can be competing, and so we’ve probably issued a little bit shorter than we would have

 otherwise. But we do put maintaining a liquid stable market pretty high on the agenda in terms of our

 objectives.
Calissa Aldridge (ASIC)
Okay. And it’s the market that’s been demanding that, or are you just observing based on

 the reflate issues?
Michael Bath (AOFM)
Well …
Calissa Aldridge (ASIC)
In addition to sort of being there and buying them, are they sort of asking you to issue shorter

 dated?
Michael Bath (AOFM)
They are. So, essentially, we’re a little bit unique in the sovereign-debt management community

 in the sense that we set an overarching strategy for the year, in terms of weighted average-term

 immaturity and various other metrics, but we don’t publish our issuance program months in

 advance, like a lot of our peers do. We survey the market weekly, and so we’ll have our

 druthers, if you like, what we’d like to issue, but then, if they’re all saying, ’We

 need April-24s’ or whatever it is, then we’ll tend to listen to them because, at the end of

 the day, if that conduit to our market and we use the auctions for the vast majority of our issuance

 and, if we don’t listen to what the people who turn up to those auctions want, then it means

 that they’ll go and buy a Jim’s lawn-mowing run or something like that instead of buying

 our bonds. What do you reckon, Nell?
Calissa Aldridge (ASIC)
Nell, did you have anything you wanted to add to that?
Nell Hutton (Westpac)
Oh, no. The only thing I’d add is, the important thing really is also just transparency and that

 there’s no surprises. So I think, the market is looking for clear guidance from the RBA, which I

 think we have, and, as long as people feel confident that there aren’t going to be any

 surprises, then, I think that’s the most important thing.
Calissa Aldridge (ASIC)
All right. So we might move on to talk a bit about the investor base, I mentioned a bit before that

 it has been changing. We’ve got, obviously, the growth of super funds and managed funds that are

 more active. The Australian banks we’ve talked about, even though their positions might have

 come down in the sovereign debt, they’re big holders of semis [semi-government bonds] for

 liquidity purposes. We’ve got potentially more market making as the markets are becoming a bit

 more automated. We’ve also got almost $2 trillion of bonds outstanding. And, again,

 listening to the themes of the rest of this conference, the enormous amount of financing that’s

 going to be needed to fund the transition into some of the sustainability financing, some of that or

 a good chunk of that is going to have to come from the debt markets, so diversity of investors is

 really critical. So maybe, Michael, starting with you, how has the investor base in government bonds

 evolved over time?
Michael Bath (AOFM)
Okay. So, as I said earlier, the share held by the RBA has essentially popped up to above

 30 per cent, but it will gradually unwind. So, putting that to the side, the share held by

 the offshore investors has drifted down to the mid-40 per cents and the banks’ has

 fallen below 10 per cent. Now, I would expect that, in the near term that will pick up for

 a number of reasons. Essentially, one is that they own so many of the semis that they’ve sort of

 reached a point that is comparable to the point they reached at various other points since the new

 liquidity regimes have come in, where you start to … Well, you would imagine you would

 start to wonder, if all the semis are owned by four players or a large majority of them, whether

 they’ll fulfil their role as a liquid asset. But that’s for others to decide, not me. At

 some point, you would imagine that they’ll start buying govies [government bonds] again, but the

 problem with that is that they’re very expensive on a relative-to-swap basis.
So, at the moment, the Exchange Settlement Account balances that the banks hold count towards the

 high-quality liquid asset holdings, and you can think of that as the other side of the RBA’s

 ledger to the bonds that they own of ours, rough and dirty. So, as those bonds, the short bonds,

 mature that are held by the RBA, those ES [Exchange Settlement Account] balances will naturally fall.

 The question will be, what do the banks do to fill that gap? That’s probably a question for

 Nell. Hopefully, I’ve got a few bonds to sell you. But we’ll see. Next week, you can roll

 on up. So, essentially, I would imagine that, if that is right and the holdings of semis don’t

 sort of keep creeping up towards 100 per cent, then you would imagine that T-notes would be

 popular, short bonds would be popular and bonds supporting the futures basket because they’re

 very easy to hedge for the banks.
On the index side, I would say that we’ve been a little bit surprised at the lack of demand for

 inflation-linked bonds, given there’s now inflation in this country, so … and also

 real yields have reflated. So, for a while, I could see why it was hard to sell an inflation-linked

 bond, because they had a minus sign in front of the yield and no one likes a guaranteed negative

 return. So, that has been a little bit interesting, although I would put in a plug for my colleagues

 in the Portfolio Strategy team by saying that we have not seen a whole lot of value in issuing

 inflation-linked bonds in recent years or decades and so we’ve kept the share of

 inflation-linked, as a proportion of our portfolio, at around about five per cent. That’s

 low compared to our sovereign peers, which tend to be about 15 or 20 per cent, and

 those guys are sort of suffering from pretty high spikes in their costs of funds. So I read

 something that said that the US Treasury, despite having 15 or 20 per cent of the

 share of its debt in linkers, has got something like half of its public-debt interest costs coming

 from linkers. That’s pretty impressive. We’ve kept it at five per cent, so ’Go

 team!’ Finally, it’s paid off. Now we just need them to buy them.
Calissa Aldridge (ASIC)
Just turning back to the point about the foreign investors, I guess I always sort of thought of
60/40
[per cent] sort of longer term as roughly the split. You speak

 of 57 [per cent] and it’s now down to 45 [per cent]. Do you sort of feel as though to

 continue to support the ongoing issuance that you need to really build back up that foreign

 investment? You’ve said that you’ve got seven team members jumping on a plane in a couple

 of days to get over there and start marketing and then …
Michael Bath (AOFM)
Well, seven per cent of our team is over there …
Calissa Aldridge (ASIC)
Oh, seven per cent.
Michael Bath (AOFM)
… but that’s two people.
Calissa Aldridge (ASIC)
Oh, okay.
Michael Bath (AOFM)
It’s more impressive if you talk in percentages when you’ve only got 40 people in the

 office. Maybe it’s three people then, maybe my numbers weren’t so good. Look, it is

 important, and Australia has been an importer of capital for, well, the last 230-odd years, so it

 stands to reason that we’ll always have a pretty strong focus towards international investors.

 And they like us because we’re predictable, we have a good governance and government structure,

 and we listen to what they say.
Calissa Aldridge (ASIC)
And where are the super funds and the other funds in all of this? I know that they’re investing

 in offshore markets, and maybe we can come back to that in a second, but are they sort of actively

 engaging with you directly …
Michael Bath (AOFM)
Look …
Calissa Aldridge (ASIC)
… in trying to increase their holdings?
Michael Bath (AOFM)
Banks aside, the domestic market is not … How do I put this? So, Australian investment

 funds or investment managers who manage fixed-income funds like the fact that there are Australian

 Government bonds in the index so that, if they don’t own them, they sort of just earn a running

 yield by owning semis and everything else. I think that’s a fair comment, but Nell might want to

 clip me over the ear.
Nell Hutton (Westpac)
No.
Michael Bath (AOFM)
Okay, fair enough. So, they don’t buy a whole lot of our bonds. Not since COVID but the last

 time I looked at it, I think we added up all of the shares owned by everyone and they’ve left

 roughly five or 10 per cent for everyone else in Australia, including their super funds.
Calissa Aldridge (ASIC)
Okay.
Nell Hutton (Westpac)
But the super funds that do have large holdings are the defined benefit funds.
Michael Bath (AOFM)
Yes.
Nell Hutton (Westpac)
But, obviously, that’s a small proportion of the super fund market in Australia.
Michael Bath (AOFM)
And most of the defined benefit funds are government, so, ’left pocket/right pocket stuff’,

 it’s sort of a bit of a wash. But, there are a few still out there.
Nell Hutton (Westpac)
State government and federal government.
Michael Bath (AOFM)
Oh, that’s right true; yes, true.
Calissa Aldridge (ASIC)
Are you planning for that to change over time, or are you expecting that, as the rate environment is

 changing, super continues to grow? We’ve got all of this capital in these super funds in

 Australia that they just have to start transitioning into sort of direct investment in some of those

 holdings?
Nell Hutton (Westpac)
Oh, look, I think the defined benefit funds will always have a demand for government paper, and I

 think the contribution … Sorry, the defined contribution funds are probably going to be

 looking for credit product to generate the yield that they need to deliver retirement outcomes.
Michael Bath (AOFM)
I think it’s fair to say though that there have been one or two notable investors who have taken

 a very deliberate long-duration position through that great moderation in inflation that Dr Kearns

 was talking about earlier, and I think their performance bears that out. So I think that, to the

 extent that markets are efficient in this space, you would imagine that they would get a reputation

 for being on the right side of things. And, now that risk premia have reflated, including the

 term-risk premium, you would imagine that there would be potentially additional demand in domestic

 fixed-income investors.
Nell Hutton (Westpac)
I’d agree with that. And I think the other thing we’re seeing from the larger super funds

 is global government bond markets as an opportunity to generate alpha, so trading across global

 government bond markets.
Calissa Aldridge (ASIC)
That was going to be my next line of questioning around the international investor base that there

 has sort of historically been a pull for Australian investors to go offshore. Is that starting to

 change? Is there something about the Australian market that makes it either more appealing or less

 appealing as it changed over time, or do you continue to expect that there’s going to be heavy

 demand abroad?
Nell Hutton
So I think … I mean, back to, I guess, the theme around super funds, what we’ve seen

 in the super-fund space and probably in the institutional-investor space more broadly is a trend

 towards consolidation and, as there’s been a focus on economies of scale and they’ve become

 more sophisticated and had more complex needs, two key things have come out of that. One is the need

 to increase the proportion of global investment to diversify, and the other is more demand for

 hedging products, including swaps and futures, to solve some of the solutions they need. So I think,

 yes, the domestic market still has an important role to play and, largely, we’re seeing, supply

 met with demand. But, as the institutional market in Australia—and particularly the super-fund

 market—continues to grow rapidly, they are going to continue to need to diversify internationally.

 But, I think the domestic market will still have an important role to play.
Calissa Aldridge (ASIC)
Great, thank you. Just one final question on the client base. Picking up from another theme that came

 out this morning in the crypto discussion around digital tokens, I was a bit surprised to hear a

 Professor of Finance mention that there is some research out there that is suggesting that digital

 tokens will account for about 10 per cent of GDP by the end of the decade, not all in the

 debt space but, clearly, some of it will have to be debt based if that’s to come true. Is there

 demand from clients and investors to be tokenising these assets?
Nell Hutton
So I’d say, ’Generally, no.’ I mean, we are working on a number of use cases for

 digital currency, particularly, for example, around international payments, where potentially having

 a digital coin can help drive efficiency. But, generally, we’re not really seeing any demand

 from either investors or corporate customers at this stage. So, as a bank, we’re obviously

 wanting to be at the forefront of these trends and be across it, but it’s not one of our top

 priorities in the near term just based on a lack of real interest from our customer base.
Calissa Aldridge (ASIC)
Does anybody else have a comment on that: digital tokens?
Jonathan Kearns
I mean, not so much on digital tokens. But, as Nell said, central bank digital currencies is

 somewhere that …
Calissa Aldridge (ASIC)
Predicted?
Jonathan Kearns
It’s an area that’s at the forefront in terms of research and work, so either a wholesale

 digital currency or a retail digital currency. There’s been a lot more work done on wholesale,

 and I think, the use cases for that seem to be stronger at the moment. The Reserve Bank of Australia

 has done some work on the wholesale with international settlements. We now do have a project for

 retail, we’re looking at the use case for that. But, we have a very developed and advanced

 financial system in Australia and so that takes away some of the retail case, so we still have to see

 what retail case will be made by people.
Calissa Aldridge (ASIC)
All right, thank you. We might just circle back to expand on some of the comments earlier about

 resiliency of liquidity. I’m interested sort of not just in the stress conditions—in the extreme

 stress conditions that we saw during COVID and GFC—but looking at other times as well. Are there

 aspects of the Australian market that might make us more vulnerable to shock events than other

 jurisdictions? I hear what you’re saying in terms of the well-functioning market. But, if you

 look across the range of different products, the greater use of swaps, for example, and not a strong

 sort of repo market as in other jurisdictions, are there aspects of our market that might create

 vulnerabilities, do you think? That’s open to anyone but maybe starting with you, Jonathan.
Jonathan Kearns
Sure. Everyone looks this way. Look, I think there are strengths and potential weaknesses of the

 market, and I think, we need to acknowledge those. The first thing is to think, ’Well, we got

 through previous shocks, we got through the GFC, we got through COVID, so we can be confident about

 the strength and resilience of the financial system.’ I think, as soon as anyone said that, they

 would be famous last words, so just be clear that I’m not saying that. There are some parts of

 the market that function very well. So, we have a very liquid FX market. The swaps and futures around

 that market, the derivative market, have functioned very well, and I think there are a lot of

 countries where, when I speak with counterparts, they’re envious of how well that functions

 because that does enable the Australian financial system and Australian institutions to take out a

 lot of risk, and, if you don’t have currency risk, that’s a really big deal. But there are

 some other parts of the market that perhaps seem less robust than you might find in other systems,

 whether that’s the private repo market or we’re seeing the swap market at the moment

 gapping in ways that are sort of a bit disturbing, and I think we have to be always very attentive.
As you’ve said, I’ve been in this job for about six weeks now. For the previous five years,

 I was head of the Financial Stability Department, so we’re always worrying about these kinds of

 shocks and risks and what can go wrong. And I think, as soon as you start thinking that things are

 stable, that’s when problems will occur. We only have to look at what happened with the gilt

 market in the UK to see where problems can arise very quickly, even when there was some expectation

 that things were generally well contained. So, there would be significant hubris to suggest that, no,

 we’re fine.
Calissa Aldridge (ASIC)
And just picking up that point on the gilt issue in the UK and how that flowed through to our market.

 I’ll come back to you in a second to get your views on this, Michael. Do you have a view, given,

 I mean, that it’s a relatively recent impact on how the Australian market weathered?
Jonathan Kearns
I mean, certainly every morning, when we look at what’s happening, the developments overseas

 from overnight are very significant in terms of what’s setting the starting conditions for the

 Australian market and how things trade through. I mean, the Australian yields and liquidity have

 responded to what’s happened internationally already. So, that certainly caused issues in terms

 of, we’d see the currency move, we’d see liquidity affected and yields affected. So, in a

 global market, these things certainly always transmit through to Australia as well.
Nell Hutton (AOFM)
But I do think … and, sorry, Michael might pick up on this, but I think that period we saw

 of UK defined-benefit pension funds selling Aussie RMBS [Residential Mortgage-Backed Securities].

 I’m sure that most people are aware of that was on the back of volatility in UK gilts, which

 forced UK pension funds to fund margin calls, and they sold some of their non-core assets, some of

 which were Aussie RMBS. I would say what really was remarkable about that was how resilient the

 market was. That really, the RMBS market didn’t really blink. And so, that’s encouraging in

 terms of the liquidity in RMBS.
Jonathan Kearns
Yeah, absolutely. I mean, in that event, we saw that the amount of selling from UK pension funds, at

 least reported, was fairly significant relative to the issuance that we would normally expect to see,

 so …
Nell Hutton (Westpac)
It helped that it was very short-dated, the instruments that they were selling, because that’s

 also the least expensive for them to sell. But still, they were selling them at auction in

 competition, it could have had a much more significant impact on the market than it did.
Michael Bath (AOFM)
There was one notable case where I saw a Beewick list come across my desk, we weren’t bidding on

 it, by the way, let’s be very clear about that, but I recognised some of the lines as ones that

 we owned and I did a double-take, and we’d already received a call notice on some of the notes

 that were being put in for auction. So what that means is that someone is trying to sell a note that

 the issuer is going to repay within two weeks. So either they just weren’t being very

 discriminating when they were putting their lists together or they needed two-week money. But the

 fact is that those two weeks have now passed and those Beewick lists have slowed right down. So

 it’s not clear which of those two it was, but it was very weird.
Calissa Aldridge (ASIC)
What I might do is just continue on with you, Michael, and I’ll come back to you in a second,

 Nell, on your observations both on dealing and on syndication. But, Michael, AOFM was asked to

 intervene in the securitisation market at sort of various points over the last decade or so since the

 GFC and during the COVID pandemic, which is somewhat unique amongst sovereign-debt management

 agencies. How did AOFM intervene, and can you share some lessons on how that played out and also

 how the recent volatility in the credit markets that we were just talking about that flow through to

 the Aussie RMBS market. What was the impact of that? Is that sort of leading to calls for AOFM

 to get back in the market?
Michael Bath
So the first question was about the lessons from it. But I think the flippant answer to that is

 because we’re talking about resilience today—if you really want to test the resilience of your

 sovereign-debt management agency, you’ll give them a $15-billion structured finance support fund

 to implement in the middle of a pandemic, which sees their issuance task go to $200 billion.

 We’re an agency of about 40 people and it takes about six months for a new employee to get

 a security clearance. Make of that what you will.
Anyway, the second question - What was it about? It was about the LDI selling. So, yes, we have been

 asked. We’ve been approached by some originators and, interestingly, financiers of originators

 to get the band back together and turn the structured-finance-support spigot back on. We don’t

 have a mandate to do that. So, to be clear, the Structured Finance Support Fund was all about

 maintaining access to finance for smaller lenders who would otherwise lose access to reasonably

 priced finance as a result of COVID. COVID is not behind the current volatility in the market.
So, to be really clear, we do not have a mandate to just start buying securities at will because

 people don’t like the price. And, as the other panellists have said, the securitisation market

 has held up very well in the face of quite a fair bit of—yes, short-dated—selling from overseas where

 the seller was not very discriminating on price. So, when you’ve got a liquidity crunch and

 you’re the liability-driven investors don’t assume that they are about to go belly-up or

 anything, on the contrary, the spike in long gilt rates means that their liabilities are getting

 revalued in their favour much more quickly than their assets. So this is really a margin call on the

 derivatives that they use to partially hedge those liabilities.
So it’s a bit like a wheat farmer who finds that they’ve got a bumper crop but there’s

 been some sort of global event that causes a shortage of wheat—oh, I don’t know: someone invades

 Ukraine, for example—and suddenly, they’ve sold wheat futures into the market. They get a margin

 call on that wheat futures, but they’re sitting pretty because, in three months’ time,

 they’ve got a lot of wheat to come in to sell at record prices. So just substitute out the wheat

 farmer and substitute in a liability-driven investor and that’s the position they’re in.
So there’s no real issue here other than that they were forced to sell to raise liquidity. And,

 in that situation, you sell the assets you can, and it’s a real vote of confidence in the

 Australian securitisation market that they sold Australian RMBS. Now, they didn’t only sell

 Australian RMBS, they sold Dutch and other countries’ RMBS, but it held up well. It displaced a

 little bit of supply, there were one or two deals that got pulled. I think that’s as much about

 credit spreads widening and people not liking the price or—how do I put it— suddenly, if you’re

 writing prime mortgages that are in competition with the banks who get 60 per cent of their

 funding from deposits, you’re going to struggle to compete with them. And so your need to empty

 your warehouse is probably not great because you’re not going to be originating at a rate of

 knots, if you’re competing with banks who can get 60 per cent of their funding from

 deposits and your spreads have gone from 50-over to 200-over in the space of a year. So, anyway, I

 think the market is doing all right.
Calissa Aldridge (ASIC)
Okay. We won’t expect to be reading about it in the newspaper then in the headlines.
Michael Bath (AOFM)
No, I wouldn’t expect that you’d be reading that I’ll be buying RMBS any time soon,

 even if I could.
Calissa Aldridge (ASIC)
Nell, I might just loop back to you then. From your dealing operations, what factors come into play

 when you’re looking at liquidity, especially in sort of changing market conditions, and your

 ability and willingness to provide liquidity, looking at it from a dealer perspective initially? So,

 when we’re looking at, for example, the size of the bond market now, the position that the banks

 have and some of strain that we’re seeing in terms of pricing and volatility and other things,

 are they all key to drivers for your willingness to provide liquidity?
Nell Hutton (Westpac)
So, and I’d start by saying, we’re very focused on providing consistent liquidity and in

 challenging times, it’s more important than ever that we support our customers in the provision

 of liquidity. We very much see it as a long-term partnership. So, in times of stress, we need to be

 there because, you know, it’s a long-term relationship.
But I would pick up on a point that Jonathan made earlier around, as an example, recent moves in swap

 spreads and the EFP market as, a function of, the challenging environment that we have had post

 financial crisis. Some of the regulatory constraints that were introduced which reduced the capacity

 of dealers to warehouse risk, I mean, this is not just in Australia, this was globally, but it has an

 impact in a smaller, less-liquid market like Australia, have meant that, at times, the flows can be

 very one way. So, if you get a significant, for example, corporate hedging flow in the swap market,

 there can be market indigestion, which means that there’s a lot more risk around taking on those

 transactions for the dealers than there was 15 years ago. So we do have to be thoughtful around

 how we manage any larger flows. And there’s been obviously a lot of focus on particularly how

 you manage larger price-sensitive transactions because it is more challenging than it was prior to

 the financial crisis.
But, overall, we will always make prices and we will always support our customers even when it is more

 challenging. But we do have to be very transparent with our clients on the best way to tackle

 markets, because sometimes it may not be that the best thing is for us to take down all of the risk,

 it may be that we need to share some of the risk over time and manage it over time, in order to

 minimise market impact.
Calissa Aldridge (ASIC)
And, moving on to your syndication business, in periods of liquidity stress, how is that impacting

 issuers and their ability to bring deals to market?
Nell Hutton (Westpac)
Well, I guess, as we’ve sort of talked about, there’s no problem for the AOFM, no

 problem for semi-government issuers. Those markets remain very liquid and strong; financials also. We

 saw last week that ANZ issued the largest-ever bond in the Australian domestic market, CBA issued the

 largest-ever tier-2 deal, $2 billion, in the Australian domestic market, there were larger

 new-issue concessions than we would have seen a few months ago, but, equally, volume was no problem.

 So I think, certainly for government, semi-government and financial issuers, the market has been very

 resilient.
As I said earlier, we haven’t really tested the corporate market much because corporates

 haven’t really needed to access the market. But that will be … I guess that the next

 test will be when we start to see some corporate primary issuance or more significant corporate

 primary issuance than we’ve had so far. But, overall, primary markets are strong. And, as I

 said, issuers have various levers that they can pull, whether it’s new-issue concession, smaller

 volume, shorter tenure, higher in the capital stack. But those are always the factors that are being

 weighed into consideration.
I guess that the other important one is speed to market. We can accelerate deal-time lines if there is

 concern around specific event risk. Again, it’s harder for a corporate to do that than for a

 financial issuer or a government issuer. But certainly, accelerated timing is another lever that we

 would always consider.
Calissa Aldridge (ASIC)
Quite. I’m just conscious of time, so what I might do is just open up to the audience. If there

 is anybody in the audience that has a question, can I just ask you to put your hand up?
Michael Bath (AOFM)
Just to Nell’s last point, while you’re looking for someone to put their hand up, the other

 tool that we have started to use is signalling intent further out. So, we always give ourselves that

 out, which is subject to market conditions being suitable to doing the deal. But signalling our

 intent a little bit further in advance gives people a bit more notice to think about the supply

 that’s coming.
Nell Hutton (Westpac)
Yeah, that’s definitely helpful as well.
Calissa Aldridge (ASIC)
Right. I can see that we’re inundated with requests from the audience! So what we might do is

 just have a bit of a discussion about some of the policy issues. Globally, you’ll be aware,

 certainly, Jonathan will be aware from some of the international forums that there’s a lot of

 discussion happening about the resilience of debt markets, focusing I think on those sort of extreme

 liquidity events, so looking at 2020 but also looking more broadly at the resilience of markets. And

 there’s a whole range of different policy initiatives that are being thought about from sort of

 pre and post trade transparency, enhancing that, promoting more use of multilateral platforms or

 all-to-all trading, about central clearing of transactions, which has been talked about for some time

 in relation to repos and government bonds and those sorts of things. What are your views in exploring

 some of these things for the Australian market? Who wants to go first? Jonathan?
Jonathan Kearns
Sure. I mean, some of these things we do see …
Calissa Aldridge (ASIC)
To some extent, anyway.
Jonathan Kearns
… in other … Well, there are some of them in the Australian market, but we also see

 some of those features in other markets and, by and large, I think a lot of them are seen to be

 beneficial, and that’s why they’re being discussed more broadly. Trade transparency does

 seem to have, in most circumstances, been beneficial. There’s the question of how much

 transparency, how quickly, to get that balance right so that you have a return for those who are

 going to be active in the market. But, certainly, there are things that I think we will want to look

 at, globally, the regulatory community, and in Australia, to think about how we can improve that

 resilience.
If we think back to March 2020, it’s not every year that you see a one-in-100-year pandemic,

 fortunately, so that was a pretty extreme event. And you would think that there are going to be times

 when you do need a degree of public-sector support or intervention, but you’d want to minimise

 how frequently that occurs. So, when you just have a little bit of liquidity in the market because of

 market dynamics, some run-of-the-mill event, that’s certainly not when you would want to be

 seeing public sector intervention required. And it would be nice if the market was resilient even

 through a March-2020 event, but there was a huge degree of uncertainty. If you think about the social

 and economic environment that we were looking at back then, it was pretty severe. So we can probably

 park that event to the side and just think more generally about the resilience of markets.
Calissa Aldridge (ASIC)
What’s your view … There you go.
Michael Bath (AOFM)
Look, I agree, and that’s got nothing to do with the fact that I was at the pointy end of having

 to do one of those interventions, or three now actually. But it does strike me that you can kind of

 train the market for government intervention. I did the math the other day and, of the

 169.5 months since Lehman Brothers collapsed, the AOFM has either owned structured finance

 products or been planning to buy it for all but seven months, and this was originally a temporary

 targeted timely something-or-other—something else starting with ’T’—intervention. So we sold

 out of the last of our GFC intervention in February 2018 and, by September 2018, we were planning

 another intervention called the ’business securitisation fund’. And we put that on hold for

 the pandemic, and now we’re back to doing that. And so it probably shouldn’t surprise us

 that, when spreads blow out 100 points, the originators just, ’dial Michael’.
There’s no downside, other than getting your head bitten off. I do note though and this is a bit

 of … if there are any budding PhD students out there, I do note though that there are

 different approaches and this challenge. We compare ourselves with our peers within the OECD who have

 similar sorts of philosophies on debt management and what-not, and they tend to be the Canadians, the

 Nordics and the New Zealanders. And, of the Canadians and the Nordics, they had different approaches

 to securitisation-market intervention. So the Canadians have got this long-standing arrangement

 called the Canadian ’Mortgage and Housing Corporation’ that essentially morphed from a

 post-World War II scheme to ensure that returned service people got access to housing, and then, you

 turn your back on these things for 40 years and they’re the size of the Tax Office. But,

 essentially, they have a permanent place in the mortgage market in Canada. There’s no

 private-lenders mortgage insurance market, and I think the two things might be related. And then, at

 the other end of the spectrum, New Zealand, I think, did not intervene in the pandemic, like we did

 with the Structured Finance Support Fund.
So it’d be an interesting question, I think, to look at the three jurisdictions, Australia, New

 Zealand and Canada that are sort of similar in other aspects as to how we approach debt management

 and see whether the end users of securitised finance in those countries had a different outcome. So

 are Australians that much better off because of what we did with the Structured Finance Support Fund

 than the New Zealanders, who sort of looked at it and didn’t do it, or are the Canadians in a

 much better position because they’ve just always had this stock standard sort of government

 backstop for liquidity of the residential-mortgage-bank securities market? So I don’t know the

 answer, but I’d love to. So, if anyone wants to do a research project.
Calissa Aldridge (ASIC)
Show of hands?
Michael Bath (AOFM)
I’m Acting CEO for the next couple of weeks, so get in fast.
Calissa Aldridge (ASIC)
We’re almost at time. But, Nell, did you have a reaction to maybe the point on all-to-all

 trading? Is that something that’s been talked about in some of those international forums? Is

 that even a proposition that would work, if you’re looking at the whole range of investors?
Nell Hutton (Westpac)
Look, I think it has its challenges. Certainly, we’re obviously open to innovation. But, if you

 look at how long it’s taken the market to get on top of the raft of reg change that came through

 after the GFC, including the current trade reporting rules and everything else, I think there’d

 be some time before we got ready to head in that direction.
Calissa Aldridge (ASIC)
All right. Well, thank you. That’s a great way to finish. We are at time. I just want to thank

 the panel. It’s been a really interesting discussion. You’ve made a topic that can be quite

 complex sound quite exciting. There’s a lot that’s been going on, so thank you for sharing

 your insights.
Just a couple of housekeeping things: for those of you who are here tomorrow, we recommence at 9am for

 the first session on corporate values in a changing world, and, for those who are registered for the

 dinner, drinks and canapes start in half an hour, at 5.30, downstairs. I just encourage you to join

 me in thanking the rest of the panel for making their time available.
