BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: The Economics of a Central Bank Digital Currency in Australia – Sydney
DATE: 08/12/2022
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2022/sp-ag-2022-12-08.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
The Economics of a Central Bank Digital Currency in Australia
Brad Jones
[
*
]
Assistant Governor (Financial System)
17th Central Bank Conference on the Microstructure of Financial Markets
Sydney
–
8 December 2022
Audio
15.7MB
Download
686KB
It is a great pleasure to welcome you to this conference at what is an intensely interesting juncture for
 all things digital finance.
When the industrial revolution took root, it spurred growth in commercial exchange on a previously
 unimaginable scale. Money played a complementary role in facilitating this economic transformation, one
 that led to an unprecedented increase in living standards. A couple of centuries on, it is the digital
 revolution that is reshaping the economy and raising important questions over the future of money. The
 fundamental issue boils down to this: is our money fit-for-purpose in the digital age and, if not, how
 can we make it so?
There is no shortage of excitable commentary about the future of money in the digital era – how and
 by whom it might be created, what forms it might take, and what roles it might play. But sometimes lost
 in this excitement is a clear articulation of the economic problems that new forms of digital money might
 solve, particularly in countries like Australia with a modern, well-functioning payments system.
Today I will discuss where the case for a central bank digital currency (CBDC) in Australia fits into the
 wider international debate over the future of money. To anchor the discussion, I will begin by setting
 out some foundational features of today’s two-tier monetary system that comprises public and private
 money and payment services. I will then turn to the arguments advanced for and against CBDCs
 internationally, and how they translate to an Australian context. Finally, I will provide an update on
 the CBDC pilot project the Reserve Bank is engaged in.
Throughout I will focus on a general purpose (‘retail’) CBDC – a digital claim on the
 Reserve Bank that is widely available to the public. This recognises that a wholesale CBDC would entail
 less change to the status quo, as financial institutions already hold digital claims (‘Exchange
 Settlement balances’) issued by the Bank. And to do justice to the economic and financial stability
 issues raised by CBDCs, I will leave others to weigh in on the many technological, legal and regulatory
 considerations.
[1]
First principles: The foundations of our two-tier monetary system
It is not difficult to encounter wildly competing visions for the future of the monetary system. At one
 extreme is a view that a CBDC could crowd out all alternative forms of money – after all, it would
 be easier to hold in unlimited quantities than physical cash, and unlike commercial bank deposits it
 would be free of credit and liquidity risk. At another extreme is a view that private digital money will
 proliferate at the expense of central bank money in response to growing distrust of public institutions,
 the move to a cashless society, and the inability or unwillingness of public entities to modernise the
 money and payment systems in a manner befitting the digital age. A myriad of other scenarios lie in
 between.
But as we try to imagine how our monetary arrangements could evolve, we might do well to first reflect on
 the underpinnings of today’s two-tier monetary system where central bank and private money
 successfully co-exist. They do so in different forms and for different purposes. Underpinning this system
 is a symbiotic relationship and clear division of roles between public and private sector entities that,
 I will contend, is likely to remain as relevant as ever in the digital age.
Take the co-existence of central bank and private money. Today, central bank money comprises banknotes
 issued to the general public, and digital deposits at the central bank issued to financial institutions
 and government agencies. But in Australia, as elsewhere, this is just a small fraction of the total value
 of money circulating in the economy; most money now consists of digital deposits issued to households and
 firms by regulated private institutions like banks (Graph 1). Alongside the belief that
 privately-issued deposits will be readily accepted in exchange for goods and services, what helps to
 underpin this arrangement is the expectation that privately-issued deposits can be redeemed at a fixed
 value (1:1) at any time into safe and liquid central bank money. That is, 10 digital dollars in a
 private bank account can be converted into a 10 dollar note issued by the central bank. But as with
 any fixed exchange rate regime, the prospect of convertibility has to be credible if the system is to
 hold.
Graph 1
More broadly, the role of central banks in this two-tier monetary system has evolved to include the
 provision of the following public goods:
[2]
First is the responsive and prudent supply of central bank money – banknotes to the general
 public and digital deposits to regulated financial institutions – consistent with the economic
 demands for it. These demands relate to the core functions of central bank money as a reliable medium
 of exchange, store of value and unit of account.
[3]
Second is the use of the central bank balance sheet and operational infrastructure to ensure the
 final and irrevocable settlement of payments between regulated financial intermediaries.
[4]
Third is to combine with other government agencies to underwrite confidence in the monetary system,
 including by forestalling stress in key financial institutions that could otherwise severely disrupt
 economic activity. This is achieved through an effective supervisory and regulatory regime,
 government insurance of customer deposits and the ‘lender of last resort’ powers of the
 central bank.
These public goods provide a foundational level of trust in monetary exchange – trust in the value
 of money, trust in the finality of settlement and trust in the stability of the wider financial system.
 This is not just of historical interest – the recent lived experience with private digital
 currencies has been that a system is more efficient and resilient when there is no fundamental trust
 deficit to solve.
This might then beg the question: why bother at all with private money and payment services? Why
 doesn’t the central bank and government more broadly supply and administer the entire monetary
 system?
The reason is that the needs of the economy are best met when a diverse ecosystem of private entities are
 adapting business models, innovating, driving efficiencies, and offering households and firms choice as
 their money and payment preferences evolve. As I will return to later, central banks don’t have a
 comparative advantage in providing customer-facing services directly to households and firms. But they
 can facilitate better economic outcomes by providing foundational public goods, safeguarding integrity in
 the system and levelling the playing field for the sort of competition in money and payment services that
 leads to more value at a reduced cost for households and firms. A payment stablecoin, fully backed by
 central bank money and government securities, issued by a regulated institution, and held in a digital
 wallet supplied by a non-bank payment service provider, is just one of many possible examples of the
 tiering of public and private money and payment services.
All of this is to say that whatever the functional forms that central bank and private money end up taking
 in the years ahead, there are good reasons to think they will reflect most – if not all – of
 the synergies inherent in today’s two-tier system.
What problems would an Australian CBDC solve?
Internationally, there have been a range of motivations underlying interest in a retail CBDC; to date,
 central banks in emerging market economies have been more favourably disposed than those in advanced
 economies (Graph 2). I will now turn to how these arguments translate to an Australian context.
Graph 2
For some low-income countries where many households and small businesses are left unbanked because of
 constraints on the provision of services, a key motivation for issuing a CBDC has been to
strengthen financial inclusion
. But, in Australia, a very small proportion of households
 are without access to banking and payment services, and it is not obvious how a CBDC would bring them
 into the fold.
A related motivation in some countries has been to
support universal access to public
 money
where banknotes are hard to access or sparingly used. Sweden is one notable example.
 But physical cash in Australia remains accessible and still appears valued by households. Recent surveys
 indicate around 95 per cent of Australians live within 4 kilometres of a cash withdrawal
 point, and around 15 per cent make most of their payments using cash.
[5]
While
 transactional demand for banknotes in Australia is clearly in structural decline, the value of banknotes
 in circulation has risen over the past decade (Graph 3). This suggests that cash is still viewed as
 a useful backup for electronic payments and as a store of wealth in Australia.
Graph 3
Another reason for interest in CBDC is that it could yield
privacy benefits
, including
 better control of personal data, and so encourage more commercial exchange. The argument here is that
 consumers might forgo transactions in private digital money for fear of leaving a digital trail that
 private organisations (and nefarious actors) could readily exploit; by contrast, central banks don’t
 have an incentive to exploit personal data on transactions in CBDC for commercial gain.
[6]
However,
 it is unclear that ‘digital exchange rationing’ of this sort is a first-order issue in
 Australia. Even if it was, a CBDC will give rise to other privacy and security trade-offs, and central
 banks are not seeking to replicate the anonymity features of physical cash that can leave it vulnerable
 to theft and use in illicit activity (issues that cryptocurrency have not addressed). Whether held as a
 token-based bearer instrument or in account-based form, a CBDC would still generate a digital footprint,
 over which the central bank, law enforcement agencies and private service providers would need differing
 degrees of oversight.
[7]
A different proposition is that a CBDC could help to
safeguard monetary sovereignty.
The
 concern here is that a stablecoin or foreign CBDC could fill the vacuum in the domestic monetary system
 in the event that the public had no access to a domestic CBDC and banknotes issued by the central bank no
 longer freely circulated. This would amount to a form of currency substitution, which would complicate
 the conduct of monetary policy and the safeguarding of financial stability. The authorities in China and
 the euro area have been particularly wary of the risk that large and unregulated
 (‘walled-garden’) tech companies could exploit network effects and dominate the monetary and
 payments landscape in the absence of a domestic CBDC. Other countries have expressed concerns over the
 geopolitical implications of a foreign CBDC circulating at home.
However, the history of currency substitution indicates it is more likely to occur in economies where
 institutions and the rule of law are weak, and residents (and foreign investors) have good reason to
 question the integrity of the domestic currency – conditions not apparent in Australia. It is also
 worth noting that lawmakers and central bankers in the United States generally remain unconvinced about
 the case for a CBDC; it is certainly the case that the underlying reasons for the ongoing predominance of
 the U.S. dollar in international trade and finance have little to do with its technical form.
[8]
And
 quite aside from the legal issues involved, I find it next to impossible to conceive of a world where say
 a digital Chinese yuan, Swedish krona or euro (as early movers) emerged as the digital currency of choice
 for Australians.
If the arguments I have listed so far fail to offer compelling support for a CBDC in Australia, let me now
 turn to others that potentially hold more promise.
One is that a CBDC could enhance the
resilience
of the money and payments system. The
 risk of physical disruptions in money and payment services is most pressing for low-income countries with
 limited capacity and that are prone to natural disasters. That said, recent extreme weather events in
 Australia have reminded us that existing electronic and physical cash distribution networks can also be
 severely disrupted on occasion. And cyber-induced disruptions represent a universal risk from which
 Australia is not immune. More generally, if a CBDC expanded the universe of widely accepted money, it
 could provide an additional source of redundancy, including when electronic communication and power
 networks are disrupted. This could include supporting government payments and peer-to-peer transfers in
 an offline environment, with programmability features – including value or time limits and
 restrictions on double spending – to safeguard their use.
A CBDC might also strengthen financial system resilience in other ways. One could be by increasing
 liquidity in markets for real and financial assets, where small-scale fractional ownership is facilitated
 by trade in digital tokens. Another is by reducing settlement risk, just as credit and liquidity risk is
 eliminated when interbank payments are settled across the Reserve Bank balance sheet via Exchange
 Settlement balances. Resilience and efficiency benefits might be largest for transactions in high-value
 unlisted assets where lengthy settlement times are common, such as real estate. One possibility here is
 that the cumbersome operation of private money exchange via escrow accounts could give way to
 ‘atomic’ (instantaneous and final) settlement in CBDC, executed through programmable smart
 contracts. As with the example of offline payments, this concept is being examined further in the Reserve
 Bank’s pilot program. Of course, other types of money, like reserve-backed payment stablecoins,
 might also achieve a similar ends.
A final key reason behind the international interest in CBDC is that it could
increase competition
 and efficiency in the payments system while reducing user costs
. A CBDC might increase
 competition directly, by competing with existing payment methods, and indirectly, by serving as a
 platform that lowers the barriers to entry for firms (especially non-banks) offering new services.
[9]
This
 would be particularly welcome by small merchants, who continue to face significant costs in accepting
 electronic payments.
[10]
And cross-border payments seem particularly ripe for
 disruption − in Australia, as in many advanced economies, cross-border retail money transfers conducted
 via banks can routinely cost 5 per cent or more (well above the G20 target of
 1 per cent) and take up to two business days to settle. This is clearly unsatisfactory and
 explains why cross-border payments are an area of intense focus for policymakers.
[11]
Even
 in the absence of an interoperable CBDC, non-bank money transfer operators in Australia have started to
 drive down costs and speed up settlement times in cross-border payments.
On the broader issue of efficiency, it is worth noting, however, that Australians already enjoy access to
 a real-time payments system – the New Payments Platform (NPP). The NPP was launched in 2018 through
 Reserve Bank and industry collaboration to enable households, businesses and government agencies to make
 payments with rich remittance information and real-time funds availability on a
24/7
basis. Take up of the NPP has compared favourably to other countries
 (Graph 4), and a number of initiatives are underway (including on cross-border payments) to further
 enhance its functionality. It remains an open question as to whether these efforts end up producing
 efficiency outcomes similar to those that could be offered by a CBDC.
Graph 4
From potential benefits to potential costs: Should we worry about a CBDC?
While the prospect of CBDC issuance has aroused considerable international interest, so too has it raised
 concerns. Among these, two are most relevant to Australian circumstances given the significant role of
 banks in our financial system:
the potential to disrupt bank intermediation and monetary policy transmission in normal times
the potential to give rise to bank runs in stressed conditions.
[12]
To be clear, neither risk is unique to Australia. But it bears mentioning that the Australian banking
 system sources 60 per cent of its funding from relatively low-cost deposits (mostly ‘at
 call’), a 20 percentage point increase since the global financial crisis (Graph 5;
 Graph 6). Small and regional banks are even more reliant on deposit funding as they have limited, if
 any, access to wholesale market funding.
Graph 5
Graph 6
The first of these concerns relates to the potential for a CBDC to become the preferred source of
 liquidity holdings for households in normal times, at the expense of commercial bank deposits. Central
 banks could find themselves awash in household deposits they don’t need and can’t usefully
 invest; control over the size of central bank balance sheets would be ceded in the process. Meanwhile,
 commercial banks, which do need deposits to finance their operations, could have their funding and
 lending channels significantly affected, disrupting monetary policy transmission in the process. For any
 given policy rate, banks might have to offer higher deposit rates than otherwise, or raise more funding
 from higher cost and/or more volatile sources. All else equal, this could dampen their ability or
 incentive to lend, and impede their ability to build capital buffers.
[13]
At a minimum, careful
 consideration would need to be given to the transition risks associated with new bank funding and lending
 models resulting from the introduction of a CBDC.
I should acknowledge here that some researchers have proposed possible workarounds, but none are
 straightforward. For instance, banks might opt to compete harder for low-cost deposits on safety grounds,
 by providing loans only to the very highest quality borrowers. But this could disrupt credit supply in
 another way − by starving otherwise creditworthy borrowers of access to funding. Alternatively, some have
 suggested that a CBDC would have little effect on bank funding and lending if central banks extended to
 them plentiful cheap loans as compensation for the loss of household deposits.
[14]
However, a commercial banking system that was largely directly funded by a central bank would overturn
 centuries-long practice and raise a litany of other issues. Separately, while non-bank lenders in
 Australia do not rely on deposit funding and so may be less directly affected by a CBDC compared to
 banks, it is worth recalling that these entities are not prudentially regulated; a material increase in
 their lending market share might therefore necessitate closer regulatory scrutiny.
What if a CBDC was remunerated at an interest rate a little below the policy rate? Might this aid in
 monetary policy transmission when policy rates are at the lower bound?
[15]
It is certainly possible. But
 to be fully effective, it would necessitate phasing out banknotes, as the higher return on physical cash
 (zero) would likely prompt some substitution out of CBDC. Yet major central banks, including the Reserve
 Bank, have committed to continue to make banknotes available to the public. Moreover, most central banks
 have indicated that the use of CBDC as a monetary policy tool is not the focus of their research.
[16]
The
 emphasis instead is on a ‘digital banknote’ that would complement physical cash, not replace
 it. This translates to elastically supplying a CBDC that, like physical cash, pays the holder no
 interest.
A second concern associated with the issuance of a CBDC is that it could threaten financial stability by
 facilitating bank runs if households lost confidence in banks. Access to a risk-free CBDC could increase
 the ability for panicked households to substitute out of bank deposits en masse. As bank deposits could
 be converted into CBDC at the stroke of a keyboard, it would be faster and easier to run into a CBDC than
 to queue outside a commercial bank and bury physical cash in the yard or under the mattress.
There is no universal consensus among researchers as to just how big an issue this might be. Some have
 even gone so far as to suggest that a CBDC could enhance financial stability.
[17]
One
 way could be by providing authorities with better real-time information on deposit flows, enabling them
 to respond faster to runs, and thereby reducing depositors’ incentive to run in the first place. And
 because banks would be well aware of this risk, they might manage liquidity more prudently than
 otherwise. But these arguments are contested, and personally, I don’t find them persuasive.
Rather, the main focus of central banks has been to examine measures that could forestall bank runs
 involving CBDC, or least restrict their impact. These typically involve a combination of limits on
 holdings or transaction sizes, penalties on bank deposit withdrawals (similar to some money market funds)
 and negative interest rates on CBDC in periods of stress. What such measures have in common is an effort
 to restrict the use of a CBDC. To my mind, this raises questions around whether the benefits of a CBDC
 would be mostly forfeited in the process. At a minimum, making banks more robust to runnable deposits in
 the presence of a CBDC seems a topic worthy of more analysis. Budding graduate students take note!
The bottom line here is that much will depend on CBDC design choices, and there are many complex issues
 that would need to be carefully weighed ahead of any decision to proceed with issuing a CBDC.
The eAUD pilot program
To further the Bank’s understanding of the benefits and risks that could follow from the issuance of
 a CBDC in Australia, the Bank has been engaged in a pilot ‘eAUD’ program with the Digital
 Finance Cooperative Research Centre (DFCRC).
[18]
The program is exploring a variety of possible use
 cases and builds on the Bank’s earlier proof-of-concept exercises in CBDC.
[19]
There are two unique features to this eAUD initiative. First, we have not prescribed use cases in advance.
 Rather, the program has been established as a blank canvas for industry to propose their own use cases.
 This recognises that in countries like Australia that already have modern, well-functioning payment
 systems, and where central bank-issued notes are still readily available to the public, the merits of
 introducing a CBDC are less obvious. Second, the pilot phase will entail the Reserve Bank issuing a real
 digital claim to approved use case providers.
In response to our call for submissions, the program has attracted much more interest from industry than
 we anticipated – more than 140 use case proposals from around 80 entities have been
 submitted. The use cases span everything from e-commerce payments, to offline payments, government
 payments, and the trading and settlement of tokenised assets. A wide range of use case providers have
 lodged submissions, ranging from large banks, financial market infrastructure providers and
 consultancies, to small digital asset firms and fintechs.
Our project team is in the process of selecting a number of proposed eAUD use cases to take forward into
 the pilot phase early next year. We would like to thank all those entities that have engaged with us on
 their submissions so far, and look forward to publishing a report on the project around the middle of
 next year.
Concluding thoughts: Revolution or evolution?
As far as monetary economics goes, the introduction of a general purpose CBDC would be revolutionary
 – for centuries, physical cash has been the only source of central bank-issued money to which
 households and non-financial firms have had access. Prior to crossing this Rubicon, a strong public
 interest case would first need to emerge. On balance, we have yet to see that case made in Australia. We
 are not alone here – no other advanced economy central bank has committed to issuing a general
 purpose CBDC. But with our eAUD pilot program in full swing, and changes in the digital economy and money
 and payments landscape occurring at a frenetic pace, the Bank is keeping an open mind.
One distinct possibility is that the next few years prove to be more evolutionary than revolutionary. It
 is not hard to imagine that existing forms of digital money and payments infrastructure continue to
 modernise in a way that captures many of the potential benefits of a general purpose CBDC, but in a
 minimally disruptive way. This could include further advanced functionality in fast payment systems and
 greater direct access for non-bank service providers.
[20]
It might entail connecting these systems
 across national boundaries in order to substantially lower the cost and time involved in cross-border
 transactions, as is now underway in some ASEAN countries. It could include the emergence of
 reserve-backed payment stablecoins and tokenised bank deposits to facilitate atomic settlement of
 financial and real assets. And building on the role that Exchange Settlement balances already play in the
 Australian financial system, it also seems a smaller leap to imagine that a wholesale CBDC would
 circulate more expansively ahead of a general purpose variety.
In the meantime, while we continue to progress our CBDC research program, Australians should be confident
 that they will retain access to banknotes issued by the Reserve Bank for as long as they place value on
 them as a public good.
Endnotes
Thanks to Geneve Bullo for her assistance in
 preparing the graphs in this speech, and to colleagues in Payments Policy Department for comments
 on an earlier draft.
[*]
For an early foray into the Reserve Bank’s
 thinking on some of these and other related issues, see Richards T, C Thompson and C Dark (2020),
 ‘
Retail
 Central Bank Digital Currency: Design Considerations, Rationales and Implications
’,
 RBA
Bulletin
, September.
[1]
For a more detailed exposition of some of these
 concepts, see Bank for International Settlements (2022), ‘The Future Monetary System‘,
 Annual Report, Ch III.
[2]
Government is not irrelevant here – for one
 example, fiat currency draws part of its value from its use in the settlement of debt and tax
 obligations.
[3]
In Australia’s case, this translates to the
 settlement of around $200 billion worth of interbank payments each day via the Reserve Bank
 Information and Transfer System (RITS), Australia’s high-value payments system. RITS is used
 by banks and other approved institutions to settle their payment obligations on a real-time gross
 settlement basis.
[4]
Caddy J and Z Zhang (2021), ‘
How
 Far Do Australians Need to Travel to Access Cash?
’, RBA
Bulletin
, June;
 J Caddy, L Delaney, C Fisher and C Noone (2020), ‘
Consumer
 Payment Behaviour in Australia
’, RBA
Bulletin
, March.
[5]
For a useful review, see Ahnert T, K Assenmacher,
 P Hoffmann, A Leonello, C Monnet and D Porcellacchia (2022), ‘The Economics of Central Bank
 Digital Currency’, ECB Discussion Paper No 2713, August. Privacy preferences can also vary
 widely across countries, as a recent ECB public consultation found: see ECB (2021), ‘ECB
 Publishes the Results of the Public Consultation on a Digital Euro’, Media Release,
 14 April.
[6]
Indeed many observers have noted that
 China’s interest in a CBDC could be partly related to the ability to monitor transactions
 for the purposes of informing social credit assessments. This is clearly not a relevant
 consideration in Australia.
[7]
See most recently Waller C (2022), ‘The U.S.
 Dollar and Central Bank Digital Currencies’, Speech at Digital Currencies and National
 Security Tradeoffs Symposium presented by the Harvard National Security Journal, Cambridge,
 Massachusetts, 14 October. For a neutral treatment of the case for and against a U.S. CBDC,
 see Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (2022), ‘Money and Payments: The U.S.
 Dollar in the Age of Digital Transformation’, January.
[8]
IMF (2022), ‘Behind the Scenes of Central
 Bank Digital Currency’, FinTech Note, 9 February.
[9]
See most recently Gill T, C Holland and G Wiley
 (2022), ‘
The Cost
 of Card Payments for Merchants
’, RBA
Bulletin
, September.
[10]
See Financial Stability Board (2022),
 ‘G20 Roadmap for Enhancing Cross-border Payments: Priorities for the Next Phase of
 Work’, October.
[11]
A CBDC would also create operational issues for
 the implementation of monetary policy, though I generally view these as less material. A full
 exposition of these issues is beyond the scope of these remarks.
[12]
See Ahnert
et al
, n 6.
[13]
Brunnermeier MK and D Niepelt (2019), ‘On
 the Equivalence of Private and Public Money’,
Journal of Monetary Economics
,
 106, pp 27–41.
[14]
Bordo M and A Levin (2017), ‘Central Bank
 Digital Currency and the Future of Monetary Policy’, NBER Working Paper No 23711; Lilley A
 and K Rogoff (2021), ‘The Case for Implementing Effective Negative Interest Rate
 Policies’, in J Cochrane and J Taylor (eds),
Strategies for Monetary Policy
,
 Hoover Institution Press, Ch 2, pp 27–90.
[15]
See Graph 1 and IMF, n 9.
[16]
See, for instance, Keister T and C Monnet
 (2022), ‘Central Bank Digital Currency: Stability and Information’,
Journal of
 Economic Dynamics and Control
, 142, Art 104501; Brunnermeier and Niepelt, n 14.
[17]
See RBA and DFCRC (2022), ‘
Reserve Bank and Digital Finance Cooperative
 Research Centre to Explore Use Cases for CBDC
’, Joint Media Release No 2022-23,
 9 August; RBA and DFCRC (2022), ‘White Paper: Australian CBDC Pilot for Digital Finance
 Innovation’, 26 September.
[18]
RBA (2021), ‘
Project
 Atom: Exploring a Wholesale CBDC for Syndicated Lending
’, December; Bank for
 International Settlements (2022), ‘Project Dunbar – International Settlements Using
 Multi-CBDCs’, March.
[19]
For work the Reserve Bank is doing in this
 area, see RBA (2022), ‘
Payments System
 Board Annual Report
’, Ch 2.
[20]
