BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Sir Leslie Melville: His Contribution to Central Banking in Australia – Canberra
DATE: 02/03/2022
SPEAKER: Canberra
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2002/sp-gov-220302.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Sir Leslie Melville: His Contribution to Central Banking in Australia
I.J. Macfarlane
[
*
]
Governor
Inaugural Sir Leslie Melville Lecture and the formal launch of 

 the Toyota-ANU Public Lecture Series
Canberra
–
22 March 2002
Download
50KB
I would like to start by thanking the Vice-Chancellor – Ian Chubb –

 for inviting me to give this address. We at the Reserve Bank were wondering

 what we could do to commemorate Sir Leslie Melville's centenary,

 so the invitation now gives the two institutions – the Reserve Bank

 and the Australian National University – the opportunity to pay

 tribute jointly to Sir Leslie in his home city, and most importantly in

 his presence.
My address today will not be a biography of Sir Leslie because there are already

 several excellent biographical essays available and, I am pleased to say, a

 full-length book is currently being written.
[1]
Instead, I hope this address will be seen as a general celebration of Sir Leslie

 Melville's contribution to public life in Australia and a vote of thanks

 from his successors for his outstanding and under-appreciated achievements.

 But, notwithstanding this intention, a very brief biographical sketch should

 help to set the scene.
Sir Leslie Melville was born on 26 March 1902, studied economics at

 Sydney University (while also studying as an actuary), and obtained his first

 job in 1924 as Public Actuary for South Australia. In 1929, aged twenty-seven,

 he was appointed Inaugural Professor of Economics at Adelaide University. In

 March 1931, he was appointed as the Economist to the Commonwealth Bank, a position

 he held until 1950 when he became Australia's Executive Director at the

 International Monetary Fund and World Bank. During his central banking years

 he was a prolific writer on economic matters, both academic and practical,

 and contributed significantly to economic debate in Australia and overseas.

 In 1953, he left the Commonwealth Bank to take up an appointment as Vice-Chancellor

 of the Australian National University. In 1960, he was appointed Chairman of

 the Tariff Board, but resigned after two years due to disagreements with the

 Minister for Trade, John McEwen. He subsequently served as Chairman of

 the Commonwealth Grants Commission for eight years until the early 1980's.

 In the 1950's, 60's and 70's he also served three different

 terms as a Board Member of the Commonwealth, and later Reserve Bank.
In assessing Sir Leslie's contribution to Australian public life, pride

 of place must inevitably be given to his contribution to central banking. He

 was wholly occupied with this from the age of twenty-nine till his early fifties,

 and if we add in his years as a board member, he has an association with central

 banking stretching over forty-five years. I think the Vice-Chancellor recognised

 the centrality of this aspect of Sir Leslie's life by choosing me

 to be the speaker here today, so it will figure prominently in the remainder

 of my address. I have another motive for doing so because I want to use Sir Leslie's

 career to help answer a difficult question – how old is central

 banking in Australia? This is something that has perplexed us at the Reserve

 Bank, and has not been definitively answered by the several economic historians

 that have covered the field.
In a strictly formal sense, the present Reserve Bank is the continuing legal entity

 that survives from the old Commonwealth Bank set up in 1912. It would be tempting,

 then, to claim that central banking started at that time and the central bank

 is ninety years old. Unfortunately, the original Commonwealth Bank was a savings

 and trading bank with no central banking responsibilities, and so this legal

 continuity argument will not lead us to the right answer. At the other extreme

 we could say that, since the Reserve Bank as a separate organisation only dates

 from 1960, at the time of the separation of the Commonwealth Bank, central

 banking is only forty-two years old. Clearly this is also false –

 the start of central banking clearly pre-dates separation as is evidenced by,

 among many other things, Professor Giblin's book ‘
The 

 Growth of a Central Bank
’, which was published in 1951.
[2]
So at what date between 1912 and 1960 did the old Commonwealth Bank start to engage

 in what we would clearly define as central banking functions? There are two

 candidates that can be put forward as the correct date. The first is 1924,

 when the Commonwealth Bank took over the note issue function (clearly a central

 banking activity) from the Notes Board, who had in turn taken it over from

 Treasury. The second is around 1930, when the Commonwealth Bank became an important

 player in economic policy debates (in this case debates about the exchange

 rate). If we are to rely on Professor Giblin, who wrote the definitive

 history of the subject which I cited above, it is this latter date which marks

 the start of true central banking in Australia. And, of course, it was at about

 this date that a twenty-nine year old Leslie Melville joined the Commonwealth

 Bank. The history of central banking in Australia and the history of Sir Leslie Melville

 are therefore largely coterminous. If you read through the correspondence files

 in the archives of the Reserve Bank in the thirties and forties you could be

 forgiven for thinking that Melville
was
the central bank. I will say more of that later.
The world was very different when Melville joined the Commonwealth Bank. To the best

 of my knowledge, he was the first economist that they had ever employed, and

 I believe the first economist to be employed full-time anywhere in the Australian

 public sector. In those days the central bank was composed entirely of bankers,

 and the Treasury entirely of accountants. There were good economists in Australia

 at the time – Giblin, Copland, Shann, Mills etc. but they were largely

 confined to the universities. The exception was when Sir Alfred Davidson

 appointed Shann to advise the Bank of New South Wales in 1930, a few months

 before Melville was appointed to the Commonwealth Bank.
[3]
The Commonwealth Bank had resisted appointing an economist for several years despite

 the urgings of the Bank of England to do so. The fact that it finally felt

 the need to do so, and to such an important position, adds weight to the view

 that this point in time, or somewhere near it, should be viewed as the start

 of professional central banking in Australia.
And what a time for Melville to be thrown into the fray. The depression had started,

 the Australian pound had depreciated against sterling and there was intense

 public debate on economic matters. Melville had already played an important

 and public role in these debates in the two years before his appointment, but

 henceforth he would be a policy maker with responsibility rather than a critic

 without responsibility. It is interesting that Melville, who publicly supported

 the devaluation and hence was considered as an expansionist, was appointed

 by an institution whose Chairman – Sir Robert Gibson –

 was the leading deflationist of the day (and opponent of devaluation).
At the Commonwealth Bank, Melville created and led the Economist's Department,

 which advised the Board on monetary policy, just as the present day Economic

 Group of the Reserve Bank does seventy years later. As he built up his team

 he looked out for young economists to add to his staff – one was

 H.C. Coombs, whom Melville recruited in 1935. Virtually from the beginning

 Melville's position was an extremely senior one despite his relative youth.

 Much of what he did would more appropriately be done by a Governor or Deputy

 Governor today. The correspondence files reveal that he was dealing directly

 with Prime Ministers and Treasurers. He was the principal economic advisor

 to the Australian Government at the Imperial Economic Conference in Ottawa

 in 1932 and at the World Economic Conference in London in 1933. On the eve

 of the Second World War, Melville was appointed – together with

 Giblin and Roland Wilson – to the Advisory Committee on Financial

 and Economic Policy, a body whose job was to plan Australia's war economy

 during its early stages.
During the twenty or so years that Melville headed the Economist's Department,

 he must have been conscious of the fact that, while central banking was undoubtedly

 important, it was dwarfed in size by the commercial banking activities of the

 Commonwealth Bank. It is doubtful how much time the Governor and Deputy Governor

 of the day had left over for central banking matters, given the huge number

 of commercial bank branches and staff they had to oversee. In these circumstances,

 it must have been comforting to be able to turn to someone of Melville's

 knowledge and experience.
The next aspect of Sir Leslie's career that I would like to look at is

 his association with the setting up of the Bretton Woods Institutions –

 the IMF and the World Bank (and, but with a long delay, the World Trade Organisation).

 It is hard for recent generations to understand, but this whole venture was

 undertaken for the most idealistic and public-spirited of reasons. It was an

 exercise in international co-operation designed to ensure that the post-war

 world did not degenerate into the isolationism and ‘beggar-thy-neighbour’

 policy making that had characterised the previous twenty years and had contributed

 so much to the depression and the Second World War.
Australia was an enthusiastic participant in these negotiations at first and it is

 no surprise that Prime Minister Curtin chose Melville to lead the Australian

 delegation. Melville had already been in correspondence with Keynes and others

 about international monetary reform from about 1942. This gave him the necessary

 background to lead the Australian delegation to preliminary meetings in London

 in 1944 and then to the United Nations Monetary and Financial Conference at

 Bretton Woods, New Hampshire later in that year. Melville threw himself into

 the task and was extremely effective. The towering intellectual presence behind

 these meetings was Keynes, and there is a letter
[4]
from him attesting to Melville's effectiveness. Keynes said of Melville's

 performance at the Commonwealth Conference that "he upheld the dignity

 and integrity of Australia with the most marked success . . . He handled himself

 most impressively, was clear cogent and never unreasonable, put his point forcibly

 yet moderately, and achieved in my judgement, as much as was humanly possible

 to move matters in the direction he desired. He had quite a difficult task

 and accomplished it supremely well." Despite some later backsliding on

 Australia's part, we became important members of these institutions and

 it was fitting that in 1950, Melville was appointed Australia's Executive

 Director at the IMF and World Bank in Washington.
In view of my earlier comment that in the 1930's and 1940's you could be

 forgiven for thinking Melville
was
the central bank, it comes as a surprise that he was not appointed Governor in 1948.

 Instead the position went to his central banking protégé, Coombs.

 A number of good judges, such as Giblin, thought the best man had been passed

 over.
[5]
Even Coombs thought so too. In a letter to Giblin after being appointed Governor,

 Coombs said ‘Many thanks for your letter of congratulations. As you know,

 I, too, have always thought that Melville should have had this job and have

 given that advice in the appropriate quarter.’
[6]
Coombs retained the highest regard for Melville and wrote effusively, but no

 doubt honestly, to him on his retirement saying ‘in the years you were

 with the Bank, you made a contribution to the theory and practice of central

 banking which is without equal in the world’.
[7]
Sir Leslie succeeded another economist – Sir Douglas Copland –

 in becoming the second Vice-Chancellor of the Australian National University.

 He was ideally suited to this role as he was both a genuine intellectual and

 an experienced administrator and negotiator. He was also devoted to the ideal

 of the Australian National University as a world-class centre of research.

 It is interesting that, without any conscious direction, a close relationship

 seems to have been formed between the Bank and the University. The former has

 provided a Vice-Chancellor (Melville) and a Chancellor (Coombs), while the

 latter has provided virtually all of the university economists who have been

 appointed to the Reserve Bank Board (Professors Swan, Gregory, Pagan and now

 McKibbin).
[8]
I have commented on a number of aspects of Sir Leslie Melville's life,

 but not on the aspect which explains why we are meeting here today. I refer,

 of course, to his remarkable longevity. It is not just that he has lived for

 such a long time – it is that he was prominent in public life from

 such an early age. He was already a well-known and influential economist in

 his twenties. When you read the early correspondence in our archives that I

 consulted in preparation for this talk – the yellowing foolscap

 pages with their uneven typewritten contents and the annotations in immaculate

 copperplate handwriting – you are transported back to a different

 era. It is hard for me to imagine that Sir Leslie actually talked to and

 corresponded with Keynes, who was already a long-dead historical figure when

 I was a student. And there are many more – Sir Ralph Hawtrey,

 Sir Josiah Stamp, Sir Dennis Robertson and Harry Dexter White.

 Not only did he meet these people, he still remembers them and can talk lucidly

 about them and their times.
I think Sir Leslie has made a remarkable contribution to public life in Australia.

 It is hard to believe that one man could have done so many things in the general

 areas of economics, education and public policy making. I could not see it

 happening today. I also find it hard to see how someone who has achieved so

 much is not better known. This I attribute to his natural modesty, and to the

 fact that he was so busy doing things that he didn't have any time left

 over to push himself forward.
But it seems to me that any objective assessment of achievements would place Sir Leslie

 among the most distinguished Australians of the past century. If this were

 Japan, and we had a serious practice of declaring our most distinguished citizens

 as national treasures, I have no doubt that Sir Leslie should be one of

 the first people chosen.
Endnotes
I would like to thank Guy Debelle for his assistance with the speech, Virginia Macdonald

 and Allan Seymour for archival material (all of the Reserve Bank) and Selwyn

 Cornish of the Australian National University for his writings and his advice.
[*]
See Cornish (1993) and (1999) for essays. Cornish is also writing the biography.
[1]
Giblin (1951).
[2]
Appleyard and Schedvin (1988).
[3]
Keynes to Giblin, 24 March 1944, Keynes Papers, Library of Kings College, Cambridge.
[4]
Giblin to Coombs, 23 November 1948, Reserve Bank of Australia Archives.
[5]
Coombs to Giblin, 3 December 1948, Reserve Bank of Australia Archives.
[6]
Coombs to Melville, 13 January 1954, Reserve Bank of Australia Archives.
[7]
The exception was Bruce Williams (1969–81), an economist who was appointed to

 the Board while Vice-Chancellor of Sydney University.
[8]
References
Appleyard RT and Schedvin CB (eds) (1998),
Australian 

 Financiers: Biographical Essays
, MacMillan, Melbourne.
Cornish S (1993), ‘Sir Leslie Melville: an interview’,
Economic Record,
, 207, pp 437–457.
Cornish S (1999), ‘Sir Leslie Melville: Keynesian or Pragmatist’,
History of Economics Review
, 30, pp 126–150.
Giblin LF (1951),
The Growth of a Central Bank: The 

 Development of The Commonwealth Bank of Australia 1924–1945
,

 Melbourne University Press, Melbourne.
