BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: The Global Economic Scene – Sydney
DATE: 02/08/2022
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2002/sp-ag-220802.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
The Global Economic Scene
Malcolm Edey
Assistant Governor (Economic)
Talk to the Australia-Japan Business Outlook Conference 2002
Sydney
–
22 August 2002
Download
100KB
Let me begin by thanking the Japanese Consulate-General and AJEI for the opportunity

 to speak today on the subject of the global economy.
The year to date has been an eventful one, both for the world economy and for international

 financial markets. Broadly speaking, it has been a year of gradual recovery

 after last year's downturn, although recent events have clearly wound back

 some of the optimism seen a few months ago. In my remarks today, I want to

 review the key developments this year and focus on current sources of uncertainty

 concerning the global outlook.
The Situation at the End of 2001
A good place to start is by reviewing the situation as it existed at the end of last

 year. Clearly, 2001 was a very weak year for the global economy (Table 1).
Table 1: GDP Growth
Year-ended December Quarter 2001
March Quarter 2002
June Quarter 2002
United States
0.1
1.2
0.3
Germany
0.0
0.2
0.3
United Kingdom
1.5
0.1
0.9
Japan
−2.0
1.4
Non-Japan Asia
*
0.9
1.5
* GDP weighted, excluding China
We now know that growth in the G-7 economies through the year was negative, the first

 time it had dipped below zero since the early 1980s. Weak outcomes were recorded

 in all the major economies:
The United States was judged by the National Bureau of Economic Research (NBER) to

 have gone into recession in March last year. That assessment now lines up

 fairly closely with the recently revised national accounts data, which show

 US GDP having fallen in each of the first three quarters of last year. In

 passing, it is interesting to note that the September 11 events did not play

 a particularly large role in this. Although there were some sharp falls in

 confidence and spending in the immediate aftermath of those events, the effects

 proved quite temporary and the US economy was beginning to recover by the

 end of the year. Even so, growth through the year as a whole was close to

 zero.
The Japanese economy recorded negative growth during 2001, and close to its weakest

 result in the past decade. In broad terms this was a continuation of Japan's

 disappointing performance of recent years, with ongoing weakness in domestic

 demand being amplified by the effects of the global downturn.
Growth in the Euro area last year was only marginally positive, with the slowdown

 being most pronounced in the largest economies (Germany, France and Italy),

 while there was stronger growth on the periphery.
Finally, the non-Japan Asian region was also clearly affected by the international

 downturn although, as I will draw out later, the region returned to growth

 more quickly than other parts of the world. China's growth, in contrast to

 the rest of the region, looks to have been relatively unaffected by the international

 cycle in the recent period.
In historical terms, how severe was the recent global downturn? I have already mentioned

 one possible metric for answering that question, namely the growth of the G-7

 economies (Graph 1). This shows the early 1980s recession clearly the

 most severe of the past two decades. The comparison between the two more recent

 cases is less clear. Last year's drop in growth was somewhat sharper, in aggregate,

 than the one that occurred in the early 1990s. However, the recessions in Europe

 and the US last year were both relatively mild. The abruptness of the latest

 downturn reflected two factors – a closer synchronisation of economic

 weakness across the major economies last year than was the case in the early

 1990s, and also a much sharper downturn in Japan.
Graph 1
An alternative summary indicator is the estimated growth in the world economy as

 a whole (Graph 2). On this basis, the most recent downturn was unambiguously

 milder than its two predecessors. The relative performance in the recent period

 has been boosted by the increasing weight of fast-growing emerging economies

 such as China and India
[1]
.
Graph 2
The Global Recovery
Most expectations at the end of last year were that 2002 would be a year of recovery

 for the major economies, but that the recovery would be a very gradual one.

 This reflected an assessment that key imbalances in the United States –

 in particular, low corporate profitability and an overhang of capital spending,

 especially IT-related spending – would take some time to correct.
While this broadly remained the prevailing view, perceptions of growth prospects

 did begin to shift quite markedly around the turn of the year. For much of

 last year, forecasters had been increasingly pessimistic, revising down their

 expectations of global growth and pushing back the timing of the expected upturn.

 If we follow the evolution of consensus forecasts month by month, it would

 indicate that the point of maximum pessimism was reached around the end of

 the year. The US economy at that time was still expected to grow during the

 course of 2002, but only modestly, and most people were talking about quite

 weak outcomes in the near term. In fact, forecasts generally incorporated a

 further contraction of US GDP in the fourth quarter of 2001.
In the event, information becoming available in the early months of this year indicated

 that global performance was exceeding expectations, and that in general, a

 recovery was taking hold earlier than had initially been expected. In this

 process, considerable attention has been focused on the United States, traditionally

 regarded as a key driver of the global business cycle.
The US economy returned to growth in the fourth quarter of 2001 and posted strong

 growth in the first quarter of this year. The latest accounts also show that

 the expansion continued in the second quarter, even if the pace was disappointingly

 slow. As is often the case at a cyclical turning point, the inventory cycle

 played a large initial role in the US upturn, but there were a number of other

 important contributing factors. Consumer spending in particular has been remarkably

 resilient to date. Also important has been the expansionary configuration of

 macroeconomic policies (Graph 3). Interest rates in the US were reduced

 to historically low levels during 2001, while discretionary tax cuts and government

 spending increases (along with the automatic stabilisers) have shifted the

 fiscal position in a markedly expansionary direction. Even though there are

 undoubtedly some important imbalances still weighing on the US economy, there

 were promising signs of higher profitability and improving confidence through

 the first half of this year.
Graph 3
In Japan, too, recent trends have been more positive than expected. Indeed, if we

 take the national accounts at face value, Japan was the fastest growing of

 the major economies in the first quarter of this year. Even allowing for some

 possible overstatement in these figures, there have been a number of reasonably

 encouraging signs recently. Industrial production in Japan has been on a rising

 trend since the end of last year, with exports expanding strongly (Graph 4).

 Business confidence has also begun to improve. Of course, none of this means

 that Japan's longer-term structural problems have been resolved, and the upturn

 at this stage remains heavily dependent on continued growth in external demand.
Graph 4
In comparison with Japan, the rest of the east Asian region has experienced a more

 extended upswing, and one more broadly based across domestic and external demand.

 It is not always widely appreciated that the timing of the current upswing

 in non-Japan Asia preceded that in the rest of the world. Excluding China,

 for which we do not have comparable quarterly accounts, the region in aggregate

 has recorded positive growth since the September quarter of last year (Graph 5).

 The figures shown here run only to the March quarter but, on the available

 evidence, the year-ended growth rate will have picked up further in the June

 quarter. Domestic consumer spending has contributed importantly to the upturn

 in a number of countries in the region, along with the recovery in the global

 electronics industry. The Korean economy has performed particularly well during

 this period.
Graph 5
Of the major regions of the global economy, only Europe has been consistently on

 the disappointing side of expectations so far this year. There were some tentative

 signs of improved confidence earlier in the year, but so far this has not translated

 into any significant pickup in growth. Nonetheless, conditions have at least

 not weakened further since late last year. Available data for the June quarter

 probably don't change the picture a great deal, showing some small increases

 in GDP in continental Europe and a somewhat stronger pick-up in the UK.
Clearly, then, there have been some significant disparities in performance this year

 across the main regions. Nonetheless the general trend for the global economy

 in the early part of 2002 was one of emerging recovery and increasing optimism.
Recent Developments and Prospects
As I noted at the outset, more recent developments have raised some doubts as to

 the likely momentum of the global recovery.
One factor that has attracted much attention has been the further recent decline

 in international equity prices (Graph 6). This was not so much a new development

 as a further round of weakness after some already substantial falls. The early

 part of this year had been a period of relative stability in equity markets,

 coinciding with the more general mood of optimism I have already described.

 But there was a renewed deterioration in sentiment around the middle of the

 year. A lot of this was related to disappointing profit results and ongoing

 corporate scandals in the US, rather than being a reaction to broader economic

 data. There was also a general recognition that the profit forecasts required

 to validate existing equity prices were not realistic. Be that as it may, the

 broad US share market indices have now fallen by around 40 per cent from their

 March 2000 peak, with similar or larger falls occurring in the other major

 international markets.
Graph 6
The immediate question raised by a fall in share prices of that sort of order is

 the size of its impact on global growth. The possible channels for such an

 impact could be expected to include effects on household wealth, business and

 consumer confidence, and associated impacts on spending decisions. All of these

 things are quite difficult at this stage to assess. There are some early signs

 that business and consumer confidence in the United States have begun to be

 affected by falling equity prices, but it should be kept in mind that swings

 in confidence can be quite ephemeral. For example, as I noted earlier, the

 loss of confidence following the September 11 events proved to be very short

 lived, and it is quite possible that a period of stability in financial markets

 would see indicators of confidence picking up again.
In addition to the uncertainties raised by these equity market developments, data

 on the real economy have also taken on a softer tone in the last couple of

 months. Of particular note were the second quarter national accounts for the

 US. Not only did these show that growth in the quarter was disappointingly

 slow, but revisions to past figures indicated that the recession had been deeper

 than previously thought. Whether these figures turn out to be an aberration,

 or whether they represent a more persistent weakening of the trend, remains

 to be seen. However, they do suggest a somewhat weaker outlook in the near

 term than had been thought likely a few months ago. Employment growth in the

 US has also been disappointing. On the other hand, indicators of spending and

 production are still showing a modest uptrend.
What are we to make of all these developments? It is reasonable to conclude that

 the widespread optimism seen in the early months of this year was overdone.

 But this does not mean we have to rush to the other extreme and conclude that

 the global recovery is stalling. The broad configuration of economic data at

 present still indicates that the global economy is in a period of gradual expansion.

 Certainly, the pace of growth has been rather uneven to date, both across countries

 and through time, but that was also true in the early stages of the previous

 expansion in the 1990s. In the normal course of events, given the supportive

 policy settings in place around the world, it would be reasonable to expect

 that such a recovery would gradually gain momentum and become more broadly

 based over time. Despite current uncertainties, this remains the most likely

 outcome.
Endnote
It is possible however that, as a result of data limitations in these countries,

 the amplitude of their business cycles is understated, which would imply

 a consequent understatement of the cyclical variation in global GDP.
[1]
