BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Inflation, Productivity and the Future of Money – Melbourne
DATE: 20/07/2022
SPEAKER: Melbourne
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2022/sp-gov-2022-07-20.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Inflation, Productivity and the Future of Money
Philip Lowe
[
*
]
Governor
Address to the Australian Strategic Business Forum 2022
Melbourne
–
20 July 2022
Audio
17.8MB
Q&A Transcript
Download
766KB
Thank you for the invitation to take part in this year's Australian Strategic Business Forum. It is
 very good to be finally back in Melbourne.
This Forum is being held at a critical time. As a country, we face some significant challenges, but we
 have plenty of opportunities as well.
I would like to focus my remarks today on the challenge of bringing inflation back to target. This is an
 important priority for the RBA. And in the spirit of this Forum being about strategic issues, I would
 also like to briefly highlight two other strategic issues that are important to the Bank. The first of
 these is the need to lift productivity growth in Australia. And the second is the changing nature of
 money in our society.
Inflation
After many years in which inflation was something that most people didn't think too much about, it is
 now a topic of everyday conversation. This is understandable as higher prices are putting pressure on
 people's budgets. In many countries, inflation is now running at its highest rate in decades. In the
 United States and most of Europe, inflation is close to 10 per cent (Graph 1); the last
 time that this was the case was in the early 1980s.
Graph 1
In Australia, the latest available reading on CPI inflation is for the March quarter. It showed an
 inflation rate of 5.1 per cent. This was lower than in most other countries, but higher than it
 has been at any time since 1991 and higher than we were expecting (Graph 2). The CPI for the June
 quarter will be released next week and will show a further step-up in Australia's inflation rate.
 Another step-up is expected later this year. We will be publishing a full set of updated forecasts in the
Statement on Monetary Policy
in early August.
Graph 2
The policy challenge for the RBA is to return inflation to the
2–3
per cent target range while, at the same time, keeping the
 economy on an even keel. We don't need to return inflation to target immediately, as we have long
 had, for good reasons, a flexible medium-term inflation target. But we do need to chart a credible
 path back to
2–3
per cent. We are seeking to do this in a
 way in which the economy continues to grow and unemployment remains low.
It is certainly possible to do this, but the path ahead is a narrow one and it is clouded in uncertainty.
 Global factors, including Russia's invasion of Ukraine, are one source of this uncertainty. And
 domestically, the path back to
2–3
per cent inflation will
 be shaped by how the general inflation psychology in Australia evolves and how Australians respond to
 higher interest rates. So these are some of the issues we will be watching carefully over the months
 ahead.
In charting the path back to
2–3
per cent inflation, it is
 useful to understand the origins of the current higher inflation. There are three factors that I would
 like to point to.
The first is the major interruptions to global supply chains that occurred alongside a surge in the demand
 for goods as people switched their spending from services to goods during the pandemic (Graph 3).
 Global supply chains are very long and any interruption anywhere in the chain causes ripples along the
 whole chain. The resulting disruptions have increased firms' costs and constrained their ability to
 respond to the change in expenditure patterns. The result has been higher prices for goods in global
 markets.
Graph 3
The second factor is Russia's invasion of Ukraine, which has caused major disruptions to the global
 markets for energy and food. This has directly affected CPI inflation in all countries and there are now
 also second-round effects as higher energy costs feed into higher costs of transport and production.
The third factor is the surprising strength of demand in many economies. Household spending, in
 particular, recovered more quickly from the pandemic than was expected. This reflected the success of the
 vaccination campaigns in advanced economies and the unprecedented support to household finances from
 fiscal and monetary policies. This policy support meant that, as the health situation improved,
 households had the confidence and the ability to spend. The result has been strong growth in aggregate
 demand and the emergence of tight labour markets in many countries. This has contributed to the higher
 inflation we are now seeing.
Looking at this experience with hindsight, I can understand why some people might conclude that too much
 support was provided by governments and central banks. But it is important to remember the context in
 which this support was provided. At the time the decisions were made, the outlook was dire. In Australia,
 tens of thousands of people were expected to die, our hospitals were expected to be overflowing, many
 people were expected to lose their jobs and deep social and economic scarring was anticipated. It was a
 very scary time.
In this environment, the RBA had a strong insurance mindset. Many other central banks and governments had
 a similar mindset.
In our case, we wanted to do what we could to provide insurance for Australians against the potentially
 catastrophic economic consequences of the pandemic. With the benefit of hindsight, it could be argued
 that we took out too much insurance. But that is the nature of insurance. If the event you were insuring
 against occurs, you are very glad you were fully insured. But if that event doesn't occur, you are
 left questioning your decision and wondering whether you could have saved some money.
Understandably, judgements will differ as to whether we over-insured or not. But in the highly uncertain
 environment of the time, the right policy choice was to err on the side of too much insurance, rather
 than too little insurance. I recognise though that while this approach meant we avoided some damaging
 long-term scarring, it has contributed to the inflationary pressures we are now experiencing.
Looking forward, the path back to
2–3
per cent inflation
 requires an increase in supply and some moderation of demand.
In terms of the supply side, there is a reasonable basis to expect that COVID-related disruptions to
 global supply chains will ease further over the months ahead. Delivery times are improving and some
 supply bottlenecks are easing as firms adjust to the new operating environment. The effects of this and
 some rebalancing in consumer demand are now evident in some global markets, with declines in the global
 prices of products as diverse as computer chips and timber (Graph 4).
Graph 4
More broadly, the prices of many commodities have also declined over the past few weeks, after the sharp
 increases following Russia's invasion of Ukraine. Oil and wheat prices have fallen recently as have
 the prices of a number of base metals (Graph 5). These declines reflect increased concerns about the
 strength of the global economy and some easing of supply problems. If the lower prices are sustained,
 this will ease some of the current global inflation pressures. Even so, it remains possible that there
 will be further interruptions to global supply, once again pushing up prices; the European gas market is
 a particular area of concern here.
Graph 5
On the domestic demand side, the economy has bounced back strongly from the Omicron setback in January.
 This is particularly evident in the labour market. Full-time employment is now around
 7 per cent higher than its pre-pandemic level, and the unemployment rate has declined to
 3.5 per cent – its lowest level in nearly 50 years (Graph 6). Underemployment
 has also declined in recent months and job vacancies are at historically high levels across most
 industries. This all suggests that the growth in demand in the Australian economy is pushing up against
 the capacity of the economy to meet that demand.
Graph 6
For inflation to return to the
2–3
per cent target range, a
 more sustainable balance between demand and supply is needed. Higher interest rates will help achieve
 this through moderating growth in aggregate demand. With the COVID emergency now over, so too is the time
 for emergency settings of monetary policy. The RBA was patient in withdrawing the insurance that was put
 in place during the pandemic. We wanted to ensure a robust recovery and we were very aware that our main
 policy instrument – the cash rate – was at the effective lower bound. That robust recovery
 has taken place and the time for ultra-low interest rates is now behind us given that inflation is high
 and the labour market is very tight.
In light of this assessment, the Reserve Bank Board has increased the cash rate by 125 basis points
 over the past three meetings to 1.35 per cent and expects that further increases will be
 required over the months ahead (Graph 7). These increases will help establish a more sustainable
 balance between demand and supply in the Australian economy.
Graph 7
In considering the outlook for interest rates at its most recent meeting, the Board had an extended
 discussion of the neutral real interest rate.
The concept of the neutral real interest rate is a useful one – it is the real interest rate that is
 neither stimulatory nor contractionary. From a practical perspective, though, one of the challenges that
 we face is that the neutral real interest rate cannot be observed or measured directly. It must be
 estimated or inferred from other information. The staff at the RBA use a wide range of models and
 techniques to do this.
These models produce a range of estimates and the estimates change through time as more information
 becomes available. This means that there is considerable uncertainty around any particular estimate of
 the neutral real rate. Having said that, most approaches suggest that the neutral real rate for Australia
 is at least positive.
A related challenge is that the Board needs to translate any estimate of the neutral
real
rate into an estimate of the neutral
nominal
rate, as the Board sets the nominal cash rate,
 not the real cash rate. This translation requires an estimate of expected inflation. If we take the
 2½ per cent midpoint of the inflation target as a reasonable estimate of medium-term inflation
 expectations, this suggests that the neutral nominal rate is at least 2½ per cent. It would be
 higher than this if medium-term inflation expectations were to shift higher.
I want to emphasise that the concept of the neutral rate is no more than one reference point for the
 Board. It is not the basis of a mechanical rule and we are not on a pre-set path to achieve any specific
 level of the cash rate. Rather, the Board will continue to be guided by the incoming evidence and by its
 assessment of the outlook for inflation and the labour market. It is determined to do what is necessary
 to return inflation to
2–3
per cent.
As I indicated earlier, an important consideration is how inflation expectations and the general inflation
 psychology in the community evolve. If inflation expectations shift up and businesses and workers come to
 expect higher rates of inflation on an ongoing basis, it will be harder to return inflation to target
 – doing so would require higher interest rates and a sharper slowing in spending. It is in our
 collective interest that this does not happen.
At the RBA, we track a wide range of measures of inflation expectations, including those derived from
 surveys and financial prices. These various measures paint the same general picture: higher inflation is
 expected for a short while, before declining back to target. As an example, the measure of inflation
 expectations derived from indexed swaps suggests a high degree of confidence in financial markets that
 the average inflation rate in Australia over the next 10 years will be 2 point something
 per cent (Graph 8). These swaps also suggest the same for the average inflation rate over the
 period between one and five years ahead, though inflation is expected to be higher over the coming year.
Graph 8
This assessment by financial markets that inflation is expected to return to the target range is
 reassuring. But we are also paying close attention to the general inflation psychology of households and
 firms. If people setting prices and wages were to believe that higher inflation will persist, they are
 more likely to push prices and wages up. This could result in a self-reinforcing cycle: one in which
 higher inflation leads to firms being more willing to put their prices up and agree to larger wage
 claims, which then perpetuates the higher rate of inflation, and the cycle repeats itself. This is what
 happened in the 1970s and it ended badly. There is little evidence of such a cycle at present and it is
 important that this remains the case. The RBA is committed to ensuring that the current period of higher
 inflation is only temporary and it will do what is necessary to bring inflation back to target. It will
 be harder to do this if the inflation psychology shifts.
The other general factor that will shape the path back to
2–3
per cent is how households respond to higher interest
 rates and prices. Household spending has so far been resilient, supported by household balance sheets
 that are generally in good shape and stronger income growth. The household saving rate is still higher
 than it was before the pandemic and many households have built up large financial buffers, including
 through payments into mortgage offset accounts (Graph 9). But as my colleague, Michele Bullock,
 discussed yesterday, not all households are alike. Recent borrowers and borrowers with lower incomes tend
 to have smaller buffers. It is also worth remembering that around two-thirds of households do not have a
 home loan. Another significant influence on household spending is housing prices, which are now declining
 in many markets after a large run up. So the situation is complex, with many moving parts, and the Board
 is monitoring it closely.
Graph 9
I would now like to turn briefly to the two other strategic issues I mentioned at the outset.
Lifting productivity growth
The first of these is the need to lift productivity growth.
I raise this issue because many of the challenges we face together as a nation would be made easier by
 stronger growth in productivity. There is a limit to what can be achieved through management of aggregate
 demand. The supply side matters too, and increasingly so.
Stronger productivity growth means a bigger economic pie and higher living standards. It can also put
 downward pressure on prices and inflation. Further, strong productivity growth provides governments with
 a greater capability to fund the many services that the public values. And it is the only way to sustain
 stronger growth in real wages.
On the financial side, stronger productivity growth is likely to mean a higher neutral real interest rate
 and higher real asset values. So savers would receive higher returns and our aggregate wealth would
 increase.
Recent trends in productivity growth have not been particularly encouraging, with average productivity
 growth slowing (Graph 10). Over the decade to 2014, labour productivity growth averaged
 1.2 per cent per year; over recent years, it has been slower than this. In contrast, labour
 productivity growth was in excess of 2 per cent during much of the 1990s. A similar pattern is
 evident in many other advanced economies, and the underlying reasons are complex and not particularly
 well understood.
The strategic challenge for us as a nation is to do what we reasonably can to lift our productivity
 growth. The good news here is that there is no shortage of ideas on how to do this.
Graph 10
The future of money
The other strategic issue that I want to highlight is the future of money and the nature of the monetary
 system.
A lesson from history is that what a society uses as money changes with technology. And once again, recent
 advances in technology are changing the nature of money. Most money these days is digital and is able to
 be moved around very quickly. In Australia, most people can now move money between bank accounts in less
 than 10 seconds any time of the day or the week – not the days that it used to take. And on
 the horizon is the possibility of programmable money, which contains self-executing code that triggers a
 payment when a specified condition is satisfied. Also on the horizon is the potential tokenisation of
 bank deposits, which could facilitate the tokenisation of other physical and financial assets. This, in
 turn, could unlock a wave of innovation and productivity growth across financial services.
A second lesson from history is that money works best when it is backed by the central bank or by the
 state. The backing by a central bank engenders trust, encourages widespread acceptance and provides
 stability in times of stress. In the past, privately backed money has all too often ended in losses for
 investors and financial instability. While I don't think of most of the crypto universe as money, the
 recent collapse of the ‘TerraUSD stablecoin’ serves as a reminder of this point.
The strategic issue here for central banks and governments is how to capitalise on the benefits of the new
 technologies and new forms of money, while at the same time preserving the stability and other benefits
 that come from a system underpinned by central banks. This is likely to require a strong regulatory
 regime to deal with payment stable coins and perhaps central banks issuing a form of digital currency.
 These are issues that we are working on with other regulators in Australia and other central banks, given
 their potential to reshape our financial systems.
Before I finish, I would like to welcome the announcement today by the Government of the details of the
 review of Australia's monetary policy arrangements and the Reserve Bank. The terms of reference are
 appropriate and the Government has appointed a first-class panel. The review is also welcomed by the
 Reserve Bank Board and the Bank's staff. It is an opportunity to take stock of our monetary policy
 arrangements and make sure that they are fit for purpose for the challenges ahead. We look forward to
 participating in this process and listening to and learning from others.
Thank you for listening today and I look to forward to answering your questions.
Endnote
I would like to thank Penny Smith and Ivan
 Roberts for assistance with this talk.
[*]
