BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Changes to the Reserve Bank's Open Market Operations – Sydney
DATE: 22/02/2022
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2022/sp-ag-2022-02-22.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Changes to the Reserve Bank's Open Market Operations
Christopher Kent
[
*
]
Assistant Governor (Financial Markets)
Remarks to the Australian Financial Markets Association
Sydney
–
22 February 2022
Audio
37.2MB
Q&A Transcript
Download
446KB
In 2020, the Reserve Bank adjusted its open market operations (OMO) in response to changing conditions in
 money markets, including those brought about by the Bank's monetary policy actions. It is now time to
 make further changes to OMO to ensure that the benefits of these operations are preserved as conditions
 evolve over time. The purpose of my talk today is to outline our plans for OMO and the reasoning behind
 them.
Background
At the onset of the pandemic, extreme uncertainty and the prospect of a significant decline in economic
 activity led to dislocation in global financial markets and a surge in the demand for liquidity. The
 Reserve Bank met that demand with an expansion in our OMO, increasing the size and lengthening the terms
 of the repurchase operations (repos) (Graph 1). The Bank also moved away from auctions in which the
 repo rate was determined by banks bidding for fixed quantities of liquidity. Instead, since April 2020,
 the Bank has been filling bids for liquidity (at the Bank's preferred terms) that are at or above a
 predefined hurdle rate (currently the cash rate target).
[1]
In this way, the OMO repo rates are fixed and
 the amounts dealt at OMO have been determined by the demand for this source of liquidity (Graph 2).
 This approach has been effective at addressing some pronounced shifts in demand.
Graph 1
Graph 2
There was an initial surge in demand for liquidity from OMO, which saw the Reserve Bank's repo book
 peak at around $100 billion in June 2020. The repo book then declined and is currently around
 $10 billion, well below pre-pandemic levels. This decline in the demand for liquidity from OMO makes
 sense. In particular, exchange settlement (ES) balances rose significantly as a result of the Term
 Funding Facility (TFF) and the bond purchase program (Graph 3).
[2]
This substantial rise in banking
 system liquidity means that banks have less need to obtain short-term funds and much greater capacity and
 willingness to lend them. Given the reduced demand for liquidity from the Reserve Bank's OMO, we
 shortened our preferred terms for OMO to between one and three months, with the average term to maturity
 of new repos declining to around seven weeks. We also reduced the frequency of OMO from daily to
 weekly.
[3]
Graph 3
The Reserve Bank's balance sheet is likely to remain large for some time yet, because funding provided
 under the TFF will not mature until June 2024 at the latest and the Bank's holdings of government
 bonds will mature over many years. Accordingly, the supply of ES balances is likely to exceed demand for
 an extended period. The demand for liquidity from OMO is, therefore, likely to remain low.
Despite the reductions in the size, maturity and frequency of OMO, they remain an important part of the
 Reserve Bank's framework. OMO are a source of short-term liquidity for individual financial
 institutions, which for various reasons don't always have access to liquidity as readily as others
 (see below). OMO also provides a back-stop to the banking system as a whole in case there is a sudden
 broad-based increase in demand for liquidity. In other words, OMO can quickly help to relieve pressures
 in short-term money markets in the event of any unforeseen tightening in liquidity conditions. Reflecting
 these benefits, the Reserve Bank will continue to conduct OMO.
Changes
However, we are looking to adjust our operations in a number of ways. These changes are intended to ensure
 that OMO continues to provide the benefits I've just described, including in the face of changes that
 are likely to affect money markets in the future. I'll first describe the planned changes and then
 explain why we are pursuing these.
The interest rate on OMO repos will change to a floating rate, which at this stage we plan to base on
 the average cash rate target prevailing over the term of the repo. Some other central banks already
 use floating rates in their liquidity operations, including the Bank of England and the European
 Central Bank.
[4]
Before we adopt floating rate repos, the Reserve
 Bank is looking to hear from market participants on the extent of adjustments that may be required to
 their systems to accommodate floating rates. Hence, we will allow for an appropriate transition
 period before making this change.
In the meantime, the Bank will continue to apply a fixed hurdle rate for OMO. However, this hurdle
 rate will change from the current cash rate target to the rate on term-matched overnight indexed
 swaps (OIS) plus a modest spread. Initially this spread will be around 5 basis points, but
 subject to change depending on market conditions. The Bank will post the relevant hurdle rate for
 each preferred term with the announcements of our OMO dealing intentions.
The maximum tenor of OMO repos will typically be four weeks, although longer terms may be offered if
 and when warranted by market conditions.
The shortening of OMO tenors will take effect immediately. Setting the hurdle rate as a spread to OIS will
 be effective from 30 March 2022; the cash rate target will remain the OMO hurdle rate until then. As
 already mentioned, the timing of the change to floating rate repos will be announced after we receive
 feedback on this aspect of the plan; we'll be in touch with relevant market participants in due
 course.
Reasons for change
I'll now turn to the reasons for these changes. First, however, I need to emphasise that these are
 operational adjustments and do not in any way provide guidance on the future path of monetary policy.
Now that the Bank has ceased purchases under the bond purchase program, the Bank's balance sheet will,
 in time, gradually start to decline.
[5]
In this environment, liquidity will remain ample for
 some time and most market participants are expected to continue to find it easy to source liquidity from
 private markets rather than the Reserve Bank. However, as mentioned earlier, OMO remains an important
 source of liquidity for some financial institutions. It is also a flexible way to quickly respond to
 liquidity pressures that might emerge from time to time across the banking system more broadly. It is
 important that the design of OMO remains appropriate to meet those objectives yet flexible enough to
 adapt to the liquidity environment as it evolves.
A key consideration in our OMO design is how to determine the hurdle rate. As I've mentioned, this is
 quite different to the pre-pandemic period, when the Reserve Bank targeted the
quantity
of
 liquidity to be provided through OMO, and repo rates were determined through a competitive auction
 process. Because the Reserve Bank no longer targets a set amount of system liquidity, there is no clear
 rationale for setting an OMO auction of a specific size. Instead, by setting the
price
of
 OMO liquidity, and filling bids at this level, the auction size automatically adjusts to any changes in
 demand, whether that demand is localised to a handful of banks and financial institutions, or is more
 widespread across the system.
Given the high level of system liquidity at present, most market participants find it relatively easy to
 source short-term liquidity without needing to use OMO. In this environment, it makes sense for the
 hurdle rate for OMO to be set above prevailing market rates in order to encourage market participants to
 use their existing liquidity or to tap into private markets instead. But the hurdle rate should not be so
 high that it discourages the use of OMO in the event of an unexpected broad-based increase in liquidity
 demand, when other sources of short-term liquidity may be very expensive or unavailable. Furthermore, we
 continue to see regular OMO participation from institutions that don't have large ES balances, and
 are less well connected to private markets, including because they might use collateral that is less
 widely accepted. OMO remains an important source of liquidity for these institutions in normal times, and
 the OMO hurdle rate should not be set so high that this liquidity becomes unduly expensive.
Looking ahead to the time when short-term money market rates eventually rise, it will no longer be
 appropriate to continue with a repo rate that is determined based on the cash rate target prevailing on
 the day of the OMO. If the OMO repo rate were to be below short-term money market rates of an equivalent
 term, demand for liquidity at the Bank's OMO would rise noticeably, potentially leading to
 destabilising moves in other markets. The move to base the OMO repo rate first on OIS plus a spread,
 and in time to a floating rate based on the cash rate target, will avoid such a situation.
Turning to our OMO tenors, in most circumstances OMO repos of four weeks or less will be sufficient to
 provide liquidity to eligible counterparties if they need it. Since the Bank will continue to fill OMO
 bids that meet the hurdle rate, and offer preferred terms with maturity dates that align with subsequent
 OMO auctions, participants will be able to roll their outstanding repo positions with the Reserve Bank.
 Of course, institutions can source liquidity from private markets for terms longer than four weeks as
 desired.
Conclusion
OMO remains an important part of the Reserve Bank's monetary policy toolkit. Over the past two years,
 it has complemented our other policy measures in providing accommodative financial conditions and
 supporting the economy. The operational changes that I have outlined today do not provide any guidance on
 the future path of monetary policy. Rather, they will ensure that OMO remains fit for purpose as
 liquidity conditions, the economic outlook and the Bank's monetary policies evolve. The shortening in
 the maximum typical terms for repos to four weeks will start with tomorrow's OMO. The use of
 term-matched OIS rates (plus a modest spread) for the repo rate will start from 30 March 2022.
 The timing of the switch to a floating repo rate will be determined after we receive feedback from market
 participants.
Endnotes
I thank Sean Dowling for his excellent assistance
 in preparing this material.
[*]
Prior to the
COVID-19
pandemic, the RBA used OMO to closely manage the supply of
 liquidity in order to ensure that the cash rate traded near to the target set by the RBA Board.
 The RBA offered a set amount of liquidity at OMO, and the price that counterparties paid (the
 repo rate) was determined through a competitive auction process. For more information, see
 Domestic Markets Department (2019), ‘
The
 Framework for Monetary Policy Implementation in Australia
’, RBA
Bulletin
, June.
[1]
For a discussion of the mechanisms at work here,
 see Debelle G (2020), ‘
Monetary Policy in
 2020
’, Australian Business Economists Webinar, 24 November.
[2]
See Dowling S (2021), ‘
Recent
 Changes to the Reserve Bank's Liquidity Operations
’, RBA
Bulletin
,
 December.
[3]
The interest rate on the Bank of England's
 Indexed Long Term Repo is the average Bank Rate over the term of the repo plus a spread. For
 details, see Bank of England (2022), ‘Bank of England Market Operations Guide: Our
 Tools’, 31 January. Available at
 <https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/markets/bank-of-england-market-operations-guide/our-tools>.
 The interest rate on the European Central Bank's Long Term Refinancing Operations are indexed
 to the Main Refinancing Operation repo rate.
[4]
The decision regarding possible reinvestment of
 maturing bonds will be made at the May Board meeting.
[5]
