BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Summary
DATE: 14/07/2022
SPEAKER: Glenn Stevens
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2014/sp-gov-220714-summary.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech Summary
Challenges for Economic Policy
Glenn Stevens
Governor
Address to The Anika Foundation Luncheon
Supported by Australian Business Economists and Macquarie Bank
Sydney
–
22 July 2014
View the speech
Audio
27.98
MB
Q&A Transcript
This speech discusses the challenges of dealing with, and then recovering from, the

 global financial crisis in 2008. It suggests that policies implemented at that

 time were effective in averting a ‘potential catastrophe’ but that

 fostering a strong economic recovery has been more difficult.
From an international perspective, the speech looks in detail at the effectiveness

 of policies implemented to generate a robust economic recovery following the

 global financial crisis. It notes that there has been some progress in fixing

 banks’ balance sheets, and although this remains a work in progress,

 achieving this is a necessary condition for financial recovery. The use of

 fiscal policy to support economic growth is noted to have been restrained by

 the fragile state of public finances in many of the crisis-affected countries.
It then turns to the role of monetary policy in supporting the economic recovery

 and acknowledges that this policy had challenges of its own. The role of quantitative

 easing as a means of easing policy by lowering long-term interest rates, and

 reducing the cost of capital for the economy, is considered. The speech suggests

 that financial conditions globally have been ‘extraordinarily accommodative’

 but that the impact on risk-taking in the real economy cannot yet be determined.

 In addressing the limits of monetary policy, the speech highlights that it

 cannot make people take on new business risks.
The speech concludes by suggesting that the subdued ‘animal spirits’

 in the economy are likely to improve at some point. It considers measures that

 can be implemented to help this happen more quickly. It notes that whilst monetary

 policy is unlikely to be able to support an acceleration of ‘animal spirits’,

 the G20 agenda on growth could provide considerable help. And then, the speech

 suggests, highly accommodative financial conditions could have a more powerful

 effect in engendering real growth.
View the speech
