BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Monetary Policy and the Economy
DATE: 14/06/2022
SPEAKER: Philip Lowe
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2022/sp-gov-2022-06-14.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Podcast
Monetary Policy and the Economy
Philip Lowe
Governor
7.30
, ABC
14 June 2022
–
Online
Download
489KB
Leigh Sales
Governor, welcome to the program.
Philip Lowe
Thanks Leigh. It's great to be with you.
Leigh Sales
These are your first public remarks since the 50 basis point rise. I wanted to

 immediately ask therefore, why did the Reserve Bank go so hard? It was a little bit unexpected.
Philip Lowe
Well I think Australians need to prepare for higher interest rates. We had emergency settings

 during the pandemic – that was the right thing to do – but the emergency is over and it's

 time to remove the emergency settings and move to more normal settings for monetary policy. The other

 consideration was that inflation is high – it's too high. At the moment it's

 5 per cent, and by the end of the year I expect inflation to get to 7 per cent.

 That's a very high number and we need to be able to chart a course back to 2 to

 3 per cent inflation. I'm confident that we can do that, but it's going to take time.

 And with inflation being as high as it is and when interest rates are as low as they are, we felt it was

 important to take a decisive step to normalise monetary conditions and we did that at the last meeting.
Leigh Sales
I'll ask about inflation in a bit more detail in a second. But I think the key question a

 lot of viewers would have is how far are rates going to rise and how quickly?
Philip Lowe
Well it's going to be determined by events, isn't it. I think it's reasonable

 that the cash rate gets to 2½ per cent at some point. And I say that because the midpoint

 of

 our inflation target is 2½ per cent. So an interest rate of 2½ per cent in

 inflation-adjusted terms is a real interest rate of zero, which in historical terms is a very low number.

 And I would expect that over time we want an average inflation-adjusted interest rate to be more than

 zero.
How fast we get to 2½ per cent, and indeed whether we get to 2½ per cent,

 is going to

 be determined by events. The Reserve Bank Board meets every month. We have at our disposal a huge wealth

 of data to analyse at each of our meetings when we decide how fast we need to go and how far we need to

 go.
Leigh Sales
After the RBA October Board meeting last year you said that rates would not rise before 2024.

 In May the RBA lifted rates by 25 basis points and this month by 50. What changed from last October?
Philip Lowe
What we've said right through the last two years was, and this is important, if the

 economy evolved as we expected, interest rates were unlikely to increase until 2024. So for most of the

 past two years, we thought that growth would be slow to recover, that inflation would stay fairly low,

 and that there'd be a long tail from the pandemic. And given that, we thought interest rates would

 need to stay where they were until 2024. So sometimes my comments get interpreted as me having made a

 promise or a very strong statement that interest rates would stay where they were to 2024. In our own

 communication, our own way of thinking, it was very much a conditional statement – if the economy

 evolved as we'd expected, we'd keep rates where they were until 2024. But the economy didn't

 evolve as we expected. It's been much more resilient and inflation has been higher. And we needed to

 respond to that.
Leigh Sales
What would you say to people watching who feel rattled because they think 'well, I made

 borrowing decisions based on what was said last October and now it's changed so I feel stressed, I

 feel worried about where it's going'?
Philip Lowe
I understand that people will make borrowing decisions based on our communication, and people

 took out loans that they may not have otherwise taken out. I also point to the fact that the

 economy's done remarkably well. The unemployment rate is at a 50 year low, a higher share of the

 population has a job than ever before, households have built up very large financial buffers. Over the

 past couple of years people have put away an extra $250 billion – it's a lot of money, and

 the saving rate is still high, and the number of people who've fallen behind in their mortgages is

 actually declining, not rising.
So there's a lot of resilience in the household sector. At the individual level, some people have

 taken out loans that they may not have wanted to take in retrospect, but the overall picture, which is

 really very much the focus of the Reserve Bank, is of a pretty resilient economy.
Leigh Sales
When the RBA makes decisions about whether to raise rates – I know of course,

 you're looking at the big picture about cooling down inflation and so on – are you also

 thinking about things like how many households are going to struggle to meet their mortgage repayments if

 you rise by say 25 or 50 basis points?
Philip Lowe
We certainly are and we spend a lot of time looking at the disaggregated data because we know

 that even the increases in interest rates so far are putting pressure on some families' budgets.

 They're coping with higher interest rates, higher fuel prices, higher food prices, so we know already

 for some households they are finding it difficult.
I also know there are some households who welcome higher interest rates. For the past four or five years,

 each week I would get letters from people complaining that interest rates were so low it was hurting

 their finances. So different households are in different positions, and the Reserve Bank staff spend a

 lot of time trying to understand that. At each of our Board meetings we discuss the various experiences

 of households.
At the end of the day, though, our responsibility is a national one. We want to make sure that inflation

 is low and stable, the country gets to full employment, the financial stability of the country is

 preserved, the country has high quality banknotes, and we provide high quality banking services to the

 government. So that's our big picture. Against that big picture, we have to look at the individual

 households and we spend a lot of time, as I said, looking at the disaggregated data and I understand that

 it's not easy for many people at the moment.
Leigh Sales
Financial markets are factoring in a $1,000 increase per month in mortgage repayments by

 the end of next year. Would the RBA really raise rates that high and put households under that much

 stress?
Philip Lowe
We'll do what's necessary to get inflation back to 2 to 3 per cent. As

 I said, I think by the end of the year inflation will get to close to 7 per cent, and we need

 to chart a course to bring it back down. We don't need to get it back down straight away.

 We've long had a flexible inflation target in Australia – we can look through the swings in

 inflation – but what we've got to do is make sure inflation comes back to 2 to

 3 per cent. And it's unclear at the moment how far interest rates will need to go up to get

 that. I'm confident inflation will come down over time but we'll have to have higher interest

 rates to get that outcome and how much higher remains to be determined.
Leigh Sales
The RBA has noted that there are external factors helping drive inflation such as the war in

 Ukraine, global supply issues. What happens if you raise interest rates and inflation doesn't come

 down?
Philip Lowe
I think eventually it will come down and partly it will come down because of the global

 factors. Over the past year, the petrol price in Australia has gone up more than 30 per cent,

 so even if the current level of petrol prices stays where it is, the rate of change goes from

 30 per cent to zero. And that will help bring down the headline rate of inflation.
Another thing that's going to help is that the supply side problems in the global economy are being

 resolved. We've seen just recently a big pick-up in production of cars around the world, and chip

 producers are responding so computer chip prices are coming down. So we're seeing the global economy

 respond to some of the supply-side problems – that will help bring prices down, at least the rate

 of inflation down, and if oil prices don't keep going up the inflation rate goes to zero for those

 commodities.
So inflation will come down for those reasons but it will also come down because of the higher interest

 rates. At the moment, the spending pressure in the economy is putting pressure on capacity. You see this

 in lots of areas in the labour market at the moment. Almost every business that I speak to says it's

 very hard to hire workers. We've seen in the infrastructure space, state governments delay some

 spending because they can't find the resources and, in construction, many firms are at full capacity.

 So the current rate of spending in the economy is putting pressure on the capacity of the economy –

 the ability of the economy to provide the goods and services. Over time, higher interest rates will get a

 better balance there. And when there's a lot of pressure on capacity, prices go up and higher

 interest rates will establish a better balance between spending and the ability of the economy to produce

 goods and services.
Leigh Sales
I think you said earlier that you would anticipate inflation would be at about

 7 per cent cent in the back half of the year. When do you anticipate that it would start to

 come off?
Philip Lowe
By the first quarter of next year. The peak will be in the December quarter this year and by

 the time we get into the second half of next year, inflation will clearly be coming down, but in the

 first quarter, we'll see lower rates of headline inflation.
Leigh Sales
Other than interest rates, what other factors are likely to drive the Reserve Bank's

 thinking on interest rates? For example, if housing prices fall significantly, would that play a role in

 what you decide to do?
Philip Lowe
Not directly. We don't target housing prices, nor would it make sense to do so. But we

 know that swings in housing prices affect people's consumption decisions. For many people, if the

 value of the house is falling, they're going to spend a bit less. So that's the prism we look at

 this through. We don't target housing prices and I think … I know the banking

 system's very strong at the moment. So we're not worried that declines in housing prices will

 affect the banking system. So it's really what effect does it have on household consumption.
So we've got declining housing prices, but we've got to remember as well that households have

 saved this extra $250 billion and the current rate of saving is very high. And unemployment is low

 and the number of job vacancies at the moment is extraordinarily high. So there are a lot of other

 factors that are influencing consumption other than housing prices and our job is to work out what the

 balance is amongst all those factors.
Leigh Sales
We've seen financial markets here today and in the US tank on fears of an aggressive US

 interest rate rise when the Federal Reserve meets later this week. There's also fears of a global

 recession. What are you anticipating the Australian economy in the context of the world economy is going

 to look like in the next six to 12 months?
Philip Lowe
We're expecting the Australian economy to continue to grow pretty strongly over the next

 six to 12 months. There's still a bounce back from all the COVID restrictions. People are

 spending in a way that they weren't able to do last year. People have got their savings that I've

 talked about to draw on and the current rate of saving is still quite high. So it's quite plausible

 that saving patterns return to where they were before, so even if income growth is a bit weaker people

 have the financial capacity to keep spending.
There's a big backlog of construction work to be undertaken and the number of job vacancies is

 extraordinarily high, so people can be confident the jobs will be there and in that environment people

 will keep spending.
Leigh Sales
Did the Federal Government with its welfare support during the pandemic and the RBA with its

 rate cuts overstimulate the economy and is that why you're now being compelled to raise interest

 rates so fast and so far?
Philip Lowe
It's a really good question and one we've been thinking a lot about, particularly in

 terms of monetary policy, but perhaps I can take you back to the dark days of the pandemic. Back in

 February and March 2020, there were credible predictions that tens of thousands of Australians would be

 dead within a few months, that our hospitals will be overfull, that the unemployment rate would reach

 15 per cent, that there'd be deep economic and social scarring in the society, and

 there'd be a generation of lost opportunity. That was the environment in which we were making

 decisions. And sometimes it's easy to forget that given that the economy is doing well at the moment.

 But that was the environment in which we're operating.
The Reserve Bank strategy at the time was twofold. First, to build a bridge to the other side. We were

 looking into the chasm and that was very scary. We wanted to build a bridge to the other side. And the

 other thing we wanted to do was provide some insurance, some economic insurance for the country, that if

 the really bad outcomes were going to eventuate, that we would be there and we would be able to support

 people.
So we wanted to provide insurance. And it's an open question – the one that you ask – did

 we provide too much insurance? It's hard to know. But that's the nature of insurance, isn't

 it? You take out insurance against a very bad event. A very bad event occurs, and you're very glad

 you took out the insurance. But the bad event doesn't occur and then you think ‘well, I could

 have saved some money here, I didn't need all this insurance’. My view is that broadly the

 country got it right.
We were facing incredibly scary, damaging times. We took out a lot of insurance. I think it was the right

 thing to do, but I accept that others will have a different view and the Reserve Bank is committed to

 learning from that experience. We're undertaking a series of reviews about how we responded through

 that period and we'll publish those over coming months.
We took out insurance. Maybe we took out too much but in the time that we faced and the decisions that we

 had to take, I think was the right thing to do.
Leigh Sales
I appreciate that you don't want to be a political commentator, but what kind of

 government policy settings would put fiscal policy in line with what the RBA is trying to do with

 monetary policy?
Philip Lowe
I'm not particularly concerned about a lack of alignment between monetary and fiscal

 policy. I've already had a couple of meetings with the new Treasurer. I know he is as committed as I

 am to bringing inflation back to the
2–3
per cent range. So

 I think over the next little while there'll be close alignment between fiscal and monetary policy. I

 have no concerns there.
The issue that I think is more important for us to focus on is not one for monetary policy, it's how

 as a society we're going to pay for the increasing demands on the public purse. Understandably, the

 society wants the government to finance spending on a whole range of social services including

 disability, aged care, education and defence. So there are increasing demands on the public purse.

 It's harder to find out how are we going to pay for that.
So the options, as Stephen Kennedy, the Treasury Secretary, talked about last week, we can make sure the

 economy grows very strongly, so that the pie is bigger and so there is more funding for everything.

 That's the best option. Another option is to cut back in some other areas, but that's pretty

 hard, isn't it? And the third option is to raise more revenue through higher taxes and that comes

 with complications as well. So that's the bigger fiscal issue. How do we meet the demands that

 society is putting on the public purse to provide the services that many of us want. In the short run

 I'm are not so much worried about the lack of alignment between fiscal and monetary policy - that can

 be worked out.
Leigh Sales
Governor, we appreciate your time today. Thank you very much.
Philip Lowe
Thank you very much.
