BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Opening address at Banking 2022 Conference
DATE: 11/03/2022
SPEAKER: Philip Lowe
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2022/sp-gov-2022-03-11.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Opening address at Banking 2022 Conference
Philip Lowe
Governor
Banking 2022 Conference
Sydney
–
11 March 2022
Audio
15.1MB
Philip Lowe
Good morning, everyone and thank you very much for that introduction. I'd like to echo your
 comments, at how good it is for everyone to be back together again. This conference had been
 postponed a couple of times earlier because of COVID, so it's really good to be able to be back
 in a room with people and let's hope the health situation allows that to continue.
The ABA has set a challenging theme for this conference; that's planning for the future. The
 events of the past couple of years, and particularly the events of the past couple of weeks, served
 as a very good reminder of how hard it is to know what the future brings. But we can be sure that
 tomorrow will arrive, and we can be sure we need to plan for it. So I think it's an appropriate
 but challenging theme the ABA has set for this conference.
This morning, I'd like to talk about three issues on which I think we all need to plan. The first
 is higher interest rates. The second is a change in the nature of money. And the third is climate
 change and a restructuring of our energy system. All incredibly important issues and all ones that we
 need to plan for.
Before I talk about those three issues, though, I want to remind you about the resilience of the
 Australian economy. It's important because having a resilient economy gives us a really
 strong base on which to plan for the future. We saw this resilience in the December quarter national
 accounts. There was a very strong bounce back in GDP following the Delta contractions mid-year. The
 level of GDP in Australia is now 3.5 per cent above its pre-COVID level. No other major
 advanced economy is in that position. I'm expecting the economy to grow by more than
 4 per cent this year, and return to something quite close to trends next year. So, of the
 advanced major economies, we're in a better position than any other. It's important that we
 remember that and it should give us confidence about the future.
The resilience is also evident in the labour market. This time last year we thought the unemployment
 rate in Australia right now would be 6 per cent. It's been 4.2 per cent for
 the past couple of months. There's an extraordinary number of job vacancies at the moment, and
 job ads are very high, so we're expecting the unemployment rate to fall further over the course
 of this year. And later this year, we expect at the moment that the unemployment rate will fall below
 4 per cent and will stay below 4 per cent next year.
If that's what happens, it will be the first time since the early 1970s that Australia has had an
 unemployment rate below 4 per cent. It will be a very significant achievement and it speaks
 to the effectiveness of a combination of monetary and fiscal support. Together monetary and fiscal
 policy have worked and they've worked very effectively. It's really remarkable that two years
 into a global pandemic, Australia's on the cusp of the lowest unemployment rate in generations.
 Who would've thought that would've happened? In the middle of 2020 people were saying the
 unemployment rate in Australia could be 15, 20 per cent, and that there'd be deep and
 protracted scarring of our labour market as people lost jobs and opportunity, they wouldn't
 recover. Yet here we are on the cusp of the lowest unemployment rate in generations.
The resilience is also evident in household balance sheets. Households have built up a lot of extra
 savings during the pandemic. Most of us couldn't spend as we used to spend, and the government
 gave people money to compensate for their loss of income. So people had their income maintained and
 they couldn't spend, savings went up. So there's almost $250 billion of additional
 savings over the past couple of years. That's a huge amount of money. The median borrower now is
 two years ahead of their mortgage payments. Four or five years ago, the median borrower was one year
 ahead of their mortgage payments. So that's a big shift from one year to two years in just a
 short period of time. We're also seeing at the moment that loan arrears rates are coming down;
 they're fairly low and they're becoming lower. And many households have been able to pay down
 their credit card debt.
The banks supported their borrowers and their customers during the dark days of the pandemic and most
 borrowers are now back on track. Obviously not everyone has a big buffer and some people are still in
 difficulty, but most borrowers are in a better position than they were two years ago.
So you put together the resilience of the economy, the resilience of the labour market, the stronger
 balance sheets of households and the strong balance sheets of Australian banks, and I think we can
 have some confidence that we're planning for the future with a strong base, and we can look
 forward to reasonably strong growth over the course of this year.
So that's the backdrop. I'd now like to talk to the first of the three issues we need to plan
 for and that's higher interest rates. The last time the RBA increased the cash rate was in
 November, 2010. That's more than 11 years ago. So there are a lot of borrowers, and I'd
 say frontline lenders as well, who have not had any experience at all of a rising interest rates
 cycle. For many borrowers, that's going to come as quite an unwelcome development. Although I
 know from the letters that I get every day when I turn up at work, that many depositors have a
 different view and there will be part of the community that will welcome higher interest rates. So
 we've got to remember that as well.
The Reserve Bank Board have said they will not increase the cash rate until inflation is sustainably
 in the 2 to 3 per cent range. We're not yet at that point. Headline inflation is
 3.5 per cent so that's higher than it has been for some time, but underlying inflation
 is just 2.6 per cent. That's just above the midpoint of the 2 to
 3 per cent target range. That's the first time in seven years we've been above the
 midpoint of the target range. So we still have modest inflation here and we're only at
 2.6 per cent on the back of really unprecedented disruptions in global supply chains, which
 have pushed up the prices of many goods. It's also relevant that aggregate wages growth is still
 running around a 2¼ to 2½ per cent mark. That's where it was before the pandemic, and
 before the pandemic, that type of wage growth was delivering inflation consistently below
 2 per cent.
So wage growth is still modest and some of the increase in prices that we've seen is from supply
 chain disruptions that we would expect to reverse over time. So we're not yet at the point where
 we can conclude that inflation is sustainably in the 2 to 3 per cent range, but recent
 developments have moved us closer to that point. Inflation's been higher than we're
 expecting, the global supply chains are proving more contracted and taking longer to resolve than was
 widely thought likely. And in the last couple of weeks, the Russian invasion of Ukraine is pushing up
 commodity prices right across the board – high prices for energy, for all the base metals and
 for many agricultural products as well.
So given these developments, it is plausible that interest rates will increase this year. It's not
 guaranteed, but it's plausible. Two issues that we're watching very carefully here are the
 persistence of the supply side problems and the higher pressures coming from developments in Ukraine.
 So that's one issue. And the other issue is developments in domestic labour markets. On the
 supply side before Ukraine, there were signs that the supply side problems were starting to be
 resolved. Wait times for deliveries were starting to come down. The price of computer chips in global
 markets was coming down. So, there were still problems, but there were gradually being resolved and
 the resolution of those problems was giving our central bank and other central banks some confidence
 that inflation would come down. But now we've added another major supply shock. We had a big
 supply shock because of COVID and now we've got another one because of Ukraine. Inevitably,
 that's going to keep CPI inflation in Australia higher than it otherwise it would be, and
 it's going to be higher right around the world.
One issue that we're paying close attention to here is the inflation psychology. For many years,
 firms were reluctant to put up their prices and because they didn't want to put up their prices,
 they didn't want to put up wages. It's quite possible that a period of protracted headline
 inflation will see this psychology shift and firms will decide that they have to put up their prices,
 and if their prices are rising, then they can afford to pay higher wages. So we're watching very
 carefully for any shift in the inflation psychology. If that shift were to occur, inflation would be
 higher and it would be more persistent and we would need to respond to that in time.
The second issue is domestic labour costs. We expect wages growth to pick up, but to do so only
 gradually. And the gradual nature of the pick-up reflects some institutional features of our labour
 market: the fact that we have multi-year enterprise agreements that often don't get negotiated
 for three years; we have an annual review of award wages; and there are public sector wage policies
 that cover a lot of labour force and they change only slowly.
So a pickup is clearly taking place, but I think it'll be quite some time before wage growth picks
 up substantially.
There are a couple of uncertainties here, though. We haven't had any experience where I said for
 50 years for unemployment below 4 per cent, so we can't be sure how wages respond
 to very low unemployment. And we can't be sure about the inflation psychology. If that shifts
 then understandably workers would want bigger compensation for higher inflation and firms might be
 prepared to pay a higher wage. So they're the issues that we're watching on inflation. The
 message here is it would be prudent to plan for an increase.
The second issue I wanted to talk about where we need to plan for the future is a change in the nature
 of money. If you look back through the long sweep of history, then what societies use as money is
 influenced by the technology they have. Some societies used clamshells a long time ago. For a while
 societies were using silver and gold coins. Right here in New South Wales, not many streets away from
 here in the colony of New South Wales people used rum. That was the best technology they had at the
 time.
Then we moved onto paper banknotes, and here in Australia you have these wonderful polymer banknotes
 with sophisticated holograms in them. The most common form of money today is electronic bank deposits
 that we can move over the internet in seconds thanks to the bank's' investment in the NPP. So
 what constitutes money in society changes over time. I think it would be foolish to think that this
 innovation and the nature of money is finished. There will surely be more innovation. We can't be
 sure what the next innovation will be, but I think there's a fair chance that it'll be some
 form of digital token sitting in a digital wallet or a digital device.
There are really big issues to think through here from both the technology perspective and from a
 public policy perspective. On the technology side, relevant questions are what form will these tokens
 take? Will they reside on a distributed ledger or some other form of technology we use? How do we
 ensure that the system is resilient and that it's not subject to some form of counterfeiting?
 Just as we spend a lot of resources making sure that banknotes can't be counterfeited, we need to
 make sure these tokens were secure. Would these tokens be anonymous and private like banknotes so
 they can move around without leaving a fingerprint or would they be traceable? And under what
 circumstances would they be traceable?
So there are a lot of technology issues here that need to be resolved and from a public policy
 perspective, there are equally challenging questions. These include, should the tokens be backed by
 the central bank? Just as we back and issue banknotes today, we could back and issue these tokens. If
 instead a private entity was to issue the tokens, how do we ensure that they're interoperable
 between various issuers and what are the collateral arrangements that would back those tokens?
 Another issue the central banks are considering is should these tokens pay interest? If we did, that
 could change the very nature of the financial system. People might prefer a central bank token that
 pays interest to a deposit at a commercial bank and if they did, that could reshape how financial
 intermediation works. So it's a big question.
Another big question is what is the potential for these tokens to destabilise the financial system,
 particularly in periods of stress? You could imagine in a difficult period that people decide they
 want tokens back by the central bank rather than deposits in a commercial bank that was under stress,
 and it could be quite easy to run from bank deposits to these tokens and it could destabilise the
 bank system. It would make bank runs easier. So if you're worried about that, how would we
 mitigate that risk?
So they're the public policy issues that the Reserve Bank is working through together with our
 international colleagues. They're important issues, but we need to prepare for them because, as I
 said, the nature of money changes with technology and technology is changing quickly.
Given this, the Reserve Bank very much welcomes the government's response to a thorough review of
 the payment system. The first important step here is the development of a national payments plan. And
 I would encourage you all to be as actively engaged in that process as you possibly can. We need that
 plan and it needs to be good and it needs wide buy-in.
There are also important pieces of legislation that will need to be passed to make sure that Australia
 is well placed for the innovations of the future. This legislation includes the modernisation of the
Payments System Regulation Act
, which governs with the payments system board of the
 Reserve Bank can do. That legislation was really leading edge when it was developed more than
 20 years ago, but it's outdated now.
We need legislation to give effect to a new regulatory regime for stored value instruments, including
 stable coins and what the collateral backing for those coins should be. We need legislation to set up
 a tiered licensing regime for payment service providers. We need legislation for the regulation of
 crypto-assets, including the custody arrangements for those crypto-assets. So there's a lot of
 work to be done here by both parliament and by people in this room. They're important questions
 – we need to get them right. It's clear the digital economy is integral to our future and
 we need a payment system and a banking system that can serve that digital economy efficiently,
 effectively, and safely.
The third issue that I want to talk about that we need to plan for is climate change. It's
 obviously a first order issue for the financial system. We were reminded of it as we walked into this
 hotel this morning. It's also an issue that comes up in every single conversation I have with
 foreign investors. They want to know how Australia is going to make the transition to a less carbon
 intensive economy. They want to know what Australia's plans are. They want to know what the
 opportunities are that Australia has, and they want to talk about the risks that we have as well. So
 we need a plan here. We need good answers to these questions, and we need to plan for this
 transition.
The financial sector has a really important role to play here. Australia has great opportunities and
 it served as a reminder, my Deputy resigned yesterday to participate in those opportunities. Those
 opportunities take financing and people in this room play a critical role in helping provide that
 financing. And there are risks here as well, and people in this room will help us manage those risks.
But you can only provide the financing and manage the risks, if people are able to price, measure and
 manage risk. To price, manage and measure risk, you need information. So from a regulatory
 perspective, the members of the Council of Financial Regulators are working on a framework to help
 establish that information. So one of the things we're working on is the Climate Vulnerability
 Assessment that APRA is leading. We want to help financial institutions identify and understand the
 risks they face. Whether they're credit risks from stranded assets or change business models, or
 they're insurance risks that are building or risks coming from the repricing of assets in capital
 markets.
So that's one important thing we are doing. Another is helping improve disclosure requirements. In
 this area we need disclosure that's clear, that's comparable across countries and that's
 comparable across companies. Without having really good disclosure in this space, investors, banks,
 and capital markets, won't be able to do what they're really set up to do, and that is
 allocate capital. So people need the information and that information needs to be quality and
 comparable.
Unfortunately, we're not yet at a point where there's a widely used and accepted international
 framework for these disclosures, although members of the Council of Financial Regulators are working
 on this with their international counterparts to try and make progress here. I think the main message
 here is that in planning for the future, we need to provide the people who want to make capital
 decisions with information, and it needs to be quality information. And if we can do that, then I
 think institutions in this room can help Australia seize the fantastic opportunities we have in this
 area. So that's a huge challenge for the future.
So the issues that I've talked about today – higher interest rates, the changing nature of
 money and climate change – are only three of the many issues that you need to plan around and
 then some of these other issues are on the table today. I could have added to this list of three,
 three more. The need to plan how best to take advantage of the new technologies that are out there.
 Not just the changing nature of money, but the way banks are run and the way they organise
 themselves. A second would be the need to plan for strong cyber resilience. As anyone who's
 involved in cyber resilience knows, this is a challenging area and the bar keeps raising and we need
 to keep moving with it. And the third challenge we all have is the need to plan for a tight labour
 market and to invest in the skills of our people.
One of the things the Reserve Bank has been trying to do, is get the unemployment rate down and
 we've been successful in that. But it creates new challenges for us all and I think we need to
 work on how to attract, retain, and invest in our people in a tight labour market. That's another
 challenge. So Ticky, you have plenty to talk about today and I'd be happy to answer some of your
 questions. Thank you.
Question & Answer Session
Ticky Fullerton
Well, Governor, thank you very much for that speech and indeed, for taking questions from me. Before
 we get to policy, let's go to the loss of your 2IC, Guy Debelle. You were told, I think on
 Thursday night. He was in the box seat to be Governor. Had you any inkling at all?
Philip Lowe
No. I found out earlier this week. It came as a surprise to me. We've worked very closely on
 issues over 25 years and I was as shocked as everybody else.
Ticky Fullerton
So, Guy Debelle was only recently reappointed as Deputy Governor for another term. What was his
 explanation for the decision to leave?
Philip Lowe
Well, he's probably better off answering that question. He says that he's long had this
 interest in climate change and another very strong interest is in capital markets. So the new
 position allows him to bring those two things together. Climate change and capital markets, and
 he's made an outstanding contribution to the Reserve Bank over the 25 years he's been
 here and that has helped the country as well. And he feels now that he can help the country in
 another way, to use his expertise in capital markets and his interest in climate change to help this
 transition to a new set of industries, which could be the source of our comparative advantage in the
 future. So he feels like he can contribute to the welfare of the Australian people, which is the
 third objective of the Reserve Bank, in a different way. So, I commend him for that. It's a huge
 loss for me and for our institution, but I can understand why he feels he can make a contribution to
 society in a different way now.
Ticky Fullerton
Well, yes, good on him. But as of Wednesday, you lose your sounding board who you worked with, as you
 say, very closely through the pandemic, the ideas, the thinking on policy. He's been described as
 adding credibility to Andrew Forrest, FFI, but he leaves you just at a time when you've got this
 tension between the RBA and market economists and others, over how soon to raise interest rates. And
 this week former treasurer, Peter Costello said, 'You need to get with the curve.' You're
 going to miss him, aren't you?
Philip Lowe
I will miss him. I'm not running away from that. I will miss him. But we do have a deep team at
 the Reserve Bank. There's a deep reservoir of expertise. So we've got a lot of colleagues and
 the way that the Reserve Bank is run is a very collegiate and team-based thing. So there's a very
 strong team there and all the decisions we take are collective decisions. And there's a team that
 supports that process.
Ticky Fullerton
And how you deal, and your team deal with this mounting pressure? Because it is mounting pressure on
 you, over a rate rise, isn't it?
Philip Lowe
I don't feel mounting pressure. In each day we sit there and think, 'Well, what's the
 right thing to do'. We have the Reserve Bank Board meeting once a month, we sit down, we review
 the information, discuss, 'Well, what's the right thing to do'. And when we're having
 those discussions, we put aside all that external noise because we know people always have views, and
 we respect those views and we talk about them, but we do what we think is the right thing at each of
 our meetings. So the pressure, it's great for media stories, but I don't feel that myself.
Ticky Fullerton
Now, the Treasurer will appoint a replacement in due course. Is there a strong internal candidate?
Philip Lowe
There are multiple strong internal candidates. So it'll be up to the Treasurer whether he wants to
 choose one of them or he wants to choose someone outside the Bank.
Ticky Fullerton
And is that likely to happen before caretaker?
Philip Lowe
I don't know. I would hope so, but the government will have to go through a process. It's a
 really important position, so they want to make sure that they pick the best person and they'll
 have to go through their processes. If there's an opportunity to do it before the caretaker
 provisions kick in, I would welcome that, but if they need to take longer, they'll need to take
 longer.
Ticky Fullerton
So Governor just on inflation, you now say in your speeches, not in the Q&A, which I think is a
 significant move this week, you talk about this, the idea that this is plausible, that there will be
 a cash rate rise this year. Not guaranteed you say today, but plausible. Now part of this is about
 the pile on with Ukraine and the energy crisis. The energy people are saying with gas market in
 particular, this is a structural change. Corporates are pulling out of major projects. Why don't
 you appear to think that this is a structural change?
Philip Lowe
It probably is a structural change and what that will do, will increase the level of gas prices, and
 when the level moves up, there's inflation while that's happening. But once you're up to
 the higher level, the prices don't keep rising, do they? So I think what we are seeing at the
 moment is a whole bunch of prices go up and in level terms.
Ticky Fullerton
But isn't that structural change enough to keep inflation sustainably higher?
Philip Lowe
It will depend upon what happens to the inflation psychology because during the period in which this
 shift in the level of prices is occurring, we record higher inflation. But if the levels don't
 keep rising, then that will wash through the numbers and inflation will come back down. And whether
 it comes back down really depends upon what happens in the labour markets. If a period of high
 inflation – I think we're going to see CPI inflation numbers with a four in front of them
 – if that leads to a big shift in wage demands and those wage demands are successful, then we
 could see persistently higher inflation that would have implications for interest rates. But it's
 entirely possible that this level shift occurs, we have higher inflation for a while and if wages
 don't move too much, then we come back down again. That would still be my central scenario that
 this will wash through. But as the developments in Ukraine keep occurring, then there's going to
 be more to wash through and how long can that take place without the inflation psychology shifting.
 That's the issue that we are discussing every single board meeting now.
Ticky Fullerton
So just on wages growth, you mentioned 2¼, 2½, modest at the moment, but what's your sense of
 where wages growth is going? Because that was sort of still lockdown numbers. Are you expecting a
 jump in the next figure?
Philip Lowe
A jump … I'm expecting an increase and a steady gradual increase. Most of the people in
 this room probably know of people who are getting very big wage rises. In professional services, in
 legal services, in IT, IT security, banking, risk management, compliance, people are getting big pay
 rises. Most of the people in this room working in that world, but we've got to remember that most
 Australians don't work in that world. Most Australians work in a world where their pay rises are
 two point something, and it teaches people in retail and most people in hospitality, in the public
 sector. So the lived experience of most Australians is a wage increase starting with two. When we
 talk to businesses every month, and we normally do 100 to 150 interviews a month, and we
 ask what the wage increases are like in their business in the next year, the number is staying two to
 three. Of course, that could change if inflation psychology changed but I think people in our
 profession have got to be careful not to translate what's going on in our profession to
 what's going on out there in the lived experience of most Australians, and most Australians are
 certainly getting wage increases of two-point-something. I hope that will turn into
 three-point-something but it's going to take time.
Ticky Fullerton
Alright, I'd like to put to you a scenario that CBA chief economist Stephen Halmarick put this
 week. Credit card data spending was strong February into March, CBA. He said CBA sees December
 quarter CPI for the end of March, the headline rate will be 4 per cent or above, the
 underlying 3½. In the middle of May when we get the next wages number, he thinks that will show
 acceleration. So by June, he says the RBA will be ready to hike. By then New Zealand, Canada, the UK
 and the US will have hiked now. Is that plausible?
Philip Lowe
He seems to have a better crystal ball than I do.
Ticky Fullerton
But is it plausible? A June hike.
Philip Lowe
Yeah. I mean the whole range of scenarios and I said before every single meeting we sit down, we look
 at the data and we make what we think is the best decision. There are plausible scenarios still where
 the rate rises don't occur for a long time, well into next year, even further, so …
Ticky Fullerton
But as early as June is plausible?
Philip Lowe
I don't want to put a particular month on it, but we will look at every month and the data we
 have. So, presumably if there's a certain configuration of events that could lead to an earlier
 increase, but it's also plausible that this gets pushed out again further. It's very hard to
 predict what's going to happen. I heard Stephen. I wish I had his crystal ball.
Ticky Fullerton
Yes. Governor your term finishes 2023. Will you extend and has Guy Debelle's departure changed
 your thinking at all on that?
Philip Lowe
It hasn't changed my thinking. The job that I have, it's a huge privilege and honour to have
 it and whether I stay on beyond the current term is really a matter for the government. It's a
 privileged job, but it's also a job of public service. I feel very strongly about public service,
 so I would do whatever I was asked to do.
Ticky Fullerton
Can I ask one final question, which is that central banks around the world worked very closely during
 the GFC with each other. Now that was a scenario about lowering interest rates obviously. I'd
 really like to know how much you are all in contact as a result of the events in Ukraine or in terms
 of some sort of coordinated move or agenda. Or is the fact that Australia and Japan's inflation
 situation is so different from the US and the UK means that's not really happening.
Philip Lowe
I chair at the Bank for International Settlements the committee on the Global Financial System. We had
 a meeting last week, and the developments in Ukraine were clearly the issue that we were talking
 about. And tonight, Friday night at 11.00 pm until 1:30 Saturday morning, I'm speaking
 with the governors of all the central banks. We've got a regular scheduled meeting tonight. So
 you can imagine what the topic will be on tonight's discussion, but the idea that there's
 some coordinated policy response we don't really talk in those terms.
Ticky Fullerton
But there was during the GFC.
Philip Lowe
There was and that was largely because financial markets had frozen and the central banks needed to
 unfreeze those financial markets. At the moment, I don't think there's a need for a
 coordinated policy response. What there is a need for us to do is to sit down and share information
 and talk about where things might go from here and we'll do that tonight.
Ticky Fullerton
So presumably a big part of that is sanctions and the impact that that's happening having on the
 global system.
Philip Lowe
Yes, and the assessment has been in the first couple of weeks, it hasn't caused major dislocation
 in the financial systems. It's causing dislocation in Russia, but not in the global financial
 systems, but it's still early days. There's a lot to come for these sanctions to work their
 way through the financial sector and we'll look at that again tonight.
Ticky Fullerton
Yes. Governor, it's been a very big week for you, I know. Thank you again very much for taking my
 questions.
