BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Panel Participation at the WEAI Monetary Panel – Melbourne
DATE: 12/04/2023
SPEAKER: Melbourne
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2023/sp-dg-2023-04-12.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Panel Participation at the WEAI Monetary Panel
Michele Bullock
Deputy Governor
WEAI Monetary Panel
Melbourne
–
12 April 2023
Audio
49MB
Transcript
David Frankel
Hello, everyone, and welcome to Melbourne Business School. I’m David Frankel, the organiser of

 today’s two panel discussions. I’ll start by acknowledging the Wurundjeri people of the

 Kulin Nation, the traditional custodians of this land, as well as paying my respects to their elders

 past, present and emerging. Our first panel will focus on the monetary policy lessons that we’ve

 learned during the pandemic and its aftermath.
Our chair is Professor Chris Edmond, Professor of Economics at Melbourne University and a

 Fellow of the Econometric Society and of the Academy of the Social Sciences in Australia. In alphabetical

 order, our first panellist is Michele Bullock, Deputy Governor of the Reserve Bank of Australia. Also

 with us is Begona Dominguez, Professor of Economics at the University of Queensland; Ian Harper, Dean of

 Melbourne Business School and Member of the RBA Board of Governors; and Greg Kaplan, Professor of

 Economics at the University of Chicago. So, without any further ado, I give you Professor Chris Edmond.
Chris Edmond
Thank you, David, and thank you everyone for attending this panel. So the goal of the panel

 discussion today is about monetary policy and what we can learn from the pandemic. But I thought it

 would be useful to start with a kind of slightly backwards-looking focus, just kind of taking us back

 to those heady days of 2018 and 2019, when life was still perfect or close to it, and to ask —

 I’m going to start with Ian — why was the RBA doing such a bad job of getting inflation into

 target in those heady days? So life was tranquil and yet the RBA was systematically undershooting the

 inflation target; what combination of factors do we think was causing that?
Ian Harper
A leading question; thank you, Chris. They were intriguing days. I’ve been on the Bank Board

 since 2016 and, subject to being corrected by my colleague, we went through that period where we

 didn’t move the rate for a very lengthy period of time. Notwithstanding, as Chris has said, that

 the inflation outcome was consistently below our target range, which was two to three per cent,

 on average, over the cycle, as says the target in the agreement with the government.
I think there were two factors going on, Chris, as I look back over that period myself.

 The first is that there was a great deal of uncertainty, and there still is in a way, as to what the

 non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment was. We figured that it was somewhere close to where we

 were, but we weren’t absolutely certain where it was. And I think I’d emphasise in this

 audience, Chris, that we’re talking about non-accelerating inflation. So we were concerned, given

 the history of inflation in this country, not knowing quite where that was in the fog, that if we were to

 stimulate the economy more than we were doing, there was a danger that unemployment would fall below that

 level, a level which we couldn’t see, and then inflation wouldn’t just go up but would become

 accelerating. With hindsight — with the benefit of hindsight —obviously, we were well above what we would

 now accept to be the non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment, as a result of which it looks like

 we did a terrible job. When you look backwards, oftentimes of course you see things much more clearly

 than you do at the time. That was one factor. The second factor was that there was a significant build up

 in household debt, primarily as the result of rising house prices and people borrowing a lot of money to

 get into the housing market, and household debt, which is still very high, was growing quite rapidly. Not

 every central bank in the world also has a responsibility to look to financial stability, but the Reserve

 Bank of Australia does; so there’s a monetary policy target to be looked at and there are concerns

 about financial stability. I would emphasise that the argument that I’ve just put about the

 non-accelerating inflation rate of unemployment, I would argue, was the dominant argument or dominant

 reason, but financial stability is never far behind. And both of those things led us to be extremely

 cautious — with hindsight, excessively cautious — in how we set interest rates during that time. That

 would be my answer.
Chris Edmond
Michele, would you agree with that?
Michele Bullock
I wasn’t on the Board at the time, but I would agree. I was actually in the financial stability

 part of the Bank at the time, and we did use to have a little bit of a discussion about that

 particular issue. And there were two camps in that: one was ‘don’t lower interest rates too

 much, because you might inflate debt more’; the other side of the argument was ‘just lower

 them as much as you like and use macroprudential tools to make sure that you clamp down on

 debt’. But I think the dominant view — as I say, I wasn’t on the Board — was ‘just be

 a bit more cautious on the way down to protect against that financial stability risk’.
Chris Edmond
Do you think it’s a problem that we can have a specific numerical understanding of the inflation

 target and whether the Bank is or isn’t sort of delivering that inflation target but then, when

 you invoke financial stability, it’s much less clear what it means in practice to be delivering

 or not delivering financial stability? So already in this conversation there’s been sort of

 several different potential indicators reference a household indebtedness and other things of that

 kind. So how should we think about that asymmetry of those potential objectives, putting aside just

 for the moment a broader discussion of whether it makes sense to have multiple objectives, given the

 limited number of instruments at hand? But just supposing one is to take financial stability

 seriously as an objective, how do you feel about that lack of specificity?
Michele Bullock
The way I would think about it is that — Ian expressed it well – the target remains inflation, and unemployment is also in there. Financial stability is a

 background consideration that I think we just need to take into account, so I don’t think it matters

 that we don’t have a really specific measure of financial stability. It’s actually very

 difficult to explain what financial stability is. It’s easier to explain what financial instability

 is than it is to explain what financial stability is, in my view. So, really, I think it’s a

 background consideration. But I wouldn’t say we are using interest rates to dial up and back on

 financial stability. It’s really about vulnerabilities building and, as we’ve seen in the

 Global Financial Crisis and we’ve seen a little bit recently, financial vulnerabilities build up and

 then there might be a shock that results in those vulnerabilities generating financial instability. But

 financial stability of itself, I don’t think you can actually say ‘Well, I’ve dialled it up,’ or ‘I’ve dialled it down.’ That would be my response.
Chris Edmond
Greg, I just want to ask you: do you think then that the RBA should be sort of attempting to take

 financial stability more seriously? I guess a kind of response to that might be — and I’m going

 to ask Greg to comment on this — that the difficulty with that line of argument is that it puts the

 financial stability as a consideration in this sort of catch-all position that can be invoked or not

 invoked. It’s a little bit like the checklist approach to monetary policy back in the late

 ‘80s, where sometimes it’s a significant consideration; other times it’s taking a back

 seat to the sort of more mandated inflation and unemployment objectives. So, to a degree, I guess my

 question would be: should we be sort of thinking about ways to operationalise this so that we’re

 not in that position of kind of using it as an argument of convenience but, instead, have more of a

 sense of when to invoke it?
Greg Kaplan
I think it’s a great question and it’s a difficult one to grapple with. I would say that

 the starting point is to accept and embrace that monetary policy is a very, very narrow set of

 instruments. And, whether we like it or not, we can legislate all we like about what the Bank should

 do. But each time you change a policy setting, you have impacts on, we hope inflation, we hope

 employment, certainly on financial stability and certainly on distributional considerations as well.

 It would be wonderful if we had a tool that could pinpoint one of those.
Coming back to that question of ‘Where was the RBA between 2016 and 2019?’ I

 think a lot of what was going on at that time was almost an over consideration of those core concepts

 that a lot of the criticisms that we saw were that the central bank was undershooting its inflation

 target. And now that seems to be — I think the one place we will agree is that we think that, if the

 central bank can do anything, it can impact inflation. We could talk about under what circumstances can that generate real effects on the economy? And one thing we saw then is that monetary policy settings were very loose at that time and the discussion was: should they be

 even looser? I was one of the people at the time saying, ‘No, I don’t think that they

 should be looser because, yes, we are understating a target but we can legislate all we want there

 are limits to what we could actually achieve.’
Michele Bullock
It might be worth just adding too that undershooting the target and low wages growth and the idea

 that we might have overestimated the under-acceleration, this wasn’t just an Australian issue.

 This was going on abroad as well. A lot of central banks were undershooting their targets. They

 were … underestimating the degree of slack in the labour market and, I think, as Ian

 mentioned, has been borne out now. We could have had the unemployment rate going down much further

 without putting a lot of pressure on wages, but we didn’t know that at the time. And we

 weren’t the only ones; others were experiencing the same thing.
Chris Edmond
I just want to bring Begona in here, so I’m going to cannibalise a question a little bit. So

 does that mean, Begona, perhaps that central banks around the world — it seems like there was

 something of a kind of common set of circumstances and perhaps a common conceptual framework in mind,

 and so it kind of leads one to wonder whether there was too much of a reliance on a kind of

 mechanistic relationship between inflation and/or wage growth and the level of unemployment. And so

 I’m wondering whether you think that there was too much reliance on that sort of mode of

 thinking.
Ian Harper
A sort of stable Phillips curve.
Chris Edmond
Yes, is there a stable Phillips curve?
Begona Dominguez
Well, it seems there’s not.
Greg Kaplan
Well, can I comment on that?
Chris Edmond
Yes, please.
Greg Kaplan
I think we need to call out the myth of the exploitable Phillips curve for what it is. It is a myth

 and I think — I guess we’ll talk about this — one thing that we’re looking at right now is

 more and more evidence that such a thing doesn’t exist. But if we go back to 2019, most of the

 criticisms of the RBA were coming from, I think, a perspective that: ‘Hang on, if we’re

 undershooting our inflation target, that means we’re missing out on some candy to be had; we

 could have employment —the labour market could be doing even better than it already is.’ And I

 think that sort of thinking comes from an overreliance on this idea of an exploitable Phillips curve

 that’s not really there in reality.
Chris Edmond
I’m going to push back on that to say that I think — I mean, I’m sure that there were

 people that had that view, but I think there are well-founded reasons to take inflation and/or price

 dispersion seriously as a source of welfare losses, even if you put aside the unemployment

 considerations. There are reasons to think there are welfare losses with undershooting the target,

 absent that sort of that labour-market side of things. But I take your point about that.
Greg Kaplan
I’d push back on that. It’s hard to argue — certainly, the costs of inflation that

 we’re seeing now at five per cent inflation over and above whatever they have on the direct

 real effects are there and different to being at two per cent. But to argue that they’re

 significantly different welfare losses from being at one per cent versus two per cent in

 that direction is sort of a hard argument to make without a Phillip’s curve in the background.
Ian Harper
Yes, especially if your concern is that you could accelerate it quickly, not just back to the target

 but out the other side.
Chris Edmond
Yes, like I said … it’s hard to get a little bit pregnant.
Ian Harper
That’s correct.
Begona Dominguez
The risk of inflation in Australia has been pretty low, but I don’t think — in Europe and in

 other places they would see it a little bit more.
Chris Edmond
Alright. Well, this panel is supposed to be looking forward, so I want to spend a little bit of time

 sort of transitioning to looking forward, and that’s to talk about monetary policy during the

 pandemic itself. I guess, in kind of crude terms. So Begona, with hindsight, to kind of take

 Ian’s favourite word at the moment, do we think that monetary policy was too expansionary during

 the critical phases of the pandemic itself, say, in 2020?
Begona Dominguez
I think so; I think so. From (
inaudible
) perspective, it probably was the right thing to

 do. We were hit by a very big shock, negative shock, and we didn’t know when we would be

 recovering from it. But actually we recovered really quickly and it took us by surprising inflation

 started picking up in 2021, and I think at that point central banks responded a little bit too late,

 in my view. Most central banks around the world didn’t respond until 2022, when we were seeing

 masses of inflation that we haven’t seen for 30 years. And, when we look at the RBA, the

 RBA was actually one of the last to respond to the increasing inflation. We didn’t stop the bond

 purchasing program until February 2022, and the first hike in interest rates was in May, when

 inflation was already at five per cent.
And that brings me to two questions
should central banks have responded earlier, and by how much? And my view is that they should have

 responded a bit earlier, maybe six months. It was clear by the middle of 2021 that we were on our way

 up; measures of inflation — expectations of inflation were rising and becoming more skewed, so I

 think we should have responded maybe six months earlier or so. Now, by how much? I think maybe we

 could have increased the interest rates earlier. But offsetting all these shocks is probably

 undesirable, because it would have then taken the economy to a very big recession.
Chris Edmond
So, Michele, do you kind of agree that — I’ll state the analysis maybe in a slightly different

 language — perhaps there was too much emphasis given to the adverse demand-side effects of the

 pandemic and not enough to thinking of this as essentially a supply-side phenomenon; and that, in

 light of it being essentially a supply-side phenomenon, the bounce back in the real economy could be

 quite quick, and that sort of stimulus measures that were put in place in early 2020 may then have

 been ex-post proved to be unnecessary.
Michele Bullock
Look, again with hindsight, I think what we underestimated was the power of fiscal policy and

 monetary policy, not just here but around the world, all pushing in one direction. This was

 unprecedented and I think people forget that we had shots of morgues in the streets in New York and

 Italy and, it was shocking stuff. We were worried about the potential for people to lose their jobs

 and never get them back again: basically, to end up with a really big structural unemployment

 problem. So I think what we did and I think what others did was —and the United States is a really

 good example — we completely threw everything at it and we relied on the ability that, with monetary

 policy, I think we could respond quickly. There’s a question about whether or not we responded

 quickly enough, so I think there was a bit of an underestimation of that.
To the points Begona was making about we should have responded earlier, I think

 you’ve got to remember too that we came out of our lockdowns and so on later than everyone else. So

 we were observing inflation happening overseas, and everyone was of the view ‘transitory’ was

 the word of the day. Everyone was talking about it’s transitory, it’s supply chain issues to do

 with the pandemic, we’ve got Russia’s invasion of Ukraine on top of that. So we had these two

 massive supply shocks, and I think there was a sort of feeling that this was going to be transitory. What

 people hadn’t taken into account, I think, as well as we could have, was that there was a big demand

 element to it, and we’re seeing that now, and that’s why I think we’re all behind the

 eight ball. So, yes, in a sense, I think you could say that we threw too much at it, but we were in

 completely uncharted territory is what I would say.
Ian Harper
We also had a much larger labour market response here in Australia.
We’ve had a much higher labour force participation rate and, therefore, much less

 action on wages than was occurring in the United States, for example.
So there was sort of no signs of inflation, either in the labour market or elsewhere,

 while we waited. And then, yeah, sure, it came around the corner.
Greg Kaplan
I have a couple of — I planned a couple of things for discussion.
Chris Edmond
Yes, yes — please.
Greg Kaplan
So I think the points about fiscal policy are really important. And supply side shock, yes, but we

 issued a tremendous amount of nominal liabilities, that if you just do the simplest, simplest

 monetarist arithmetic on it, will tell you that we should see something like a 15 to

 20 per cent increase in the price level if nothing else was changing. Other things did

 change but just at a basic level. So that’s sort of my apology for the RBA. Somehow, sort of out

 of central bank’s control, regardless of what one would have done, that’s got to show up

 somewhere, right? Now I’ll be less nice. I think the concern really is not so much the delayed

 reaction but the unconditional guidance that was given prior, and I think this ties into that

 discussion about Phillip’s curves and the critiques that were coming earlier on. My view is that

 it’s irresponsible to be giving unconditional guidance so far out into the future. And it’s

 even more, I think, unjustified then to hold onto that for so long, once the shock did hit. It is one

 thing to say that it’s not the central bank’s job to be giving unconditional forecasts, in

 the sense that they give — there’s lots of things that might happen and it should be expected

 that, as those things unfold, we will respond to those in appropriate ways.
The language that was sequentially rolled out over that period that we’re talking

 about sort of unwound that in the public’s perception that we went away from unconditional forecasts

 to actual here’s exactly what we’re going to do. And I think that put the Bank in a difficult

 position relative to other countries. And what Michele said is absolutely right that things played out

 slower in Australia. But we printed the money at the same time, and I think there were a lot of reasons

 to expect that we would see exactly what we’ve seen right now.
Ian Harper
Do you want to comment on whether it was unconditional?
Michele Bullock
Well, I will comment, because I don’t actually agree that it was unconditional. We were always

 conditioning it on the state, and there was a time bit: ‘and we don’t expect that we will

 reach that state until 2024’. What I will accept — and we’ve said this in our review of

 forward guidance — was that the message got garbled and I think it got garbled for two reasons. One

 was that the media and people latched onto a date; they latched onto a date much more easily. And

 what’s really interesting is that, even now, while we’re raising interest rates, they still

 want us to put a date on when we’re going to stop doing it. People are clamouring for a date;

 they just want one. So we should have resisted, I guess, a little bit more there. So that was one

 reason.
The second reason that I think we didn’t get the message across really well is we

 talked around the sorts of things that we thought were going to be important and we got a little bit

 fixated on wages and — the Review makes this point as well — instead of focusing on saying ‘We want to get inflation back in target,’ and leaving it at that, we actually went on to

 say: ‘And we’ll therefore be expecting this to happen to wages’ and ‘this to

 happen on demand.’ So we muddied the communication, I think, and so we didn’t do as well as

 we could have there. I would say, no, we didn’t offer unconditional guidance at all, but I will

 do a mea culpa in terms of communication.
Ian Harper
Yes, your subsequent words ‘in the public’s perception’ are very important.
Greg Kaplan
It was perceived in that way. I mean, I think there was something interesting on wages as well, which

 I’ll just add to that, which is we did have a big supply shock. What is a big supply shock? It

 is a reduction in real wages, which is the level of nominal wage growth relative to the level of

 price growth, and so we should have expected to see a slowdown in nominal wage growth relative to

 nominal price growth relative to what we were expecting previously. So I think that’s yet

 another reason why that overemphasis on the slow growth in nominal wages was indicative of a stance

 on the demand side, but perhaps not.
Chris Edmond
I want to come back to this in a question of whether the RBA could have done a better job of kind of

 communicating some of the subtleties in, like, time-dependent versus state-dependent policies. So,

 Begona, I want to bring you back in here. One might think that it’s a little bit difficult to

 say to kind of like a lay audience that: ‘You haven’t understood our complicated

 messaging.’ In some sense, it feels like the institution that is the locus of expertise in this

 space has, in some sense, an obligation I think, to provide education about what its language means;

 whereas I think what we see from the RBA is perhaps a little bit more — it’s communication tends

 to be a little bit more stand­offish and not actually teaching the public what it’s language

 means. So do you think there’s like a role — how would you imagine or how could an institution

 like a central bank educate the recipients of its communications about what that language means,

 without sort of undermining the message, as such.
Begona Dominguez
That’s a tough question. Also, I see what Michele is saying, because the journalists are going

 to try: ‘No, I really want to know the date.’
Chris Edmond
Right, Michele, exactly. But we don’t want to take it for granted. Journalists are always going

 to want a simplification, but it’s the role of experts to guide people in forming their

 experience. So, if you’re a criminal and you say, ‘I want to get off,’ and your lawyer

 says, ‘Well, you’re not going to get off; this is the situation,’ it’s the job of

 the lawyer in that sense to provide realistic expectations and guidance as to the situation

 you’re in and …
Begona Dominguez
Yes. You need to be able to kind of communicate the model that you have in your mind of how you are

 going to be implementing that policy. So, if you think that the right variable that you are going to

 be paying attention to is wage growth or whether it is unemployment or you want to have a look at

 vacancies, well, you don’t want to muddy the waters, but you want to be able to say it in a way

 in which it makes that state contingent clear.
Chris Edmond
I think I was trying to ask a sort of similar question but with different language. So when do you

 think the RBA realised that their communication on this front was not working and that people were

 misunderstanding the policy? At what point was that clear to internal policymakers?
Michele Bullock
I think it was starting to become clear at the beginning of 2022, when we were …
Chris Edmond
As late as that?
Michele Bullock
I think it was, yes, yes. Ian might have a different view because I joined the Board sort of April

 2022 and I thought it was starting to become clear then that there was a lot of emphasis being put on

 the date. You’ve got to remember too that this was one part of a package of things that are

 done: lower the interest rate to 0.1 per cent; the yield curve target, which was the other

 thing that was challenging and which was also a sort of three-year target, which was the 2024 date.

 There was the TFF, which was also three-year funding. So all these things were sort of

 self-reinforcing. And I think part of the challenge of the whole thing was that, even though it was a

 state-based forward guidance, there were all these other things in place, which gave …
Ian Harper
The same date.
Michele Bullock
The same date on it.
Ian Harper
It reinforced it.
Michele Bullock
It reinforced it.
Chris Edmond
So I guess the question, in some sense — sorry, Greg; jump in, please.
Greg Kaplan
I just wanted to finish a thought. I had a question related around forward guidance and around this

 discussion, but —
Chris Edmond
Well, I guess my question was just going to be like: so suppose that we accept that at some point the

 bank sort of recognised that there was too much focus on the date and a misapprehension had developed

 for whatever reason about the meaning of that date in that communication. Suppose that one stipulated

 that’s the case, is it obvious then that the right thing to do is not to try and correct that

 misapprehension, to try and provide some additional messaging around that and to kind of try and

 build up again a sense of education or understanding in the public’s mind?
Michele Bullock
Well, I think …
Ian Harper
That happened, right?
Michele Bullock
Yes.
Ian Harper
I think I’m not telling tales out of school here if I point out … Well put it this

 way, right? The Governor was asked by
The 7.30 Report
, which is a quite widely seen

 current affairs program on our public broadcaster here in this country, and there was significant

 debate at the Board as to whether or not the Governor should appear for two reasons: (1) because it

 was highly likely that the interviewer would be hostile and seek to twist the Governor’s words

 against the interests of the Bank. The other faction on the Board said, really, your argument, right:

 ‘Here’s an opportunity for you, the Governor, to now explain the subtleties of this to what

 is a sophisticated audience.’ This is the public broadcaster, so a lot of people who do think

 through the issues would watch this. And, in the end, the Governor decided to do it, and it turned

 out to be, I think, an exceptional performance on Philip’s part, if I may say so. So, Chris, the

 notion that the Bank sat there like the proverbial deer caught in the headlights, not wanting to do

 anything: that’s false, right? Whether or not the Governor’s attempts in speeches and

 interviews were successful in allaying that impression, that’s another matter.
Michele Bullock
And he was softening the language on the time base … through that period. So, we were

 trying to get the message across. But our traditional methods of communication used the financial

 press, for better or worse, and speeches and interpretations of those. Is there a way we can get more

 to the people that we want to get to without going through that layer, that filtering layer? I think

 it’s a really good question and, I think, something that we’ll be thinking about. We have

 our speeches program and we have a ‘school sort of university education’ sort of program.

 But what about this other group people that we really want to try and educate, how do we get to them?

 And I’m not sure that’s easy, but I think we’ve got to try and think about it.
Chris Edmond
Greg, you had another point that you were going to—
Greg Kaplan
Well, I was just wondering, given the audience here, whether it might be a good time to talk about

 what the role of this guidance is, in the first place. And, maybe to sort of kick off that

 discussion, I think there are, broadly speaking, two sorts of objectives, and it would be good to

 hear this from the Bank’s perspective. One is that one thing the Bank doesn’t want to do is

 create unnecessary volatility in financial markets and destabilise the financial system, and

 providing guidance on what relative price is going to look like in those markets is important. To

 that extent, you don’t want to be continually surprising market participants. And I’ll put

 in that broad class as well what ended up being interpreted, which is you’re going out to buy a

 house and, ‘What can I expect in terms of my mortgage payments?’ because, at the end of the

 day, that is where the transmission is happening.
But there’s sort of a second reason as well — which is less spoken about but I

 actually think is there without being spoken — which is, when interest rates got really low after 2008,

 banks around the world started turning to forward guidance as a stimulatory policy. And it’s not

 without coincidence, the time of these discussions that we’re having about the nature of the

 guidance, the nature of what those statements were and having to go on
The 7.30 Report
.

 If it was just about stability, we should be doing it and that would be happening all the time. But it

 happens at this period of really low rates, and what’s going on there is this idea that it’s an

 additional source of stimulus. My own view and I think that of an objective outsider who came down from

 Mars and looked at the evidence on this …
Chris Edmond
Chicago is not Mars, Greg; anyway, go on.
Greg Kaplan
… the view, I think, of an objective outsider that came down from Mars—the same with the

 Phillips curve, by the way — is that, at best, there’s no evidence either way that this has any

 effect and, at worst, maybe — at best nothing. So it would be good to get the thoughts on what do we

 think are the primary motivations, and how do we reconcile these two motivations for giving guidance

 in this way?
Chris Edmond
So can I just summarise that? So one motivation is stability and the other is using forward guidance

 as sort of a statement about the expected path of future short-term rates …
Greg Kaplan
Stimulus.
Chris Edmond
as stimulus through long-term rates.
Greg Kaplan
Well, we can talk about that. That may or may not be a transition mechanism, but the announcements of

 future short-term rates having a substantial effect on the economy.
Begona Dominguez
I think I’d have a third one, which is the credibility of the central bank. If you follow with

 that, you are (
inaudible
) the reputation.
Ian Harper
Well, certainly, as I recall it, the idea was to try to encourage people to see through to the other

 side of what was a massive dislocation. And the expression I think that Philip Lowe, the Governor,

 used at the time was ‘building a bridge to the other side’. So encouraging people not to

 shut their wallets, not to shelve their plans but to keep spending, as a way of trying to prevent the

 state from having to fill that gap in other ways. That involved the Bank giving this type of

 guidance.
The alternative of saying nothing — and, again, this is another matter which is often

 discussed at the Board level, as you would expect — people don’t interpret silence as conveying no

 information; on the contrary. We often discuss whether we should say anything at all and, if so, what we

 should say in order to try to encourage confidence as far as we can. Now, that’s a tricky business,

 as you would appreciate. Just to swing across to stability for a moment here, Chris; and picking your

 point up, Greg—that is why the Treasurer of the Commonwealth, as advised by the Governor of the central

 bank, who happens to be the Chairman of the Council of Financial Regulators, made a comment the other day

 about the soundness of the Australian banking system. Now, that’s forward guidance, brother.

 That’s exactly what that is ‘Don’t run on the Australian banks; you don’t need to do that. Why not? Because

 they’re sound. Turn off the television and watching what you’re seeing happening in Europe

 and the United States.’ That’s forward guidance. And why would the Treasurer do that? In

 the public interest.
Chris Edmond
But I think that highlights, like, a sense that the forward guidance of the RBA during this episode

 is distinct, which is the appearance of specific numerical aspects to that guidance. So, if the RBA

 had simply said in 2020, ‘We are going to keep the cash rate low for an extended period of time;

 when circumstances start to change, when inflation starts to pick up or other signs of recovery start

 to pick up, then we are going to revisit our kind of commitment to’…
Michele Bullock
And that’s, in effect, really what we started off saying.
Chris Edmond
Yes.
Michele Bullock
And then the sort of clamouring kept coming, ‘Well, how long is that?’ and our forecasts —

 everyone was at sea on forecasting by now, of course.
Ian Harper
A tsunami.
Michele Bullock
So, basically, what you said was exactly where we started, and then what crept in was: ‘And we

 don’t expect that will be until about 2024.’ That was how the whole thing played out and

 that was, I think, where we slipped. And I think we acknowledged in our review of forward guidance

 that we erred — we didn’t do great on that. But, to Ian’s point about forward guidance, the

 Fed dot plots are all forward guidance. I mean, central banks around the world use forward guidance

 and have used forward guidance in the past.
Chris Edmond
Sure, of course.
Michele Bullock
And some of them use time base, so the Fed dot plots are all time based. So forward guidance is all

 around. Having said that, I think we don’t feel that we would be heading back in a hurry to time

 based at any sort of time with forward guidance. I think our more usual practice is much more

 qualitative for conditions that we would want to see before we move interest rates. So I think we

 have learnt something from that episode that we’ll take forward with us.
Chris Edmond
I want to start talking about our more recent experiences. But, before I do, I just want to touch on

 something that was brought up in passing, which was the yield curve control experiments. Begona, I

 was going to ask whether you think in the future the yield curve control is something that will still

 be on the table, or whether the end of that — so, essentially, the run at the end — is in some sense

 damning of the experience.
Begona Dominguez
Going back to what Greg said about forward guidance, I think actually there is more forward guidance

 in the real economy than the yield control. It seems to me that there is no clear evidence of what

 yield control has on the economy. At the end of the day, businesses and households in Australia had

 plenty of liquidity, so it’s not that they weren’t providing liquidity. It seems that it

 was mostly driven due to the three-year mortgage fixed term in Australia. I haven’t written up a

 model and evaluated how much of that has played into the economy, but I’m not sure that we

 should start using these events.
Chris Edmond
Michele, I’ll ask you then: how do you think about this in retrospect?
Michele Bullock
Well, in retrospect, I mean, again, we’ve done a review of this and it worked really well until

 it didn’t.
Chris Edmond
Yes, exactly. That’s my concern, exactly. So then, all things considered …
Michele Bullock
So, all things considered, since then, I think — so we did that first.
Greg Kaplan
Can I just say, for the purpose of the audience, when you say ‘it worked well’, maybe you

 should just elaborate on what the objective was.
Michele Bullock
Okay. So the objective — well, as I said earlier, it was part of the package. So we had a very low

 interest rate, we had a Term Funding Facility that was extending cheap funding to financial

 institutions out for three years, and this was another way of getting the short end of the yield

 curve down at a low rate to, again, lower funding costs across that front end of the yield curve.

 And, as you highlighted, it actually did find its way into the economy because it found its way into

 all of those very low fixed-rate mortgages, which we’re coming back to. But, a lot of people,

 40 per cent of loans, ended up being on these very low fixed-term mortgages, so people took

 advantage of them and it was really …
Begona Dominguez
In 2024.
Michele Bullock
Yes, that’s right. It’s not the US but, nevertheless, that was the purpose: to get that

 front end of the yield curve down. What I mean when I say that it was successful was, while it was

 credible, we didn’t actually have to spend much money defending it, because everyone just

 believed us.
Chris Edmond
Well, that’s a nature of fixed home rates.
Michele Bullock
So, you know, it was—
Begona Dominguez
But the effect on the balance sheet was huge.
Michele Bullock
The effect on the Bank’s balance sheet came from the bond purchase program. So we had the yield

 curve. The bond purchase program was rolled out subsequently when we thought we needed to get them

 down at the longer end –, so that was more aimed at the 10­year sort of end – the longer end of

 the yield curve. And that’s the one that’s had the really big impact on the balance sheet;

 that’s the $200 billion to $300 billion worth of bonds … and that’s the

 one that’s left us in negative equity. The purchases under the yield curve target were actually

 pretty small because, as I said, while it was credible, you didn’t have to spend a lot of money

 defending it. And it was only towards the end — I think we called it in the review a ‘disorderly

 exit’ — of the program that we were actually spending money, but the bulk of it was the bond

 purchase program. Now, would we do it again? I think our general view is that it’s not that

 flexible and it’s hard to get out of. And Japan has still got one by the way. The Japanese have

 still got a yield curve target on the 10­year bond. So it’s not easy to get out of. So I think

 our feeling is that we would lean more towards — even though the financial risks are more with the

 bond purchase program, it’s more flexible because you can dial it up and you can dial it down a

 bit, you’re not aiming at a particular yield, you’re aiming at quantities. So I think that

 would be the way we would think about it into the future.
Chris Edmond
Well, I want to transition a little bit more to contemporary, so to speak: contemporary policy

 issues. I’m going to start by picking up on this idea that any sort of inflation is transitory

 kind of coming from the supply side. It’s a view that was prevailing sort of 12 to

 18 months ago and certainly in certain circumstances. I’m going to ask Ian: I think a lot

 of people outside of central banking circles, outside of macro sort of policy circles, maybe struggle

 to understand the role that monetary policy might have in dealing with supply shocks, let’s call

 them that. So how should we think about the role of monetary policy in that circumstance; and are

 there other tools that we could be bringing or should be thinking about, if supply shocks are kind of

 dominant or playing a significant role in our current inflationary episode?
Ian Harper
Sure. Thanks, Chris. Well, those people would be right to struggle with that, thinking, ‘So this

 is a supply side problem, so why are we trying to deal with that with a demand-side instrument?’

 Well, the fact is, as the aggregate supply curve shifts off to the left or you’ve got a reduced

 aggregate supply for whatever reason, then you’ve got to make aggregate demand match that or

 else the outcome is inflationary. And so you end up dealing with a supply-side problem by managing

 aggregate demand in order to try to bring the two back together again. Now, this is against the

 backdrop of an environment in which aggregate demand had been deliberately expended to deal with what

 we thought was the opposite problem: a collapse of aggregate demand. So two things happened. Firstly,

 the aggregate demand didn’t collapse as much as we thought, so the stimulus arguably was too

 much; and now you’ve got the aggregate supply curve shifting off to the left and doing its own

 work. So you’ve got two reasons to try to bring aggregate demand under control quickly, and

 that’s precisely what central banks have done.
Chris Edmond
So should we be thinking — is there a role for other instruments? Greg, you might like to comment on

 this.
Greg Kaplan
So, maybe just to start telling about how I think about this, a supply shock is a reduction in real

 wages. If we think nominal wages can’t fall, then the way that that might be realised is an

 increase in prices. That doesn’t necessarily mean an increase in sustained inflation. I think

 part of the role of the central bank is the one that you were describing earlier, Ian, which is about

 coordinating expectations, about coordinating multiplicities, so you can have the bank-runs up. A

 bank run is a really good example of that. You can think of that as forward guidance; I think of that

 as the role of — as being a big player of coordinating expectations and coordinating beliefs. And the

 bank has a role to play in coordinating beliefs about what the future path of that required increase

 in prices is going to be and so that we don’t fall into a trap of a wage/price spiral and end up

 somewhere where we have persistently more inflation than we need.
This idea of having to bring demand back
I must admit that I don’t quite understand it. If there’s a shock to the real side of the

 economy and it requires a fall in the real wage to bring us back to equilibrium, then that is the

 real equilibrium. If demand was high in the past because the government — the fiscal side really

 expanded, it doesn’t really make sense to me that then the central bank should be pushing back

 on that. That seems to be a separate issue, but …
Michele Bullock
I was just going to say that I think there’s a distinction here between ongoing inflation and a

 rise in the price level.
Chris Edmond
Yes.
Ian Harper
Correct.
Michele Bullock
What you’re talking about is the need for the price level to adjust and what—
Greg Kaplan
Yeah, and what are the—
Michele Bullock
That’s right. And what Ian is talking about is: how do we make sure that it’s a price level

 adjustment and not ongoing inflation?
Ian Harper
Correct.
Michele Bullock
So I’d sort of assert that it’s—
Ian Harper
Yes, exactly. So one thing you’re keeping a weather eye on throughout this process, including

 now, is what the markets think the long-term expected inflation rate will be. And in our case,

 throughout this whole experience, the market has said that the long-term, 10­year, expected rate of

 inflation in this country is 2½ per cent, right in the middle of the Bank’s range,

 throughout. And that, for me as a Board director, is one of the key charts that’s presented

 every month; it’s to watch that like a hawk. Now, part of the demand response that looks like

 it’s a bit odd when you’ve got a supply side problem is to switch off one channel by which

 that long-term expectation could escape. By giving people the impression not just that you had

 monetary policy too loose for so long — and just flipping back to the earlier conversations; as you

 rightly remember, Greg — lots of people were saying to me at that time, even though interest rates

 were very low, ‘You wouldn’t dare put them lower; you’re just putting more fuel on the

 fire that one day will come.’
Greg Kaplan
You were just mentioning: what were the long-term inflation expectations at that time, when inflation

 was (
inaudible
)?
Ian Harper
Well, at one stage, this government — our government, could borrow for 30 years at less than

 100 basis points and did, briefly. But they locked stuff in for 30 years. Bluntly, this

 university has borrowed for 30 years at less than 100 basis points. So a lot of people, not

 just mortgage holders, did very well out of that. But, throughout that process, the expected rate of

 inflation — if you asked people on the street, some of them would say exactly the same thing, but

 park that to one side; ask the markets, people have got money on it, and they’d say

 2½ per cent. Now, that’s not true in the United States. So, in the US, it’s still

 the case that the market thinks inflation is going to be higher than the central bank’s target.

 That’s not true in Australia, and part of the reason for that, I believe, is that we responded

 with demand-side management over against a supply-side problem to deal with that issue, well, amongst

 others.
Greg Kaplan
I’d add that another part of that has got to do with our very different long-term fiscal

 position in Australia relative to the United States.
Ian Harper
Do you mean a structural deficit?
Greg Kaplan
Yes.
Chris Edmond
But a much smaller one, relative to the size of …
Greg Kaplan
Oh, I beg your pardon. Yes, yes, okay. Yes, okay, sure, sure, sure.
Ian Harper
So the chances of someone having to monetise it are much lower …
Greg Kaplan
Or a significant …
Michele Bullock
Monetise it.
Ian Harper
Yes, quite. I accept that.
Chris Edmond
So, lurking in the background here, I want to talk about the current pause in the increase in the

 cash rate and some of the circumstances around that. I guess, sort of a month ago, we had the failure

 of the Silicon Valley Bank and other kinds of financial market disturbances. So, I guess, lurking

 behind that pause and some of the related discussions of central banks around the world is the

 ongoing sort of tension between inflation control and financial stability concerns. So I guess

 I’m going to ask you, Begona: is that something that we should be concerned about? In crude

 terms, is there a trade-off between financial stability concerns and inflation control? Well, I can

 put it even cruder: should the RBA have paused the increase in interest rates?
Begona Dominguez
For the RBA specifically? I would say no. Well, first of all, in general, I would say no, because

 central banks aren’t governed … countries have different instruments to deal with each

 of them. For the case of Australia specifically, we have APRA, and my understanding is that the

 standards of APRA are fairly strong in terms of capital requirements. And not only that; it seems

 that — I didn’t know this, but it seems that Australia is the only country that has this

 interest …
Michele Bullock
Interest rate risk in the banking book (
inaudible
).
Begona Dominguez
Yes, which means that they require banks to hold an additional capital requirement to hedge against

 the risk of interest rates going up, which means that actually, for Australia, there is very little

 trade-off between the two objectives. Having said that, there is a caution to be made for the US and

 Europe because it seems that many commercial banks have been buying all those bonds and now they have

 many—
Ian Harper
As in Silicon Valley.
Begona Dominguez
… like you have read in the news, they have many losses, unrealised losses. And I read in the

 news that it seems like the … what is the name of the federal deposit?
Ian Harper
FDIC.
Michele Bullock
FDIC, the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.
Begona Dominguez
In February, they said that there was $620 billion in unrealised losses in the US. So it’s

 clear that, if you have this cycle of monetary policy tightening, that does want to bring some banks

 down. Why did they take so much risk, these banks? It seems like actually there may be some reasons

 for that. Maybe could be mismanagement, which seems to be the case for Silicon Valley. But it seems

 that there are also some reasons. I found this paper by Dan Ciuriak and—
that they found that it might be optimal for banks to actually take some of this risk to

 hedge against the deposit risk so that … But actually, I mean, there needs to be a bit of a

 balance there and then, since, some banks went over this. Having said that, still the US and Europe
they have ways of dealing with these situations through appropriate capital requirements, monetary in

 the banks and managing this risk. And, as long as they keep it managed, which is the case now, I

 think they should focus on bringing the inflation down and not …
Chris Edmond
I’ll ask Michele the same question but in a slightly different way. So do you think that, absent

 the kind of Silicon Valley Bank and related events a month ago, the Bank would have paused?
Michele Bullock
Yes. Even before the problems with Silicon Valley Bank, we had already suggested that we were

 thinking about pausing because we’d moved 350 basis points, 3.5 percentage points, in

 quick time. Normally, we don’t. In fact, in other tightening cycles, we typically move a bit and

 then we stop and watch and then we move a bit more. But we had to get from emergency low levels,

 remove all of that stimulus, and get into restrictive territory. Now, I think what we observed was

 that we feel we are in restrictive territory because we’re starting to see signs on the housing

 market, consumption and these sorts of things, retail sales. Now, just stop for a minute and watch

 because we are — the Governor uses this term and he’s got great terms, hasn’t he —

 ‘the narrow path’. He likes ‘the narrow path’. So, to your point earlier, it

 would be ideal if we could get inflation down but keep as many of the gains on employment that we

 have managed to get through this period. So I would say, yes, that was always on the cards. The other

 point I would make is that, if you read the statements by — in fact, the Fed and the ECB continued to

 increase interest rates, even though this had happened and they both made the point that financial

 stability concerns can be managed with other instruments; they don’t have to do it with interest

 rates. Having said that, what is likely happening over there, at the moment, is financial conditions

 more generally are tightening. People are running to sort of safer assets; the banks are pulling in

 their horns a little bit. So that’s going to be a factor. It’s not saying that the Fed is

 not increasing as quickly because of the financial stability concerns; it’s saying they’re

 taking into account the fact that financial conditions have tightened and, therefore, they have to

 maybe do a little bit less. So that’s the perspective I would give on that.
The other point, not to labour on too much about it — but we did write about this in our

 recent Financial Stability Review, a little advertisement for you all if you haven’t read it,

 it’s a great read. We set out what we know about Silicon Valley Bank and the particular issues in

 those banks in the US. The US has bank failures on a regular basis. They have lots and lots of banks,

 thousands of them, and some of the smaller ones are failing all of the time.
Chris Edmond
Yes, but they don’t resolve them through emergency FIDC measures …
Michele Bullock
No, because …
Ian Harper
(
inaudible
) the largest ones.
Michele Bullock
… but this one was a large one of the small ones. But it had —and the ones around it that were

 particularly at risk had — these particular characteristics: (1) was that they had a lot of bonds

 sitting with unrealised losses on their balance sheet.
Ian Harper
Unhedged.
Michele Bullock
Unhedged. (2) They had concentrated deposit bases, concentrated in two ways: large amounts of money

 by a small amount of people, and also the types of people; they were all tech people.
Ian Harper
It had a run.
Chris Edmond
Absolutely. It speeds that up.
Michele Bullock
And some of the feedback you get when we listen to regulators around the world talk about this; they

 say they had never seen a run so quick. It was basically a quarter of the deposits in that, because

 they were uninsured …
Chris Edmond
The size of it.
Michele Bullock
The size and the speed of the run had just never been seen before, so that’s why the regulators

 had to step in.
Chris Edmond
They didn’t have to stand outside in the cold.
Michele Bullock
Yes, so, sorry, I’ve …
Chris Edmond
No, no, no. I think we can all understand that they are well-founded reasons why (1) a special

 authority was granted for the FDIC to intervene and then — in a situation where, at face value, they

 may not have. But I’m more kind of interested in the issue of the interaction of these sorts of

 mechanisms with monetary policy and whether — you kind of gave a fairly direct statement that you

 think conditions are tightening in Australia and that …
Michele Bullock
No. I would say overseas they are tightening. I’m sorry if you misinterpreted me.
Chris Edmond
Okay. That’s what I wanted to ask about. Go on.
Michele Bullock
No. In Australia we are actually not seeing signs of financial tightening here. The banks here:

 again, you’ve already highlighted the way that they’re very, very well regulated here.

 Interest rate risk in the banking book meant that they have to hold capital as the prices — if

 they’re not hedged. In fact, what they do is they do hedge, because they do know that they have

 to hold capital if they’re not hedged against these sorts of things. So there’s no doubt

 that the banks are very solid here. There’s no sign that there’s any tightening in

 financial conditions because people are worried about the banks or runs against banks. And, as yet,

 there doesn’t seem to be Australian banks reacting in any way to tighten financial conditions

 either. So, no, I would say that’s not an issue.
Chris Edmond
I’m glad you clarified that because I was going to ask Greg this: do you think then it was

 correct to kind of pause in this most recent sort of decision, or whether we should have been

 continuing to tighten, given that inflation continues to be significantly in excess of target?
Greg Kaplan
Look, I think the more important question is: where are we going and how are we going to get there?

 My view is that the difference between 25 basis points now or in three months’ time over

 the sort of period that we think the central bank really can control inflation, is probably neither

 here nor there. It’s more understanding what our members of the Board here are thinking about in

 terms of what they’re keeping their eye on. I think Ian nailed it on the head when he said,

 ‘We’re keeping our eye on what the lows those long-term inflation expectations are.’

 And I feel quite comfortable as long as those are being kept under control because, at the end of the

 day, that’s what we want to make sure: that these temporary shocks that we’ve been hit with

 don’t translate into persistently higher inflation over time.
Chris Edmond
That’s fair enough, I think, at one level. But on another level, that’s sort of like a

 rationale for not doing anything this month and then next month. Like, it can take — at what point

 does that argument sort of strain credulity, in the sense that — is it kind of like —
Greg Kaplan
(
inaudible
) some point between now and when it doesn’t. I mean …
Chris Edmond
Well, let me put it this way. Exactly, that’s very useful. So let me kind of make it a little

 more concrete. One might think, that once you see those measures of market inflation expectations

 start to move significantly to the point where you would then change the actions that you would

 otherwise have taken, that in some sense you’re too late.
Greg Kaplan
You might be too late; maybe.
Chris Edmond
So then the question is: ex ante, what should we be doing? So just let me make this really concrete.

 Let’s suppose that you were never going to see ‘along the equilibrium path’, if

 you’ll excuse the expression, a kind of a change in inflation expectations, right? So the

 question is: ex ante, what kinds of developments would lead you to change your monetary policy

 actions, supposing that, if you did things correctly in the rational expectations of equilibrium, you

 would never see those inflation expectations change?
Greg Kaplan
Well, I’m just going to say the obvious, I think, which is that you’re going to look at the

 signals that we see in the world that give us some confidence that the mechanisms by which we think

 we can impact inflation are actually starting to play out. In the model that you describe, you never

 see that; it doesn’t happen; fortunately, we don’t live in that model. But in that model,

 we also know ex ante exactly how much inflation we would see from a particular shock. So we saw the

 big issue in sort of nominal liabilities; we saw a temporary supply shock. In that model, we know

 exactly what to do. Fortunately, we’re not in that model because we don’t see that, but we

 have a lot of things that we can be looking at and we want to be seeing turning points in there. So I

 suspect that’s what goes on at the Board level and probably why they see in the communications

 that we’re starting to see some pressures on wages.
Chris Edmond
So you think that we’ve seen enough of a turning point. So we’ll just junk all equilibrium

 talk and just say: so we’ve seen enough of a turning point, you think, that a pause is fully

 warranted.
Ian Harper
Well, I’m not going to add to what the Deputy Governor said about that. The minutes haven’t

 even been released. But the minutes of the previous meeting, as she rightly pointed out, spoke about

 a pause as one of the scenarios or one of the recommendations that was put alongside another

 recommendation, which is that we go with another 25 basis points; and, as it turned out, the

 Board went for the 25 basis points. So the pause proposition had come up well before any bank

 failures. And in this discussion, well, I think you can read the minutes when they’re released.
Greg Kaplan
But, I mean, I think an important — obviously, I’m not privy to the minutes, so I can …
Chris Edmond
You can speculate.
Greg Kaplan
I can speak freely and nothing I say has any weight to it. But it is the point that expectations

 don’t move that fast. Now, it’s true that …
Chris Edmond
Well, they do.
Greg Kaplan
Until they do. But the idea that realised inflation is …
Chris Edmond
But this is the case of a problem or the fixed exchange rate problem: all of these things are—so we

 have very recent dramatic examples that they don’t move until they do.
Greg Kaplan
Yes, in currency markets, yes …
Chris Edmond
And yield curve markets.
Greg Kaplan
And yield curve markets. Well, I’m sure …
Ian Harper
That’s three years.
Greg Kaplan
But I mean in the trade for goods and labour, no. In fact, it’s the opposite; things take a

 really, really long time to (
inaudible
) we’re going to get a lot of warning there.
Michele Bullock
I mean, the point really is: yes, it’s comforting to see that long-term inflationary

 expectations are anchored. But I tend to agree that it would be too late if you saw them shoot up,

 it’s almost too late.
Ian Harper
Well, to the point, they stayed constant throughout the episode. So, if you thought, that’s the

 only thing to worry about, you would neither have relaxed monetary policy nor tightened monetary

 policy; you’d just sit there, which nobody is going to do.
Michele Bullock
So you are back to looking at — if you think we have an excess demand problem and we’re trying

 to wind it back, you end up looking for the signs that you’re seeing it come through in demand,

 the sorts of things that we’re looking at. And we’re also looking at, obviously, inflation

 itself.
Greg Kaplan
Yes. And look, I mean, the Bank has moved — what was it — 375 basis points.
Michele Bullock
It’s 350.
Greg Kaplan
It’s moved 350 basis points. That’s a big movement. I’ve been out on the record,

 saying that I don’t think 25 basis-points movements here or there actually do

 anything …
Ian Harper
But they add up.
Greg Kaplan
They add up. that’s exactly right. And I often get criticised, by people saying, ‘Oh, so

 you don’t think monetary policy has an effect at all?’ I didn’t say that. I just said

 it doesn’t really matter if we’re 25 here or a bit late or a bit later there. The

 reality is that it’s probably not going to matter. There are no people out in the street who

 it’s really going to make that much of a difference to. But it will add up and it will

 accumulate, and that has — so you’re asking is the point — well, I don’t know.
Begona Dominguez
The only thing is that, once you pause, when do you go up?
Michele Bullock
But the history …
Begona Dominguez
So they can do it.
Michele Bullock
It shows that that’s exactly what we can (
inaudible
).
Ian Harper
That’s right. When the facts change, you change your mind.
Greg Kaplan
Pausing is more common than not pausing.
Michele Bullock
Well, pausing in the past has been more common. This one where we’ve done it at every single

 meeting is actually the exception.
Chris Edmond
Let me come in here. It’s more the pause …
Greg Kaplan
It’s almost like you’re looking for an algorithm. I think his line of reasoning is in want

 of an algorithm. It says, ‘Here are the inputs into our reaction function and they will spit out

 what we do,’ and I suspect that’s going to be really difficult to articulate.
Chris Edmond
I’ll put the point slightly differently. It’s more like a pause relative to other major

 central banks. So that’s, I think, like we’re seeing the dollar depreciate significantly

 and like we might …
Ian Harper
Not significantly.
Michele Bullock
No, we haven’t seen it. It’s basically on a TWI …
Ian Harper
On a TWI basis, it’s rock solid.
Michele Bullock
That’s more important; it’s rock solid.
Ian Harper
Absolutely.
Michele Bullock
So, for whatever reason, the market path in Australia for official interest rates is lower than it is

 overseas. Now, partly that’s reflective of wages increasing more sharply overseas, particularly

 in places like the UK, New Zealand and the US, so it might partly be reflecting that. But that’s

 what we’re seeing in the markets and, as Ian said, they’re the people who are putting their

 money on it.
Chris Edmond
Well, I’m going to switch gears a little bit to go to institutional questions more broadly

 understood. We’ve already touched on, I think, the interactions between monetary and fiscal

 policy, so I’m going to kind of advance a thesis statement and invite people to comment on it.

 So I’m basically going to make the claim that monetary and fiscal policy can’t be thought

 of as being functionally independent, in the sense that the path of fiscal policy matters for

 monetary policy and the path of monetary policy matters for fiscal policy. We have an institutional

 setting where it’s very difficult to comment in what I’ll call a ‘mature way’

 about the interactions between monetary and fiscal policy without creating a lot of noise. It seems

 somehow undesirable that we can’t talk in a kind of open way about the implications of the

 stance of monetary policy for fiscal policy, especially with issues of long-run fiscal policy; and we

 can’t talk about the implications of fiscal policy for monetary policy, especially with issues

 of short-run monetary policy. So are there things that could be done to allow that conversation to

 take place in a more constructive way; or do you disagree with the premise? I guess that you can just

 say, ‘I don’t agree.’
Michele Bullock
I’m not sure I agree entirely with the premise. The way I would think about it is that, over

 (
inaudible
), fiscal policy needs to basically — it needs to go into deficit when

 it’s needed for purposes of supporting the economy. Then we need to be able to make that back,

 so obviously it needs to move with the cycle. And it has a structural element to it, and the

 government has to figure out ways to pay for the services that they want to offer to all of us

 Australians, and that involves them making hard choices about taxes and debt and those sorts of

 things.
Monetary policy is much more a cyclical thing, so I see it much more

 as … it’s difficult if fiscal policy is working completely at odds with monetary policy.

 You saw that in the UK, when the government tried to expand fiscal policy markedly while the Bank of

 England was trying to fight inflation; the markets did not react very well to that. So there is a sense

 in which fiscal policy and monetary policy need to be pulling together, but I do think that one is much

 more structural and the other one is much more cyclical.
Ian Harper
Having said that, there’s a strong cyclical element, given the automatic stabilisers in fiscal

 policy and, at the moment, those automatic stabilisers are working very much in sync with monetary

 tightening.
Michele Bullock
Yes, they are.
Ian Harper
So the budget that the Treasurer will announce next month is likely to look a whole lot more in the

 black than people are expecting off the back of the result of cyclical tightening.
Chris Edmond
Let me just kind of push that. So, if the next budget is unexpectedly not as constrictive as

 currently expected — there is sort of surprise spending or surprise tax initiatives — then that is

 going to matter for the operations of monetary policy over the next year or the next …
Michele Bullock
To the extent it adds to demand in the economy and to the extent that we’ve got excess demand,

 then it does matter, yes.
Chris Edmond
And you won’t be able to say a single thing about it.
Michele Bullock
No, that’s not true. I think …
Ian Harper
The Governor has often …
Michele Bullock
He has often talked about that.
Ian Harper
Yes, to the extent of being criticised for making comments about …
Chris Edmond
Well, no, because then it was kind of construed in his much less direct terms; whereas it would be

 good if we had faster … I’m thinking back to 2018-2019, and it would be good if we had

 faster wage growth in the public sector and things like that, which you can construe as relating to

 fiscal policy, broadly speaking, but I think you wouldn’t narrowly (
inaudible
) the

 monetary-policy transmission mechanism and where we think wage growth comes — normal wage growth come

 from.
Ian Harper
Anyway, I was going to say one more thing about that. The other structural element — and, as

 you’re aware, in comments that people have been making in advance of the Review of the Reserve

 Bank, that’s yet to be released —people have said that it’s a problem for us that the

 Treasury Secretary is a member of the Board of the Bank. And I would say that, even if the Treasury

 Secretary is there, that officer is not there to represent the government; that officer is there — in

 this case his – his own capacity as an economist. But that doesn’t mean that the Treasury

 Secretary can’t inform the Board about thinking with respect to fiscal policy and does. So right

 in the room there, with one vote of nine, is a person whose day job is setting or at least advising

 the government on how fiscal policy should be set and, if we have questions about how that might feed

 into the decision the Board is currently discussing, there’s the person right there.
Michele Bullock
I think everyone is very conscious of that. And, if you think back to when we were talking earlier

 about having inflation below target and the challenges of getting it up to target prior to the

 pandemic, one of the things that was going on at the same time as we were lowering interest rates was

 that the government …
Ian Harper
JobKeeper.
Michele Bullock
was tightening fiscal policy as well, so it was working sort of a little bit against it.
Chris Edmond
I agree, and that’s the kind of episode that’s then guiding my question, where I feel like

 commentary about the extent to which fiscal policy was unnecessarily contractionary in that episode

 was quite muted, I would say, relative to the fundamentals. I mean, you might say, ‘Well, if you

 listened carefully to the right people in the right places, then you would hear it.’
Greg Kaplan
But isn’t that the idea? At the end of the day, central banks can set interest rates

 independently of what’s happening with (
inaudible
).
Chris Edmond
So a fiscal instrument as opposed to policy.
Greg Kaplan
Yes. Fiscal policy can issue nominal liabilities and raise real surpluses or run real deficits …
Ian Harper
Yeah, like all independently of monetary policy.
Greg Kaplan
… independently of what’s happening. The fact that there is an objective of the central

 bank that says, ‘You have to target inflation,’ and the reality is, whether we like it or

 not, that the outcome of inflation is a result of the combination of both what the fiscal authority

 and monetary authority do …
Ian Harper
Are doing, yeah.
Greg Kaplan
… that’s neither here nor there. The central bank can still comment on, ‘Well, we have

 to target inflation and, given the fiscal environment, this is what we’re going to do.’ And

 there’s nothing stopping the Treasury saying, ‘Well, given what the RBA is doing, this is

 what we’re going to do.’ It turns out that the Stackelberg game normally works the other

 way, with the fiscal authority moving first and the central bank reacting to it. I don’t think

 it’s legislated though, that it has to be that way.
Michele Bullock
No. But fiscal policy typically moves slightly slower than monetary policy.
Ian Harper
That’s the other thing.
Begona Dominguez
But also the rules of the game are different now. As you say, the RBA has a mandate while the fiscal

 authority doesn’t have it. They are more prone to this question about choices. But I think there

 is a need for improving the coordination. I’m glad to hear that there is this information going

 through. I’m not sure there should be a representative of the Treasury in the Board.
Ian Harper
I’ve represented the Treasury.
Begona Dominguez
I think that’s mixing things. But, at the minimum, there is needed to have that information

 going on. Together with (
inaudible
), he’s going to be presenting a paper tomorrow

 in which we see that the way central banks need to respond depends on what is their fiscal stance.

 But not only that; I think, to improve the coordination, we would need to have kind of some mandates

 also for fiscal policy to have some — we have the knowledge that fiscal and monetary policies are

 very different. Modellers agree that inflation is a bad thing, high inflation, all of us. But, if we

 start talking about what is the optimal size of the government, we might disagree very much. However,

 even if we disagree on that, we could agree on certain principles of efficiency or transparency and

 accountability, and all these things would help that coordination to work in a better way. Recently,

 Professor Eric Lippert from Virginia has been talking about the importance of transparency from

 fiscal policy. Like, we have been talking about forward guidance but also that kind of forward

 guidance to be also on the fiscal side so that that helps anchor expectations of fiscal policy, and

 that would help with your job and understand what is going to go (
inaudible
).
Michele Bullock
But there’s sort of a little bit of that, isn’t there, though, because when you do the

 budget, they do forecasts for it and they do …
Ian Harper
Yes, at the forward estimates.
Michele Bullock
that in forward estimates and, yes, there are some assumptions in there and so on. But they do a

 little bit of that.
Ian Harper
There’s more than there used to be.
Michele Bullock
Yes, so it’s moving that way.
Chris Edmond
I think we’ve had a good discussion and I cede the terrain, so to speak, but what I’m going

 to do now is throw the floor open to questions from the audience. We’ve got about half an hour

 left. So just put your hand up and we’ll take questions as they come to Kevin.
Question
(
inaudible
) It’s probably a quarter of a century since I’ve really focused on

 monetary policy. But, reflecting on that, I think four words were very important or very common, and

 they’re related to this issue of the dates that things are going to happen, and there was

 ‘long and varied’ in there (
inaudible
).
Michele Bullock
Yes.
Question
I wonder whether the thinking on that has changed. The second one was, Michele, you said we’re

 in the unknown. But, if I think back to the early 1970s (
inaudible
), do you think

 there’s anything by virtue of that that’s relevant now?
Michele Bullock
‘Long and variable lags’: yes, it’s a term that’s certainly back in fashion. And

 that’s another reason for pausing, basically. You know, we’ve done — in 10 months,

 11 months, we’ve done 3.5 percentage points and so, yes, we’re waiting now to see

 how long it takes the lags to come through. One of the things that’s been interesting about this

 particular episode is that, as I said earlier, 40 per cent of people are on fixed rate

 mortgages, so it’s coming through slower into the cash flows of households than it has done in

 the past. So that’s another reason why the lags might be slightly longer and more variable than

 they might otherwise have been, so another reason for the pause.
The lesson I would take away from the earlier ‘70s episodes is that you cannot let

 inflationary expectations get out of control, and I think that’s all the more reason why — interest

 rates, actually, at 3½ per cent and the official cash rate, they’re still not that high

 relative to history. So I think we’ve just got to keep in mind that, yes, they’ve gone up

 quickly and, yes, some people are hurting, but it’s not the whole population; there are other things

 going on here as well. And I think we just have to keep in mind — the lesson for me at least is –

 inflationary expectations need to be kept under control. So we’ve got to keep an eye on the long

 term, but we’ve got to make sure that we are observing what’s going to bring aggregate demand

 back. So that’s, for me, the lesson.
Greg Kaplan
Michele, can I add one that we can learn from the 70s?
Michele Bullock
Yes.
Greg Kaplan
So we raised interest rates by a lot more in the ‘70s. It was very, very clear that …
Ian Harper
Eventually.
Greg Kaplan
Eventually. But we got to a point where real rates were undoubtedly positive at all horizons …
Ian Harper
Okay, that’s true.
Greg Kaplan
… but now we have to look up quite a long way to those inflation expectations to get a world of

 positive real rates. But I think we’ve got — I think there’s something positive to take

 from the ‘70s in the Australian context, which is that there was also a lot of fiscal

 coordination at that point. If you look at what happened ex post, in terms of fiscal policy,

 it’s that, over the coming decades after that, there was return to surplus, and in the United

 States as well. Now, here, what you were talking about earlier, we’re in a much better position

 than a lot of other countries, and I think that’s another argument for the pause. It’s

 that, when we think about what we’re going to see on the fiscal side, that played a big role in

 the ‘70s, and we’re more likely to see that playing a role, I think, in Australia than in

 other countries. So I think you might have an easier job then.
Ian Harper
Yes. Just more on the 70s: we’ve been …
Kevin
You remember them!
Ian Harper
Yes, I do remember the ‘70s, Kevin, just like you.
Kevin
I just read about it.
Ian Harper
We’ve been criticised — the Governor’s been criticised in talking about the risk of a

 prices/wages outbreak and of thinking ‘in 1970s terms’. In other words, people referring to

 the fact that, back then, there was a much higher degree of unionisation, much greater centralisation

 of wages fixing and, therefore, the chances — well the during the 1970s, we had actual indexation, as

 you’ll recall, where literally wages were indexed to prices. So it is true that, when the ACTU,

 our union peak body, and others make the point that that’s all outdated thinking, it

 doesn’t mean that there won’t be a prices/wages spiral, but not for that reason. So

 we’ve learnt from that, I think, Kevin. Just to your point briefly there, Greg: of course, in

 the 1970s, the exchange rate wasn’t floating …
Michele Bullock
Yes.
Ian Harper
… so we didn’t really have an independent monetary policy. That’s one way to get

 fiscal monetary coordination: you just don’t have an independent monetary policy.
Kevin
That’s a fair point.
Chris Edmond
There are a few questions here.
Question
(
inaudible
) In terms of (
inaudible
), talking in the post-pandemic—monetary

 policy in the post-pandemic — and thinking about the post-Global Financial Crisis as well — one thing

 that’s completely different from, say, raising interest rates in May 1998 and by 300 basis

 points now is the (
inaudible
). And in terms of the political and

 (
inaudible
) implication of raising interest rates now, you have in the Bank — you know,

 the Feds are holding huge amounts of unrealised losses on their books and the impact of the C-note

 has just been sent back to the fiscal authorities. At some point, it gets noticed and it’s going

 to have, at least in the US, an impact in terms of monetary policy going forward. But now you’ve

 got these huge expansions of the balance sheets. So thoughts about that: relative to sort of what we

 learnt about dealing with inflation and handling inflation in the 1990s versus now, the big

 difference is the balance sheet.
Ian Harper
Well, the balance sheets are certainly different, but I can make the point in our case that the

 central bank’s balance sheet is mark to market. So we know exactly what the losses are and we

 know exactly how much we’re underwater with capital. And there was a discussion at the Board as

 to whether we should ask the government to recapitalise the Bank or whether we would just carry this

 loss —because, after all, it disappears into the public sector in the wider scheme of things —and

 work it off as the bonds mature. Because it is a mark-to-market loss, we will still lose, but the

 loss won’t be as great as we approach the maturity date for these different bonds, it will come

 good. And the result of that conversation between the Bank and the Government was that, no, we would

 just carry it; it will be announced in the annual report; people all know about it. I don’t

 think that that’s made any difference to the effectiveness that the Bank has in terms of its

 monetary policy; it’s public information. The reason that it’s occurred is completely

 understood. The alternative would have been, as has happened once before, for the Government to

 recapitalise the Bank and to realise the loss on its own balance sheet straight up, but nobody

 thought that would make any difference really. And, in respect of the seigniorage point that you

 make, the Treasury is well aware that the Bank will not be paying dividends for the next, what, five

 years is it? And so they already know and have built that into their estimates that they’ve got

 to find that additional money to keep their own accounts in order, because the Bank is not paying

 dividends for five years. So none of that is a secret.
Chris Edmond
I think we had a question here.
Question
Hi, Ed Burton, from the University of Virginia, and thanks for the shout-out to my colleague, Eric

 Lippert. The Federal Reserve — I’m not that familiar with Australian banking or New Zealand

 banking — but the Federal Reserve system has been criticised quite a bit for its targeting policies.

 It was criticised for targeting rates, overnight rates, to be too low for a long period of time; and

 now there’s a huge chorus from many directions that they’ve stayed the course too long on

 targeting rates at higher levels. My question is — you always have to wonder what might have happened

 in the absence of some of these policies – and the question I’d like to ask is: if, on

 March 15, 2022, the Federal Reserve had said — I can just imagine Jay Powell coming out and saying —

 ‘We’re announcing today that we’re no longer going to target overnight rates;

 we’re going to let them just go wherever they want but without changing the planned reduction in

 the Federal Reserve balance sheet,’ what then might have happened? It strikes me as unlikely

 that rates would have stayed low, with inflation clipping along at about a six per cent pace; so

 how much different would the pattern of rates been, had the Fed simply abandoned rate targeting in

 March of 2022?
Greg Kaplan
Can I just ask for clarification because I’m not sure that I fully understood: and did what

 instead?
Michele Bullock
Yes.
Question
Continued the balance sheet reduction plan that they had announced in December; suppose they’d

 simply left that in place.
Ian Harper
Let the bonds mature and they don’t buy any additional bonds back.
Michele Bullock
So they basically run down liquidity.
Greg Kaplan
They just run down liquidity.
Ian Harper
Exactly. They just left the balance sheet (
inaudible
).
Michele Bullock
Yes. I don’t really know the answer to that question, I have to say. I mean, we do know that, in

 the past, post GFC, when they ran down their balance sheet, it did get to a point where the markets

 did, in fact, tighten quite significantly in the Taper Tantrum, for example. So I guess my question

 back to you is whether or not that would just result in a lot more volatility, which would be

 unhelpful, rather than the more stable process of saying, ‘Well, we’re going to control the

 rate and we’ll move it up in a controlled fashion rather than just running down the balance

 sheet and having volatility in the rates, which might be unhelpful.’
Begona Dominguez
(
inaudible
) have a paper (
inaudible
) on how to manage the balance sheet.

 One thing that we learn is that it is good to do these things slowly to keep the economy stable.

 I’m not sure about doing something quite different on — when you are in the middle of all those

 bad shocks happening in the economy. I’m not sure it’s that good to add more volatility

 into it; I would be concerned with that. One thing that is different nowadays compared to the

 ‘70s is that actually we have central bankers that know much better how to do the job — I need

 to say this — so, to throw everything out of the window, I wouldn’t do that in the middle of a

 crisis.
Question
I think the rates were moved 11 times or 10 times in a row, so my question is about the

 credibility of the Reserve Bank. Yes, there was a message that, until 2024, rates would not go up,

 and people made investment decisions on that. Another question is about countries, and the central

 bank would recall bonds as well of the foreign currency, especially with the USD bond sales going

 down and now they are investing in gold and gold prices are shooting up. So, in future, if there is

 another way around where Reserve Bank wants people to spend money and they’re lowering interest

 rates, why would people trust that that will stay in the foreseeable future and really spend money

 rather than paying off their mortgages?
Michele Bullock
Well, I think — and we concluded this in our Review of Forward Guidance — that, actually, our

 credibility, we think, did in fact suffer through this process, so I think you’re right. But, if

 we were lowering rates in the future, I don’t think we’d be giving forward guidance in the

 same manner that we have given it in this emergency situation. So I think people would be responding

 based on their classic decisions about intertemporal substitution: do they want to save, do they want

 to — but we do know — one thing we do know is that Australians do like to save; they do like to sock

 money away into their offset and redraw accounts …
Ian Harper
Even when rates are going up.
Michele Bullock
even when rates are going up, and they’re still doing is. So, yes, I think the credibility issue

 is a good point.
Question
Given that we’re in a post-COVID world, I’m curious about the learnings from that event. So

 I think we faced a pretty unique situation, where there was uneven impact on certain job sectors

 versus not; and my understanding of monetary policy is that that’s relatively broad brush. And

 so, in the future now, in dealing with targeted interventions, do you have a better method of dealing

 with this, or are you coordinating with the Government better on fiscal policy, for example, or are

 there new methods still (
inaudible
)? I’m just curious: what’s been learnt in

 that situation?
Michele Bullock
Well, I’ll start and, Ian, you might have a view. I mean, we’ve discussed this before.

 We’ve got one — I mean, despite the fact that we’ve used these other policies, we’ve

 really got one instrument, and that’s the interest rate. And, yes, it’s blunt. That’s

 the other word that comes up a lot: ‘long and variable lags’; and interest rate use is

 ‘blunt’. It affects different people differently. And what we’re hearing a lot about

 now is the people that it’s squeezing, which are the people that have mortgages; that’s the

 one-third of the population. There’s two-thirds of the population that don’t have

 mortgages, and quite a few of them are seeing the interest rates rise on their deposit accounts. So

 there’s difference. So I guess I would say that heaven forbid that we ended up in a similar

 situation like this again. I think we’d probably — and this, again, was one of the findings out

 of the Review – we insured really heavily for the downside risk. We threw everything at it

 because we were really worried about the downside risk. Maybe, in retrospect, going forward, we might

 want to do a little bit more thinking about what if we’re wrong on the upside and how bad could

 it be. So I think that would probably be the main learning. But, in terms of the interest rate,

 it’s what we’ve got, it’s blunt.
Swati, Bloomberg News
Michele, my question is to either you or Ian on whether there is any nervousness around the housing

 market, which is rising, and there are some commentators who are calling the trough in the market. So

 what kind of inflation will follow through from the housing market? We are seeing rents rising as

 well and continuing to go up. And a follow-through on that is whether you’re putting hope over

 prudence in taking longer to bring down inflation.
Ian Harper
I’ll have a go at half of that.
Michele Bullock
Do you want to have go at houses?
Ian Harper
No, no; you go.
Michele Bullock
I’ll have a go at houses. So there’s actually so many bits in that question. So the

 established housing market: yes, it’s fallen quite a bit since its peak, but then people forget

 it went up 20 per cent in the pandemic.
Ian Harper
It’s still above where it was.
Michele Bullock
It’s still above where it was …
Ian Harper
pre-pandemic.
Michele Bullock
pre-pandemic; that’s right. Interestingly, initially it fell and then it rose very sharply. So

 it’s still above that and it has stabilised. One of the things we do know is that there are

 wealth effects. People do respond — consumption does respond when housing prices are — when housing

 prices are falling, it’s typically having an impact on the way people are thinking about their

 wealth and also their consumption. So, to the extent that it has stabilised, that might indicate that

 people have sort of stabilised at a lower level of consumption, but they’re not falling any

 further. So that might be one.
So we’re watching that because of the things that have been turning down. We talked

 about consumption and we talked about housing prices. The other thing in the established housing market,

 of course, is that there is quite a big pipeline to be run off from all of the stimulus that went into

 the housing market through fiscal programs and state government programs. But there’s actually quite

 a big cliff coming housing approvals and starts and so on, six to nine months out, are not looking very good at all. So

 there’s a few things in the established housing market. Some suggest that maybe things are

 stabilising; others are suggesting, no, they’re not.
The question about rents is a different one. Vacancy rates are really low; they’re

 at historically low levels in many places, and they’re below average in Sydney and Melbourne. We

 haven’t been building much high-density; all of the pandemic spending went into freestanding

 detached housing. The other thing that has happened is that household size has declined to historic lows.

 Through the pandemic, people didn’t want to share anymore; they wanted to have a spare office in the

 house. So there’s a few things going on there; and, on top of that, we’ve got immigration.
Ian Harper
Immigration, exactly.
Michele Bullock
We’ve got strong immigration. So, yes, there is trouble brewing in rental accommodation, and

 that has implications for inflation because rental inflation is going to rise. So, if you put all

 those things together, I’m not sure what sort of pudding you get. But it’s complicated and

 it means that we have to continue to watch what’s going on in the housing market, because there

 are some things that are playing on the downside and there are other things that are actually going

 to be playing on the upside for inflation. So that’s where I’d say we’re at with that.
Ian Harper
Yes, that’s right, yes.
Question
Hi my name is Sydney Libby, I’m an undergraduate student at the University of Virginia, and I

 just want to thank you all for hosting this panel today; it’s been recently interesting to be a

 part of and listen to. So my question is regarding the long-term inflation expectations that you were

 talking about before and, admittedly, I’m only familiar with the history of inflation

 expectations in the US. And, looking at the empirical data, really only in one instance — I believe,

 1981 — the inflation expectations predicted what inflation did. For basically the entire history of

 tracking inflation expectations, there has been really no correlation between inflation expectations

 being able to predict what happens with inflation. Really, it’s been, unsurprisingly, that

 expectations are trailing the actual inflation pattern. So, going back to your mention of the

 importance of looking at inflation expectations before, I would love it if you could just elaborate

 more on that and why that’s so important in your determinations of policy.
Ian Harper
Well, for me, it feeds into what I think the markets are thinking is likely to happen and the impact

 of that. Now, the fact that they may well be wrong ex post is — I take your point, but what matters

 is their ex-ante expectations and what they’re thinking now is likely to happen and how that

 feeds into the decisions that they’re making about buying and selling securities, which feeds

 into prices and interest rates. That’s the relevance of that.
If the markets start to — if those expectations become unanchored, then people are going

 to start changing their behaviour about how they can demand and buy and sell securities, let alone what

 they buy and sell in the markets, and that changes the response that we have to make at a policy level.

 So it’s really giving you a window on what people who are putting money on the table — what their

 guesses are about the future. And your valid point is that their guesses — it may just be a random walk;

 it may just be like throwing a coin or tossing a coin or throwing a die, when you look back at it, true.

 But what matters for us making policy is what we think they think
what they think we’re going to do, right? So it’s a window on their expectations of what

 they think we’re going to do, as a policymaker, and what the impact of that’s likely to be

 over the long haul.
Question
So what they think is going to happen in the future is always wrong; it never correlates

 (indistinct).
Greg Kaplan
Yes. But the question is whether it’s systematically wrong.
Ian Harper
Yes. This is on average.
Greg Kaplan
So that would be a big problem. And, yes, I take your point; I think it’s a really good one. If

 it’s systematically the case that expectations undershoot or overshoot realised inflation, then

 you start to worry about if it’s just that they’re a mean zero …
Question
We (
inaudible
) take that forward, so there’s no inflation. People don’t expect

 inflation and then, once inflation starts to increase, that’s when expectations — so they see

 what’s happening and then they expect more inflation.
Greg Kaplan
Well, that’s okay. What I would worry about is if I could predict inflation on the basis of

 inflation expectations.
Ian Harper
Yes.
Greg Kaplan
If that were the case, we’d be in trouble; and, if that is the case, probably we’d have to

 start looking at other data. I don’t know whether or not it is. It’s still consistent that

 that’s not the case and they still follow; that’s possible as well.
Begona Dominguez
There may be also many different forms of expectations of inflation. You just think about the

 standard (
inaudible
) model firms that are setting up prices and are going to be thinking

 about what is going to be the cost of the inputs that they need to buy to produce. That is going to

 affect how there are then going to be setting prices.
Ian Harper
So feedback on behaviour.
Greg Kaplan
It’s a good point.
Question
I’m going to ask a typical Australian question. I’m from Monash University. So it is a

 common fact that both the economic condition of Australia and the physical policy were benefited by

 the commodity price boom during 2005 and during the pandemic crisis, and it’s likely that the

 commodity price will have to go down in the next one or two years and the Commonwealth Treasury is

 likely to have a fiscal consolidation. So my question is: will you worry that the current hike in

 interest rates will lead to a possible economic recession or a possible economic slowdown in

 Australia in the next two or three years; and how will the central bank respond to it?
Ian Harper
Because of the commodity price cycle?
Michele Bullock
Well, I think the question was that the current commodity price cycle is supporting the fiscal

 position of the Government; is that your point?
Question
Yes.
Michele Bullock
And, therefore, as that unwinds, then the fiscal position is going to basically wane and we’re

 going to end up sort of having — with the reverse of the boom from the commodity price, we’ll

 end up with a recession from the commodity price.
Ian Harper
So monetary policy would have to be recalibrated.
Michele Bullock
Monetary policy would have to be recalibrated. The other thing that happens is the exchange rate can

 move and—
Ian Harper
And you get a natural hedge.
Michele Bullock
It does tend to — at the moment, commodity prices have risen, but our models suggest that the

 exchange rate is where it probably should be. In terms of commodity prices and interest

 differentials, it probably looks about right. But the other thing that could happen is that the

 exchange rate could fall if you ended up in that position.
Question
Thank you very much. I’m from the University of Technology Sydney. My question is similar to the

 one that Chris asked to all of you, and it’s about the trade-off. Do you see any trade-off

 between the macro prudential policy and the expansion and contraction of different lending charges,

 in Australia particularly?
Michele Bullock
‘Trade-off’. I’m not sure I’d use the word ‘trade-off’ for macro

 prudential policy. The rise of macro prudential policy, I think, has been quite interesting over the

 last decade or so. It’s always been used quite extensively in more developing countries to try

 and sort of control where lending is going and lending standards and so on. It’s really only, I

 would say, over the last five years grown much traction in Australia. APRA started to dabble in this

 about five years ago. They’ve more recently sort of also added a very explicit one now;

 they’re going to have a countercyclical capital buffer, so they’re going to build it in now

 rather than just relying on lending standards.
But to your point, we talked earlier about the trade-offs between interest — well,

 interest rates and their potential impact on financial stability, and this is one way in which APRA has,

 in the last little while, tried to address some of those financial stability concerns. So we talked about

 pre-pandemic when inflation was low, we were trying to lower interest rates a bit further; we were trying to be a

 bit prudent. The other thing that was happening was APRA was trying to crack down a little bit on

 lending standards. So they were, in fact, moving into interest-only lending, for example, and saying,

 ‘Well, we’ll put limits on that.’ Higher LVR lending is another thing; in recent

 times, they focused on high debt-to-income ratio lending. So there is an increasing push in this. And

 I think you’ll see more of this from APRA because they’ve got a framework now that

 they’re working on, and that’s not done independently of the Bank.
Ian mentioned earlier the Council of Financial Regulators. In considering what role macro

 prudential policy might play in thinking about financial stability concerns, it gets discussed with the

 Bank and it gets discussed in the Council of Financial Regulators. So I wouldn’t say it’s a

 trade-off; I’d say it’s a part of the package of things that we’ve got available to manage

 the economy, and it’s getting more legs.
DAVID FRANKEL
I think we’ve got time for one more question. I’m aware that there’s someone there.
Chris Edmond
There’s someone over here? Okay. Right, we’ll have two very quick questions.
Unknown
I agree with you; we definitely should end on time.
Question
This is a very quick question. I’m from Uni SA. My question is about productivity. So there was

 a lot of talk previously about how, you know, the real wage is not increasing, whereas the nominal

 wage is increasing, and then whether the level of productivity is actually increasing in that place

 or not. So what are your thoughts about that one, in the context of the Australian situation

 post-pandemic times?
Michele Bullock
Well, Greg, I think — well, I could say that we’re not happy with it. That’s what I would

 say.
Greg Kaplan
Well, look, there’s two ways to bring inflation down. Either you can lower the price of goods in

 terms of money, or you can raise the price of money in terms of goods; and higher productivity would

 be the best way out of this for everyone. So then we don’t have to do anything and so that would

 be great.
Ian Harper
That’s right. There’s a thousand pages worth of proposals on the government’s, on the

 Treasury’s desk.
Greg Kaplan
Yes, exactly; at least.
DAVID FRANKEL
And over here.
Question
I’ve got a very high, particular question. I’m not a finance student. I was just listening

 to Michele about rent and talking about going down to an interest rate of 0.1 per cent.

 What stopped you from going to a negative interest rate?
Michele Bullock
Well, I actually wasn’t on the Board at the time, and Ian might …
Ian Harper
I can give—
Michele Bullock
So that’s my out.
Ian Harper
… you an answer to that.
Michele Bullock
But I would say — and correct me if I’m wrong, Ian — that it was considered by the Board quite

 extensively, but it was felt that it wouldn’t give you much. And, observing what had happened

 with negative interest rates in a number of European countries particularly, overseas, it potentially

 introduced some quite damaging impacts. So I think the feeling was that the Board decided that,

 really, it wasn’t a path we wanted to necessarily go down. It was not ruled out completely; but

 it was really not a path we wanted to go down, given other experiences.
Ian Harper
Yes, a fair summary. Remember that the rate of interests on currency is zero, and the last thing we

 wanted was for people to run in favour of currency and out of the banking system. The banks,

 similarly, wouldn’t or at least have shown great reluctance to offer negative interest rates on

 deposits and so, as interest rates go down and down, it narrowed bank margins. If you talk about your

 trade-off with financial stability, the last thing you want is for monetary policy running interest

 rates at such low levels that you start to compromise the income to the banks.
Greg Kaplan
Okay. Income to the banks is a good place to stop.
David Frankel
I want to thank everybody for coming. Also, please join me in thanking our esteemed panel of experts

 for sharing their wisdom with us today.
Applause—
