BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Prudent Mortgage Lending Standards Help Ensure Financial Stability – Sydney
DATE: 12/02/2023
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2012/sp-so-230212.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Prudent Mortgage Lending Standards Help Ensure Financial Stability
Luci Ellis
Head of Financial Stability Department
Address to the Australian Mortgage Conference 2012
Sydney
–
23 February 2012
Audio
15.73MB
Download
housing, lending standards
Good morning, and thank you to RFi for the opportunity to speak to you today. Property
 markets and financial stability are both topics that are dear to my heart,
 and I hope to yours as well. It has been known for generations that boom-bust
 cycles in asset prices can be harmful to the economy and the people in it.
 They are especially harmful when fuelled by easy credit. Sadly, that knowledge
 has not stopped the busts occurring. The source of the threat to financial
 stability is more often in commercial property or property development than
 in home mortgages, so I think we need to keep the risks posed by the housing
 and home mortgage markets in perspective. Still, if something did go badly
 wrong in the housing market, it would be painful and could damage financial
 stability. I therefore want to go through some of the reasons why households
 might default on their mortgages, explain why the US market became so distressed,
 and show how we can continue to avoid a similar situation.
Is housing really the problem?
Although this talk is about home mortgages, I want to emphasise that home mortgage
 markets with prudent lending standards do not generally pose risks to financial
 stability. It is not unusual for housing prices to fall, especially if they
 had been booming previously, or if the economy has turned down. But for that
 to translate into a big upswing in mortgage defaults, the economy generally
 has to have weakened first. That was the pattern of the housing busts of the
 1930s and early 1990s in many countries. It is also what we see in Ireland,
 Spain and the United Kingdom today. In those countries, as in the past, commercial
 real estate and property development have been the bigger problems. The recent
 cycle in commercial property prices has been at least as large as that in
 housing prices for essentially every country for which we have good data,
 including the United States as well as countries like Spain and Ireland (Graph 1).
Graph 1
Typically, the rate of home mortgage defaults remains low enough that it does not
 damage the financial system as much as property-related corporate loan defaults.
 The effects therefore do not feed back to the real economy to the same extent.
 All the same, the recent US experience shows that painful housing busts can
 happen. We would certainly want to avoid one here. Housing lending is a larger
 fraction of the balance sheets of Australian banking institutions than for
 their US counterparts. So in the unlikely event a US-style bust did happen,
 it would be harmful to financial stability in Australia.
We should seek to avoid US-style housing busts, not only because they harm financial
 stability, but also because they impose great social costs. Losing money in
 a failed property investment is one thing, but how much worse would it be
 to lose your home? Millions of American households have lost their homes to
 foreclosure. Whole neighbourhoods have been blighted by empty and even uninhabitable
 homes. Communities are fractured and lives are disrupted, sometimes permanently.
There is no reason why Australia should follow the same path as the United States
 in this respect. But it is important that we continue to avoid the same mistakes.
 By ‘we’, I do not refer only to policymakers. Mortgage lenders
 need to refrain from easing lending standards the way they did in the United
 States. And so far, you have been refraining. It is a key difference between
 the two countries, and it motivates the title of my talk today.
Why do some households default on their mortgages?
There is a common misconception that US home buyers can just walk away from their
 mortgage, and will do so whenever the value of their home falls below their
 loan balance. Non-recourse lending applies in some states for some borrowers,
 but the law in most US states allows lenders to sue for any remaining shortfall
 from the proceeds of sale of foreclosed homes. It is just that many do not
 bother going to court to obtain a ‘deficiency judgement’, as they're
 known. Experience has shown that households are much less likely to default
 on their mortgages than a simple financial test would imply (Vandell 1995).
 Rather than just giving up and walking away at the first sign of difficulty,
 many borrowers strive to maintain their repayments or to get back on track
 after falling behind (Foote, Gerardi and Willen 2008).
Instead of imagining a ‘ruthless defaulter’ who walks away from their
 financial obligations, we need to focus more on
capacity to pay
and how it can decline. The reality is that things
 can happen to people that make it difficult to repay their loans – their
 relationships break down, or they lose their jobs, or a member of the family
 becomes too ill to work or even dies. We economists and credit risk modellers
 speak euphemistically of idiosyncratic shocks, but this is what we mean. Financial
 stability policymakers cannot legislate away these individual setbacks, but
 we can be alert to circumstances that could make them more common or more
 damaging.
The most obvious factor that can make things worse is a recession. In good times,
 the people most at risk of losing their jobs are less likely than average
 to have a mortgage. As unemployment rises, though, many more people face a
 loss of income, and more of them are likely to have mortgages. So the really
 large upswings in mortgage arrears rates have, perhaps not surprisingly, tended
 to occur at the same time as large increases in unemployment. This is certainly
 the experience in countries like the United Kingdom and Spain in recent years
 (Graph 2).
Graph 2
Falling housing prices are another factor that tends to result in higher rates of
 mortgage arrears. If something bad happens to you and you can no longer afford
 your repayments, it is better to sell and have a bit left over after discharging
 the mortgage. If the property value has fallen below the loan balance, though,
 you are in a much worse situation. You can't easily sell if you are in
 trouble or even if you just want to move to a cheaper area or a more appropriate
 home, or to where the jobs are.
So we need to be alert to falling housing prices, but we also need to keep them in
 perspective. There still needs to be an underlying problem with the borrower's
 ability to repay before they default. A note of caution, though: housing price
 growth is no longer running ahead of income growth the way it did during the
 1990s and early 2000s, when the economy was still adjusting to disinflation
 and deregulation (Graph 3). And because inflation and thus income growth
 are lower than in the 1970s and 1980s, soft periods in the housing market
 could now be more likely to involve falling housing prices.
Graph 3
Mortgage debt is a nominal quantity, fixed in dollar terms until the borrower pays
 some of it down. So if periods of mild price falls are more common nowadays,
 households are more likely to end up in negative equity unless they do something
 about it, by paying back principal. I will have more to say about this in
 a moment. For now, just consider that higher debt burdens make it more likely
 that a household will run into repayment difficulty. And now that the transition
 period is over, low inflation makes it more likely that households in difficulty
 will also be in negative equity.
The meltdown in the US housing market cannot be explained by these factors alone,
 however. Mortgage arrears began rising rapidly well before unemployment did,
 even when housing prices had fallen only modestly (Graph 4). Had capacity
 to pay deteriorated so much? It is to this question that I now want to turn.
Graph 4
What went wrong in the United States?
Much has been written on the causes of the crisis and the housing bust that sparked
 it, including by me. The causes are complex, but I think they can be boiled
 down to three things: lax lending practices, lax lending practices, and lax
 lending practices. Lending standards eased in the United States far beyond
 what was seen in other countries over the boom period. Partly this was because
 certain specialist subprime lenders gained market share, but individual lenders
 also lowered their standards.
Subprime lending has long been a niche in US mortgage finance. The traditional players
 in this market understood that it was a very risky customer base. These borrowers
 are, after all, people with a history of missing payments on other debt. During
 the boom in subprime mortgages, US lenders thought they could manage their
 exposure to these risky borrowers by ensuring they would not remain customers
 for long. They tried to enforce this with loan terms that induced borrowers
 to refinance after a few years, like large scheduled increases in required
 repayments. But if credit wasn't available elsewhere and the borrower
 couldn't afford the higher subsequent repayments, default might have been
 the only option.
Much of the subprime and other non-prime lending that went on was not based on proper
 assessments of borrowers' ability to service the loan. Brokers and lenders
 did not verify incomes or other financial obligations. All they seemed to
 care about was the value of the collateral. If housing prices kept rising,
 they assumed, the borrower could either refinance or sell, and everything
 would be fine. Big assumption. We would never want to see this kind of asset-based
 lending in the Australian market.
So subprime markets and lax lending decisions were key differences between the US
 and Australian markets. What happens during the life of the loan also matters
 a great deal. Some recent research by economists at the Federal Reserve suggests
 that it was not high proportions of subprime loans that predicted which districts
 would have worse outcomes for prices and loan defaults (Barlevy and Fisher
 2010). Rather, it was the proportion of new lending that was interest-only
 loans. These loans were not being paid down. In some cases, the loan balance
 was increasing through cash-out refinancing or explicit negative amortisation
 options.
How are Australia and other countries avoiding a US-style situation?
As the RBA has made clear many times before, one important reason Australia did not
 go down the same road as the United States is that lending standards didn't
 ease as much here. Even at its peak, subprime lending was only ever a tiny
 fraction of the total. Low-doc loans were also a small niche. And we never
 saw here the explosion of zero-deposit loans – or worse, the 125 per cent
 loans that were available in the United Kingdom. In Australia in recent years,
 around two-thirds of new mortgage borrowers from banks had an initial loan-to-valuation
 ratio below 80 per cent. If we look at the whole mortgage book,
 that fraction is even higher.
A large part of the reason why lending standards didn't ease as much here is
 that prudential supervision is stricter. Unlike in the United States, in Australia
 most mortgage lending is done by firms that are prudentially regulated. And
 unlike in the United States, there is only one prudential supervisor, APRA.
 Australian lenders can't arbitrage differences in prudential treatment
 across different regulators.
There are quite a few mortgage lenders that are not prudentially supervised, though,
 and this is where an important second line of defence comes in. Consumer protection
 standards around credit are a vital part of the authorities' defence against
 a US-style outcome, a part that in my view has been under-appreciated to date.
 Consumer protection standards for credit products have in recent years been
 broadened, and shifted to a national framework administered by ASIC. But the
 earlier state-based system still had the three features most needed to avoid
 US-style problems: it was nationally consistent; it covered all consumer borrowers;
 and it covered all lenders consistently, regardless of whether they were prudentially
 supervised or not.
Another important mainstay against a US-style outcome is that many Australian households
 actually pay their mortgages down, often quite quickly (Graph 5). Estimates
 vary, but it seems as many as half of owner-occupiers with mortgages pay it
 down faster than the contract requires. The faster they pay it down, the less
 likely they are to end up in negative equity; they have a head start if prices
 should fall. Some of them must be running their debt down quite fast: data
 from lenders suggest that the total amount of excess repayments made is similar
 to the amount of required repayments. This is a welcome feature of the Australian
 market that is rarely seen overseas.
Graph 5
The international regulatory community is all too aware of the role of lax lending
 practices in the US meltdown. In response, the Financial Stability Board (FSB)
 has drafted some global principles for sound mortgage lending practices, which
 all countries should
 follow.
[1]
These principles were released for consultation last year and should be finalised
 quite soon. I was part of the group that drafted these principles, so naturally
 I commend them to you. The Principles recognise that lending standards are
 multidimensional. This is a crucial point. Many factors affect a borrower's
 capacity to repay their loan. Some of them are complementary; others can offset
 each other.
The international debate about so-called ‘macroprudential policy’ and
 financial stability policy more generally has been quite focused on housing
 and mortgages. For instance, there has been a lot of talk about the idea of
 the authorities setting a cap on loan-to-valuation ratios (LVRs), and periodically
 adjusting that cap. Some countries already do this. The FSB did not mandate
 or specifically encourage such a policy tool, and we do not think it is necessarily
 warranted in the Australian environment. It is, of course, important that
 borrowers put some of their own resources into the purchase of their home.
 But the focus should not be on maximum LVRs at origination, ignoring all other
 aspects of lending standards. In my view, capacity to service the loan is
 far more important.
Looking at LVRs just at origination also ignores how these ratios evolve over the
 life of the loan, and how they are distributed across households. In Australia,
 households in aggregate used to have very little debt against their homes,
 relative to the value of those homes, back when the financial sector was highly
 regulated and inflation eroded that debt quickly (Graph 6). Obviously
 this measure of leverage has risen since then. It would not be desirable for
 this ratio to approach that in the United States. However, we do not think
 the most effective way to prevent that would be to impose a cap just for new
 borrowers.
Graph 6
Nor do we think it is sensible to rely on simple rules like a ratio of loan amount
 to income; nowadays many Australian lenders sensibly take borrowers' other
 obligations and expenses into account when determining how much debt can be
 serviced, and thus how much they will lend.
The Principles themselves deal with the various dimensions of lending standards in
 their own order, but I like to group those dimensions into five categories.
First,
serviceability
: or in simpler terms, capacity to pay. This
 is covered in Principle 2 of the FSB proposal. It is the crucial decision
 of how much to lend. And I think it is the decision point where it is all
 too easy to become complacent and lend too much.
Lenders should also consider over what
term
the loan is to be serviced.
 The term affects how quickly the loan is paid down. As the Principles also
 note, if the loan term extends past normal retirement ages, lenders need
 to allow for that when assessing capacity to pay. Don't assume, without
 good reason, that borrowers will necessarily downsize when they retire.
Amortisation
of the loan is also important. Principle 2.1 in the
 FSB document states: ‘Jurisdictions should ensure that lenders appropriately
 assess borrowers' ability to service and fully repay their loans without
 causing them undue hardship.’ The National Consumer Credit Code in
 Australia says something similar. Interest-only loans have their place, but
 the point about mortgage lending is that the household should be able to
 pay it off eventually. Otherwise we would be in the undesirable world of
 asset-based lending.
Of course, we do have to think about
collateralisation
, or loan-to-valuation
 ratio. This is covered in Principle 3 of the proposal, where the FSB emphasised
 the need to avoid allowing higher LVRs just because housing prices happen
 to be rising. Principle 4 covers how that valuation should be arrived at.
Finally,
subordination
greatly affects loan performance. Some of
 the worst loss outcomes in the US meltdown occurred in portfolios of second
 mortgages, and the structured securities based on them. Sometimes the lender
 for the first mortgage didn't even know that the second mortgage existed.
Within each of these dimensions, both lenders and policymakers need to think about
 more than just the explicit loan terms. We must consider the
variability
of those terms, and of the circumstances of the borrower.
 For example, does the borrower have an unusually volatile income or employment
 history? And have both the borrower and lender allowed enough of a margin
 to cope with interest rate changes? We must also consider who has the
option
to vary those loan terms. Australian borrowers' tendency to repay ahead of schedule
 is a good example of this. And we must consider whether and how the lender
 can
verify
that the information they base their decisions
 on is true. This last aspect is so important that the FSB made it the first
 of the Principles. The problems with stated income loans – and even
 outright fraud – in the US market during its boom, show how important
 verification can be.
Conclusion
In conclusion, I would like to stress that Australia, like many other countries,
 does not have the ingredients needed to create an outcome like that in the
 United States. But in ensuring that remains the case, much will depend on
 you, the mortgage lenders.
If I may use an analogy: we know that the key to maintaining a healthy weight is
 to have a healthy diet and to exercise regularly. Yet we find it hard to avoid
 temptation. And so it is with maintaining a healthy mortgage market. It is
 always tempting to ease lending standards, and dress that up as responding
 to competition or giving the customer a better deal. It must be hard to resist
 the disappointed customers who just want to borrow that bit extra to purchase
 their dream home, especially when the loan officer is also trying to make
 budget on new loan approvals. But in the experience of the United States,
 we have seen what can happen when lenders yield to that temptation.
If lenders were to ease lending standards beyond the point of prudence, they would
 not be doing anyone any favours. Their customers, the borrowers, would be
 overburdened by their debts. The firm themselves would face difficulties if
 loan defaults were to rise. And financial stability would be much harder to
 maintain. I am pleased to say that I do not currently see signs of widespread
 lax lending practices here in Australia. Indeed, APRA has been consulting
 with the boards of the larger banking institutions about their housing lending
 standards. But there will be times – good times, when everything seems
 rosy – when lenders will find it hard to maintain the necessary prudence.
 While the regulators can take actions and central bankers like me can warn
 of the risks, in the end we all have a stake in maintaining financial stability.
 For financial stability is in the collective interest of all Australians.
Thank you for your time.
Endnote
See <http://www.financialstabilityboard.org/publications/r_111026b.pdf>. The
 report uses the term ‘underwriting practices’, which is commonly
 seen in the United States and some other jurisdictions.
[1]
References
Barlevy G and JDM Fisher (2010),‘Mortgage Choices and Housing Speculation’,
 Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago Working Paper WP-2010-12.
Foote CL, K Gerardi and PS Willen (2008), ‘Negative Equity and Foreclosure:
 Theory and Evidence’,
Journal of Urban Economics
, 64(2), pp 234–245; also available
 as Federal Reserve Bank of Boston Public Policy Discussion Paper No 08-3.
Vandell KD (1995), ‘How Ruthless is Mortgage Default? A Review and Synthesis
 of the Evidence’,
Journal of Housing Research
, 6(2), pp 245–264.
