BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Summary
DATE: 14/07/2023
SPEAKER: Philip Lowe
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2014/sp-dg-230714-summary.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech Summary
Australia's RMB Policies and Future Direction
Philip Lowe
Deputy Governor
Introductory Remarks at the RMB Internationalisation Roundtable
Sydney
–
23 July 2014
View the speech
Audio
11.26
MB
Q&A Transcript
The speech outlines the internationalisation of the renminbi (RMB), with a particular

 focus on the currency's impact and progress in Australia. It highlights

 the importance of the currency's internationalisation and the accompanying

 process of capital account liberalisation in China. The suggestion that this

 process could be one of the ‘seismic events’ in global capital

 markets over the coming years is reiterated. The speech then outlines the work

 that is being done in Australia to support the development of RMB business

 and suggests that for this market to flourish, Australian corporates must identify

 a clear business case for paying, receiving, lending, borrowing and investing

 in RMB.
From an Australian perspective, the speech remarks that more businesses are showing

 interest in having trade invoiced in RMB and that some common misconceptions

 are being eroded. However, it acknowledges that there is still significant

 potential for growth in RMB trade invoicing by both international and Australian

 firms.
Consideration is then given to the Bank's work in this area. Its focus on better

 understanding how the RMB markets operate is outlined. On the increased foreign

 currency reserves that the Bank invests in RMB, the speech suggests that this

 reflects the broadening financial relationship between China and Australia.

 Discussion also focuses on the bilateral local currency swap agreement between

 the Bank and the People's Bank of China (PBC). The key benefits of this

 swap are explained and the speech underlines that the swap is not meant to

 provide a ‘cheap’ source of RMB funding to the Australian market

 in normal times.
The speech then outlines future RMB clearing and settlement arrangements that the

 Bank and PBC are progressing. Consideration is given to the establishment of

 an ‘official RMB clearing bank’ in Australia. The role of clearing

 banks more widely is discussed, with an explanation that the differences between

 an official RMB clearing bank and existing channels are quite subtle. The speech

 suggests that the establishment of a clearing bank here would help to ensure

 Australia is well positioned to participate in the next stages in the process

 of RMB internationalisation. It then explains that work is underway to obtain

 a quota for Australian-based financial institutions to invest in mainland China

 under the Renminbi Qualified Foreign Institutional Investors scheme. It is

 noted that this would represent an important next step in facilitating cross-border

 RMB-denominated investment transactions between the two economies.
The speech concludes by noting that the Bank has focused on reducing potential impediments

 to the development of RMB business in Australia and that once such impediments

 have been removed, the development of the market will be up to the private

 sector.
View the speech
