BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Summary
DATE: 14/10/2023
SPEAKER: Glenn Stevens
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2014/sp-gov-231014-summary.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech Summary
Issues in Payments Systems
Glenn Stevens
Governor
Remarks prior to the Annual General Meeting of the Australian Payments Clearing Association
Sydney
–
23 October 2014
View the speech
Audio
20.84
MB
Q&A Transcript
The speech focuses on challenges and opportunities faced by the payments industry.

 Consideration is given to progress made by the industry in recent years including

 the increasing use of innovative technologies and developments in industry

 governance. The speech emphasises the critical role that the New Payments Platform

 (NPP) will play in the payments industry.
It begins by outlining recent progress in the industry. Specific innovations in the

 industry are discussed, such as the increasing use of contactless payments

 and mobile-phone-based point-of-sale card acceptance facilities. It suggests

 that the apex of such innovation has not yet been reached and indicates that

 future innovation is likely to be ‘disruptive’. However, the speech

 underlines that the ‘full flowering’ of innovation is dependent

 on system architecture and governance that is supportive of change. On systems

 architecture, it notes that the costs and difficulties involved with change

 should not stand in the way of improvement in service to the community. Moving

 on to developments in industry governance, consideration is given to recent

 reforms implemented by the Australian Payments Clearing Association and the

 establishment of the newly formed Australian Payments Council.
The speech then turns to the progress and challenges in developing the NPP. It explains

 the Bank's role in the development of this project – namely that whilst

 the Bank suggested that any new payments infrastructure should have a central

 hub, the industry was charged with developing the ‘roadmap’ for

 the project. The speech acknowledges the challenges of developing such a national

 infrastructure project but emphasises the importance to the community that

 the industry delivers on its commitment to deliver real-time, accessible payments.

 And it suggests that the project's biggest risk is not a technical one,

 but that an opportunity could be missed to provide infrastructure that will

 fully support the payments needs of the economy into the future.
The speech concludes by urging the payments industry to ‘stay the course’

 and deliver on its collective commitment to develop and implement the NPP and

 build a payments infrastructure which is efficient, open to competition and

 will support future innovation.
View the speech
