BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Remarks to the Whitlam Institute Forum – Sydney
DATE: 09/07/2023
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2009/sp-ag-230709.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Transcript of Remarks and Question & Answer Session
Remarks to the Whitlam Institute Forum
Guy Debelle
Assistant Governor (Financial Markets)
Remarks to the Whitlam Institute Forum, University of Western Sydney
Parramatta
–
23 July 2009
Audio
11.4MB
Download
24KB
Dr Debelle
Thanks very much, Eric. I'm very happy to

 be here to talk about John's paper, and I'd actually commend that you

 read the publication he's put out for the Whitlam Institute which is a

 very nice and thoughtful piece.
I think – John mentioned this – that there is an important distinction

 to be made between Australia and most of the rest of the world in the sense

 that, by and large, our markets and institutions have functioned well and effectively.

 So, in the face of the largest downturn in global output since the great depression,

 we've actually – the Australian economy has faired relatively well,

 and I think our markets and institutions have contributed to the relative stability

 of the Australian economy.
But, as John says, we really do need to question why this is so and that we can't,

 to some extent, rest on our laurels, and we certainly shouldn't take this

 for granted and assume that it may have just been plain good luck. And we need

 to look at the lessons of what's happened, both for ourselves and the lessons

 for others.
But, as I said, I think our regulatory system has worked reasonably well and our

 macro-policy institutions have – obviously I'm going to say this

 – but our macro-policy institutions, I think, have functioned reasonably

 well, and we need to be careful that we don't throw the baby out with the

 bath water. We also need to make sure that we're in a position to capitalise

 on our strong points in an environment where the Australian economy potentially

 is emerging stronger than most.
Let me just digress a little bit and just comment on a couple of things Steve said.

 The last time Steve and I were on a panel was in Adelaide, which is my home

 ground, so this time I'm on Steve's home ground, so I'm the away

 team. When I used to play footy in Adelaide, sometimes when you played in some

 away team you needed to have your car parked very close to the oval to get

 out quickly at the end of the game so – well, this time I have to get

 in a taxi.
But one thing which is sort of interesting – if you think about house prices,

 and Steve showed you the picture of house prices going up dramatically –

 is that housing, in the end, is just something we consume, just like food,

 like your TV or your car. And relative prices of goods and services move around,

 so if Steve could have actually stuck up food on that graph, and food would

 have actually gone up relative to some of those things; if he'd stuck up

 TVs, it would have gone the other way, so your TV price would have gone down

 a long way. So I'm not saying that house prices are necessarily fairly

 valued but just relative prices move around and some of them, in moving around

 and moving around in a relative sense, means some have to go up and some have

 to go down.
The other thing about debt is that, I don't know – I mean, I've got

 a mortgage. I'd assume that some of you – well, some of you are students

 who probably don't have mortgages, but those who aren't students probably

 have a mortgage. When you go into your bank to get a mortgage, they lend to

 you to some extent, and your willingness to borrow depends on your expectation

 of your future income. One of the primary criteria they do use as your ability

 to service the mortgage is, indeed, your current income, but your willingness

 to go and stick a large mortgage on a house to some extent reflects your assessment

 of where your income is going to be in the future.
So debt – if I look at my debt when I first went and took out my mortgage,

 it's high relative to my income. And, over time, hopefully, my income grows

 and also I start paying back my mortgage, and my debt relative to my income

 fails. So if we're sitting here in Australia and we think the prospects

 for our country are actually pretty good, then having a relatively high level

 of debt relative to the current income is not necessarily a bad thing if, indeed,

 those expectations are realised. Now, you can argue about whether those expectations

 are realistic but I suppose my point is that expected income matters just as

 much as current income.
Now, Steve has a reasonably well-publicised bet – I'll have to declare

 some conflict of interest here in that it's actually a bet with a mate

 of mine – about where house prices are going in Australia. Now, I was,

 if I'd had time, going to stop at the local Woolies and pick up a pair

 of Dunlop Volleys and give them to Steve because I think, on the terms of the

 bet – okay, well – and I didn't know your shoe size either.

 But I was actually going to give the shoes to Steve because there's a fair

 chance that next month he actually might have to start walking. At least starting

 in Parramatta, it's a slightly shorter walk to Kosciusko than it is from

 the centre of Sydney.
Let me turn to talk about some of the points that John made. And I think one point

 I want to pick up is about the reform of the international financial architecture.

 And a lot of the points that John raised with his colleagues – with his

 other five economists I think, to some extent, are under way in one shape or

 another around the globe. At the moment there is a serious examination going

 on of counter-cyclical financial tools: what can be deployed, whether those

 tools actually exist, or whether they need to be created. And that debate is

 happening at particularly an institution which the Reserve Bank is a member

 of. There used to be a body called the Financial Stability Forum which arose

 out of the Asian crisis and the RBA was on that. It's now been transformed

 into the Financial Stability Board which has a much large membership, its membership

 which is, by and large, the membership of the G20, which is representative

 of both developed and developing countries. So within that forum at least,

 and in other forums, there is a serious examination going on of counter-cyclical

 financial tools.
Another issue which is being seriously looked at is the assessment of ‘too

 big to fail’ or ‘too big to rescue’ or also ‘too interconnected

 to fail’ which is a slightly different variant. Now, there's a reasonably

 well-known line going around that if, the problem with ‘too big to fail’

 basically just means too big. But the question is once you have institutions

 which are in that situation, what do you actually do about it? How do you stop

 them either getting too big or, if they are too big, what can be done to make

 them smaller? And in that sense, I think the point John made about the share

 of financial services is actually quite interesting. If you look at the economies

 which have got the hardest questions to ask in this environment, it is the

 countries where the share of financial services was very large relative to

 the size of the economy. So Iceland is the most extreme example of that, where

 the size of the banking system was about seven or eight times the size of the

 country. Ireland is another example where the size of the banking system is

 quite a decent multiple of the size of the country, and Switzerland as well.
The UK and the US – the US, actually the size of the banking system is not

 that large relative to the size of the economy. It's large but not that

 large. But when you have banking systems which are a multiple of the size of

 the country and which obviously then have activities in other countries, there's

 the issue of how do you resolve a bank which is in trouble when it has operations

 in a whole bunch of countries. And that's a question where there's

 a lot of examination going on as to what might be the possible solutions to

 that.
One thing again, when assessing the size of the financial sector and its appropriateness,

 is sort of the allocation of society's resources. Have too much resources

 gone into financial innovation which could have been otherwise deployed to

 other activities? In saying that, it should be borne in mind that some of the

 financial innovations that we've seen over the past 2000 years or so have

 probably been beneficial. So some financial innovations are good, some of them

 not necessarily so. But that's true of any sector of the economy. To some

 extent it might matter a bit more with the financial sector, given the role

 that – the place that it sits in the economy but it's, again, something

 which happens right across the economy.
In terms of looking at ways which one might go about resolving these issues, one

 issue which I think is not dissimilar to something that John raised, and has

 raised I think in more detail in his paper, is the prospect of having higher

 capital provision or capital charges for risky activities. And to some extent,

 if the capital charges are high enough, then an institution which indulges

 or partakes in too much of those risky activities may have an incentive to

 be smaller than it otherwise would be, which is another way of – it's

 a tax on the provision of those services.
One point which John did talk about today was making sure there are sharp boundaries

 between publicly-supported and unsupported institutions which I think, in principle,

 is very fine. I think the difficult problem that we have to address as policymakers

 is how to put that in place in practice. If you think about the '70s and

 the '80s in the Australian context, and John mentioned the case of the

 Bank of Adelaide, to a large extent, those innovations were occurring outside

 the regulatory net and, to some extent, the linkages between those inside the

 regulatory net and those outside the regulatory net are not all that clear

 until they become clear because you've got a problem. And making sure that

 those linkages aren't there is a difficult problem because there's

 always an incentive to arbitrage around that.
That said, just because it's a difficult problem means you don't have to

 try and address it. One of the objections raised to the Tobin Tax, for instance,

 is that – and John mentions this – if it wasn't implemented

 in every single country in the world you'd see the whole of financial services

 shift to the Cayman Islands or the like where this wasn't there. And that

 argument I think can always be put in the way of any regulatory change, but

 to some extent, if you're throwing sand in the wheels, then some of the

 sand is probably going to slow things down. Yes, it's not going to be completely

 effective, the car's probably still going to keep on driving, and there's

 always going to be regulatory arbitrage, but that doesn't mean you don't

 contemplate these sort of things.
I think a more difficult question to answer is sort of what is systemically important

 because, to some extent, that's very time-varying. At the moment, it's

 almost the case of any financial institution is systemically important because,

 if we have another reasonable financial collapse, there's probably –

 panic is going to set in again and we'd be back where we were in October

 which is a month I don't want to particularly revisit again.
And if you think about – if you were sitting there at the beginning of 2007

 and you asked people in the UK was Northern Rock a systemically-important institution,

 most people probably would have said, ‘No, it's not.’ But come

 sort of mid to late 2007 it turned out it was a systemically important institution.

 So it partly depends on the circumstances, and the circumstances tend to change

 reasonably quickly. So, you know, being able to answer that question, I think,

 is a difficult question. It doesn't mean you don't ask the question,

 but I think, as in all of these things, the answer is a lot harder than the

 question.
That said, I would like to highlight one point John made which is the important role

 of government as a provider of public insurance. And you see that across a

 whole set of dimensions in terms of the social safety net – and Australia,

 by and large, has a pretty good social safety net if you compare that to China

 where the social safety net is nowhere near as developed as it is here –

 that has serious consequences for household behaviour. For instance, the high

 rate of saving in China has a lot to do with the fact that there isn't

 much of a social safety net in place and there isn't much of a health safety

 net in place.
To some extent it will be interesting to see what happens in the US at the moment

 in the sense that their social safety net is, to some extent, not as well –

 not as well developed is not the right word – but it's not as comprehensive

 as it is here, both in terms of unemployment and also in terms of health. And

 the government does serve an important role as a collective risk manager to

 handle things like intergenerational transfers probably better than nearly

 everyone – nearly any other institution we have around.
But, to some extent, and I think part of the sort of progression that John mentioned

 between the sort of '70s and where we are today in terms of the role of

 the government in the economy, to some extent reflects the influence of economic

 ideas. It also, I think, to some extent, reflects the preferences of the median

 voter. Now, I can sit here – throughout my whole life I will never be

 the median voter. I'm in that generation which is, unfortunately, screwed

 by the people sitting at this table who are, throughout their whole life, the

 median voter. So the baby boomers are the median voter pretty much their whole

 life, but I'm, unfortunately, a member of Generation X – throughout

 the first part of my working life we paid down the public debt in this country.

 By the time I get towards the end of my working life, I'll be paying off

 the pensions of the baby boomers. By the time I actually get to be on the pension,

 assuming I'm ever allowed to retire, Generation Y who's actually –

 there are more of them than there are of me – will be coming along and

 reducing my pension. So the students of today won't have this problem because

 you'll be – Generation Y, there'll be more of you than there

 are of me.
And let me just finally talk a little bit about the current account which John talked

 about. I don't see it quite as a vulnerability to the country that John

 does. It's not something that we ignore, but I don't see it as quite

 the vulnerability that he does. By and large, I think it reflects a desire

 to invest in Australia because of the future prospects that the global community

 sees in the country and the future income growth that the global community

 sees in this country.
As John said though, that means that assessment needs to be maintained to keep the

 funds flowing this way. But that said, we have had, over the past 15 years,

 fairly sizeable swings in the current account deficit in this country. For

 instance, just over 12 months ago it was about – over 7 per cent of GDP.

 Today it's about
1½ per cent
of GDP. So we've had a major swing in the size of the current account without

 a particularly large disruption to the local economy. And, in fact, if you

 go back to the early 2000s where the current account again swung from about

 6½, 7 per cent of GDP down to 2 per cent of GDP and basically no one

 really noticed, so I think, to some extent, the flexibility we have in the

 country nowadays allows us to adjust to those swings without too much drama.
The other point about current account deficit is that, by and large, someone has

 to run a current account deficit so – when I was at the IMF, it used

 to be quite interesting because you'd see the – you used to work

 on particular countries at the IMF and every economist who worked on a particular

 country would say that this country's current account deficit would have

 to be smaller or this country's current account surplus had to be larger.

 But there's a bit of a fallacy of composition here – that you can't

 have every country run a smaller current account deficit because someone has

 to actually be on the other side of that.
So one thing that – hopefully you still get taught this in university economics

 is about the value of portfolio diversification. Well, if you want to diversify

 your portfolio across the globe, that actually means money needs to flow from

 one place to another, and it probably means, given that, say, if you compare

 Australia versus Japan where the future income and growth prospects here are

 probably better than they are in Japan, that it's probably going to be

 the case that we are going to be running a current account deficit and they're

 probably going to be running a current account surplus. So to allow that sort

 of global portfolio diversification to occur, you do need to have cross-border

 capital flows and you probably do need to have some countries running current

 account deficits and some countries running current account surpluses, just

 as, within a country, you have some households, like me, who have a mortgage

 and you have people who have retired who probably don't have a mortgage.

 And the same thing sort of happens on a global scale.
So let me just finish by saying I very much – I would commend you to read John's

 paper which he's put out through the Whitlam Institute. I think it is a

 very thoughtful piece which raises a lot of interesting questions and I would

 – John does actually try to give some answers to those questions –

 and he is thinking very hard about these issues, as he's thought hard about

 them over a number of decades. So, it does throw up a lot of interesting questions.

 Us on the policymaking side have to think very hard about those questions.

 I think that thinking is going on. It will take some time to – you have

 to diagnose the problem. As I said, the problem is less here than it is in

 other parts of the world. You have to diagnose the problem and have some understanding

 as to what's caused that situation before you move too quickly into determining

 the appropriate remedy to that problem. But that process is under way. To some

 extent it's necessarily somewhat slow moving, and probably that's more

 of a good thing than a bad thing.
But I think – the bottom line is Australia has come through this episode really

 well – reasonably well, sorry. I don't share Steve's pessimism

 about the future obviously. And I think we, nevertheless, can still look at

 the issues that have arisen elsewhere. We can assess whether our system –

 whether we are in the situation by good luck or by some combination of good

 management and good structures – and question hard why we are where we

 are, why the rest of the world is where they are, and try and learn those lessons.
So thanks very much, and I'll leave it there.
MC
Thanks very much, Guy. So we've got a few minutes

 and we want to maximise the opportunity for you to ask your questions, so what

 I'd like to suggest is that, when you ask your questions, just say, if

 you don't mind – if you don't want to, you don't have to,

 of course – who you are and what your interest is. So the floor is open

 to you. There are two microphones. We have a hand – desperate to ask

 a question over here. Go ahead, please.
Question
Hi. I'm just - - -
MC
I'm sorry; I had trouble seeing up there.
Question
I'm a school kid from Westfields. What about

 the consenting adults' theory?
MC
Which theory?
Question
The consenting adults' theory.
MC
Guy, did you want to, you know, buy in on consenting adults?

 I'd just be very worried, you know, the Gen Y question and the baby-boomer

 answer.
Dr Debelle
Oh, why not? I'm Gen X. Sorry, I'm the

 squeezed generation.
MC
I know; that's what I mean.
Dr Debelle
Oh, sorry – question from Gen Y answered

 by a baby-boomer, yeah, true. No, well, I think John put it pretty well and

 he certainly characterised John Pitchford's view nicely. I think it is

 – I wasn't in the Reserve Bank at the time so I can't –

 I was actually in the Treasury at the time. I can't really say what the

 Reserve Bank's view was back then as to whether the policy was directed

 at the current account. But if you think about the current account now, as

 I said, I think, looking at it from the capital account side rather than the

 current account side and you think about whether people are investing in this

 country because they like the future prospects here, a lot of times I think

 people look at the current account and say, ‘Oh, it's completed financed

 by the banks,’ which I think is – if you look at the capital flows

 for this country, they're actually very, very big in a whole – there's

 a lot of money which goes out of this country into the rest of the world. You

 know, a lot of your super is invested offshore. So there are big flows going

 in both directions. It so happens that the net of those is about the same size

 as the net funding of the Australian banking system, but there are a lot of

 big flows going on in both directions. And so one has to question – you

 have to look at whether those flows make sense in a gross sense as well as

 focusing on the net sense. So I think one has to be a little careful in just

 focusing on the net number, which is the net of some very, very big gross numbers

 in determining whether this is sensible or not.
Question
Thank you.
DR ARVANITAKIS
I've got a question for Guy as well. My

 name is James Arvanitakis. I'm from UWS and I'm a Gen Xer as well,

 so I feel for you. What's – one of the questions, I suppose –

 one of the points of John's paper you didn't respond to was the issue

 of a people's or another public bank. Do you think the financial system

 within Australia is, I suppose, open to that possibility? Thanks.
Dr Debelle
I've actually got some practice because someone

 asked me this question yesterday at another public event I was at, so I've

 actually had some practice answering this. I actually – one thing John

 mentioned, which I think is actually important, is there is – you know,

 credit unions and building societies – and despite what John said there

 are actually a few building societies left around the place. So credit unions

 and building societies are sort of local based institutions, very community

 oriented, and which by and large partake in the sort of narrow banking that

 John's talking about. So there is that entity out there. They're not

 a trivial part of the financial system by any means actually. So that's

 one point I'd make. The second point I'd make is that, we had a bunch

 of state-owned banks back in the '80s including – I saw this first

 hand in my own state in South Australia where – now, they didn't

 follow John's edict in the sense that they started heading into those investment

 banking territories that John doesn't want them to go into, so that's

 certainly the case. But, they were a state-owned bank and I think it just shows

 the sort of issues that can arise, even with what was set up originally as

 something designed to fulfil the sort of role that John was looking at. And

 now I'm not – that doesn't mean that, you couldn't prevent

 that happening again but, it is a place we were at and which didn't necessarily

 work.
Mr Siedler
Yeah, I'm Sam Siedler(ph) from Sydney. I got

 a mortgage, Guy, so I'm on your side, and I'm a passionate follower

 of the Australian economic recovery and I'm cautiously optimistic for the

 fact that Glenn Steven's monetary policy since he released since October,

 they're heading in the same direction as Wayne Swan's or Ken Henry's

 fiscal direction. So what I am trying to do is to add value to the (inaudible)

 at the highest level of policy setting, in trying to make the financing of

 massive projects, PPP projects. Even though John was saying it's partly

 dead, I'm cautiously optimistic for the fact that those proposal can be

 made – why bother appealing to the private parties by providing (inaudible)

 for example Ken Henry's ones or by continually, sharing risk with the private

 parties, you see? What other options can you think of, Guy, in terms of making

 these PPP proposals viable and sort of practical in a pragmatic sense? I'm

 not an academic. You know, why I am asking this question is that, Guy, I strongly

 believe this is the time to be a debtor as opposed to other views expressed

 by some of the speakers and come out of the hole, with productive – again

 each one with capacity, you see? In layman terms – I'm not an economist.

 I'm an infrastructure guy, you see. So what can you tell us, Guy, please?
Dr Debelle
John's actually a much better expert on all

 this stuff than I am. In fact, he's written a lot on that. The one thing

 – the one point which I think John makes nicely, and has made nicely

 a few times in the past – it's sort of sometimes interesting to think

 that you get – in terms of the financing of the project, the person who

 can actually borrow the cheapest is actually the government. So if you think

 about everything, there's a spread actually relative to government debt.

 And so the person who's actually borrowing the cheapest is the government

 and private sector is always going to borrow more than that. So, you know,

 I'm not going to draw any ramifications from that, but it's sometimes

 worth just throwing that out there. But if you think about management and whatever

 of projects, that may be a completely different issue, but I think it's

 always sometimes interesting to think on the financing side as to, where the

 cheapest financing options are.
