BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Panel Participation at the Regulators 2023 (FINSIA) – Sydney
DATE: 03/11/2023
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2023/sp-ag-2023-11-03.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Panel Participation at the Regulators 2023 (FINSIA)
Brad Jones
Assistant Governor (Financial System)
Regulators 2023 (FINSIA)
Sydney
–
3 November 2023
Audio
27.9MB
Watch video: Panel Participation by Brad Jones, Assistant Governor (Financial System), at the Regulators 2023 (FINSIA), Sydney 3 November
Transcript
Brad Jones
I will begin by highlighting our priorities in the payments system, and briefly touch on some of the key

 focus areas for our financial stability work program.
Payments System Priorities
The Reserve Bank has a mandate to promote the safety, efficiency and competitiveness of Australia’s

 payments system. With our ASIC colleagues, the Bank also supervises clearing and settlement facilities,

 consistent with the mandate to promote the stability of the financial system.
As the Payments System Board, which sets the Bank’s payments policy agenda, recently updated its

 strategic priorities for the coming years, let me speak to some related priorities.
[1]
First is to strengthen the resilience of Australia’s payments and market infrastructures. Some

 critical systems are relying on aging infrastructure. It’s crucial that the associated risks and

 upgrades are managed carefully. Partly in response, industry are increasingly turning towards the

 services of third party providers, including cloud services. This can enhance resilience and security,

 but concentration risk among these providers is a concern. Cyber security is also a significant

 challenge, reflecting an increase in the scale and sophistication of attacks. And as businesses and

 consumers are more reliant on electronic payment systems than ever before, the Bank is developing a

 framework for supervising these systems, such as the NPP and the card schemes, to ensure they are

 managing risk appropriately.
A second set of priorities relates to key reforms for payments and market infrastructures. It is crucial

 that regulators have the powers to address risks in the payments system now and in the future, and the

 Bank strongly supports the government’s reforms to modernise the regulatory frameworks for payments

 and market infrastructures. There are a few elements to highlight here. The draft legislation to

 modernise the
Payment Systems (Regulation) Act 1998
(PSRA) is a key piece of reform.

 Definitions of ‘payment system’ and ‘participant’ need to be sufficiently broad so

 the Bank has the powers it needs to discharge its mandate. Separately, the Bank is supporting Treasury in

 its work to introduce a tiered licensing regime for payments service providers (PSPs). This should help

 to address regulatory uncertainties and barriers faced by many PSPs, and promote greater access to

 Australia’s payments system. The Bank also strongly supports reforms to the regulation of financial

 market infrastructures. This will introduce a crisis management regime for clearing and settlement

 facilities and strengthen the supervisory powers of the RBA and ASIC.
A third initiative is to promote competitive, cost effective and accessible electronic payments. A key

 focus over recent years has been reducing payment costs for small businesses. The Bank has been

 encouraging PSPs to help merchants lower the cost of accepting debit cards through least-cost routing. We

 are also monitoring the rapid adoption of digital wallets. Once the new PSRA is in place, the Bank will

 undertake a comprehensive public review of retail payments regulation to determine where to focus future

 regulatory action. Separately, the Bank has been encouraging the delivery of additional fast payment

 capabilities to consumers and businesses through the New Payments Platform (NPP). To prepare for the

 transition away from the legacy Direct Entry system, the Bank is encouraging industry to ensure all

 relevant accounts are connected to the NPP and to provide enhanced functionality for payments.
A fourth priority is to improve cross-border payments. The user experience for cross-border payments

 falls well short of that for domestic payments. An ongoing priority for the Bank is to contribute to

 the international effort to make cross-border payments cheaper, faster, more transparent and more

 inclusive under the G20 cross-border payments roadmap. The Bank is also encouraging the adoption

 of new functionality and messaging capabilities for cross-border payments, and conducting a study

 with Australian industry participants to explore the issues in linking the NPP with international

 fast payments systems.
A final priority is to shape the future of money in Australia. As part of this effort, we are

 exploring the case for new digital forms of money. Building on a pilot project that examined a wide

 range of use cases for a central bank digital currency (CBDC) earlier this year, we are now in the

 early stages of planning a project that will explore how different forms of digital money and

 infrastructure could support the development of tokenised asset markets in Australia. We will also

 publish a paper with Treasury around mid-2024 that will take stock of the research work to date and

 outline a forward workplan on CBDC. Alongside these efforts, the Bank is working with Treasury on

 options for maintaining adequate access to cash in Australia.
Financial Stability Priorities
The Bank has long promoted stability in the wider financial system. We manage system-wide liquidity, work

 closely with the Council of Financial Regulators, participate in a range of international fora on

 financial stability issues and produce a significant volume of related analysis. Our central position in

 the financial system means we also have a key role in financial crisis management, and we constantly

 examine ways to improve our arrangements.
Our research priorities comprise both conjunctural and longer-range issues. As set out in our recent
Financial Stability Review
, our conjunctural domestic focus is very much on the ability of

 borrowers to withstand ongoing pressures on their finances and the related implications for lenders.

 Internationally, we are closely tracking developments in the Chinese financial system and the risks

 around interest rates staying higher-for-longer, including for commercial real estate markets.
[2]
Over-and-above these conjunctural issues, we are also mindful of emerging threats to international and

 domestic financial stability that are likely to be with us over the longer-term. I addressed these issues

 in a recent speech and so won’t go into detail here, other than to mention these challenges have a

 different complexion to those of recent decades and include rapid-fire bank deposit runs, contagion risk,

 higher interest rate volatility, geopolitics, operational risk and climate change.
[3]
This is

 a rather daunting list of challenges for both regulators and industry, which means that in the years

 ahead, we will need to constantly challenge ourselves on what resilience needs to look like.
Endnotes
See Reserve Bank of Australia (2023),
Payments System Board

 Annual Report
, October.
[1]
Reserve Bank of Australia (2023),
Financial

 Stability Review
, October.
[2]
B Jones (2023), ‘
Emerging Threats to Financial Stability - New

 Challenges for the Next Decade
‘, Speech at the AFIA Conference, Sydney, October 31.
[3]
Question & Answer Session
Christine Yates, Moderator
Let’s turn to some questions and really have a conversation with our regulators. I might kick

 off with John and Mark. We hear about APRA and ASIC working very closely together with the banking

 sector at the moment, in regard to the implementation of FAR by March 24, so that’s coming very

 quickly, and also, ultimately, then the superannuation industry and the insurance industry by March

 2025. So how can professionals working in financial services, really, our audience here, best prepare

 for this transition and engage with regulators to prepare for this new regime? So, it’s just,

 really, about any pragmatic guidance.
John Lonsdale, APRA
Well, I’m happy to go first. So, the financial accountability regime, a very important piece of

 legislation, was passed by the parliament. It extends the BEAR, if you like, in a couple of ways. So,

 it moves from prudential to prudential and conduct, and it also moves from banking to banking,

 insurance and super. So, they’re kind of the two kind of elements to it. We see it as a really

 important way to improve accountability, improve risk culture, improve governance, really, in our

 regulated entities and, if we can achieve that, we think we’ll get better community outcomes, so

 we do think it’s really important. We’ve put out, together with ASIC, some information very

 recently around probably a couple of aspects: the joint agency agreement between APRA and ASIC, how

 we’re going to work together. And that is a really unique function, a really unique thing about

 this piece of legislation, in the fact you’ve got a piece of law administered by two regulators.

 So we’ve put out a short document explaining: well, how is that actually going to work? And

 we’ve put out another document around: well, if you’re a bank, how are you actually going

 to transition from a BEAR to a FAR? And that has to happen by March next year. So they’re the

 two things. We’ve done some webinars. Hundreds of people came to the webinars. If you missed it,

 it’s all on our website, so I’d encourage you to have a look. We’ll put out some more

 detailed material probably in a few weeks, really, particularly around the templates and what we

 expect. But broadly, if you’re sitting in a regulated entity, start thinking about the

 accountability, start thinking about the mapping I think is what I’d say to you. And the final

 thing I’ll mention is that we are giving a lot of thought to regulatory burden. When we look at

 the FAR, we really want it to feel, if you’re in a regulated entity, that you’re not

 dealing with two regulators, you’re dealing with one regulator. And there’s a couple of

 things I’d highlight. One is that, when you’re putting in your information, you’re

 going to put it in through the APRA Connect Portal, so you’re not going to two agencies;

 you’re going to one, and then we’ll distribute that to ASIC. And, as we’re thinking

 about supervisory or enforcement actions, we’ll do that collaboratively. So there’s a lot

 happening in this space. I’d encourage you: if you want more information, go to our websites;

 it’s there. And you’ll be hearing more from us on that.
Christine Yates, Moderator
Thank you, John. If there’s anything more –
Mark Adams, ASIC
I’ve got very little to add to what John says. Just engage with that content that’s coming

 and know that we’re working closely. There’s more content to come. There’s the

 minister’s rules too, I think. They all collectively set the scene, and I think that’s the

 rub of it. Just engage with that and know that we’re open to being engaged with.
Christine Yates, Moderator
Thank you. Brad, I’ll turn to you. We might talk a little bit more about payments, if we have a

 little bit of time. But I might pull you back to a different topic and we can’t ignore the

 geopolitical tensions, which are extraordinary, across the globe: Ukraine last year, of course,

 what’s happening in the Middle East, and on it goes. How does this increasing geopolitical

 tension impact how you think about the regulatory focus, the priorities?
Brad Jones
Well, first of all, I agree with the proposition of your question, which is basically connecting, I

 think, to this idea that, more or less since the Second World War, economic policymakers and industry

 haven’t really had to think hard, deeply, about some of these issues because there was never any

 real, genuine prospect of economically integrated countries, and whether there are going to be

 potentially significant issues. That sort of a mind­set clearly needs to shift. I don’t think it

 would be helpful for me to be too prescriptive about what individual institutions do here because

 they’re each got their own obligations to manage risk, broadly speaking, in a prudent and

 comprehensive way. Maybe what I could say is, at least the way that I think about this is that

 there’s kind of two dimensions here that we need to unpack, two layers. One is the risk of sort

 of slow-burn fragmentation in the global economy and the global financial system, and I’d go so

 far as to submit it’s actually not a risk but it’s actually happening now. And I gave a

 speech about this earlier this week, where I sort of went through the different dimensions to this

 fragmentation. But the bottom line is it’s happening, it’s real and it’s playing out

 along various dimensions in the global financial system, in the global economy, and it’s making

 the system more susceptible to shocks. That’s the first point. The second point is that

 there’s another dimension, which is the risk of fast-burn kinetic – some sort of fast-burn

 kinetic event, and that is a totally different sort of set of implications. But what both of those

 elements, I think, speak to, the slow-burn fragmentation risk and the fast-burn kinetic risk –

 they connect to this concept of resilience and preparedness, and we really need to be thinking very,

 very hard as a community about what that looks like.
Christine Yates, Moderator
Yes. Thank you, thank you. Peter, we started talking earlier, of course, about the importance of

 fighting financial crime and our industry’s obligation to fight with you in that regard. What

 are you seeing taking place in the financial markets as our understanding matures; are you seeing

 this swell of improvement?
Peter Soros, AUSTRAC
It’s a great question. I think it’s fair to say that we have really had an evolution. In

 the last five or six years, I think it’s fair to say that AUSTRAC has been more forward-leaning

 and more visible in the marketplace, and I think industry has really responded, so, —not all sectors;

 it has been a bit hit and miss. But I think, in general terms, industry is really responding and

 taking it a lot more seriously; we are absolutely seeing that. But even that response is coming in

 waves. I think, initially, industry quite rightly said, ‘Okay, let’s all have a look; are

 we doing this well? Okay, we need to invest more,’ and so we did see quite a significant spike

 in reporting that was coming into AUSTRAC, which is always welcome. What we’re now seeing I

 think is, after that initial period, an increase in the level of sophistication and maturity in the

 type of detection systems. So that is now helping us further improve again, industry again. So,

 we’re not just getting report of everything that might be something suspicious but a much more

 mature and developed understanding of the types of risk, and that’s being done in partnership

 with AUSTRAC and based on the benefit of that additional guidance and material. So, I think we are on

 that journey. I think there are some sectors that have been faster than others, and so that’s

 why our enforcement work is still really important. So, we need to make sure that there is a strong

 deterrence effect for those sectors that are slower to adapt, and so we remain committed to that. But

 we have seen that uptick, absolutely.
Christine Yates, Moderator
Yes. Thank you; that’s good. So, Mark, on that theme of movement in the industry, if we think

 back to the design and distribution obligations, DDO, which is now two years in, what impacts are you

 seeing following the introduction of these obligations; are you seeing what you were needing to see

 across the industry?
Mark Adams, ASIC
Thank you. So, the DDO, from our perspective, is really an important addition to the mix of things in

 the framework which promote better consumer investor outcomes, so it’s at that supply side. So,

 it’s not just about disclosure; it’s about issuers and distributors thinking about the

 cohorts which this product is most apt to and its goal of promoting that ambition that people are

 getting the fit-for-purpose sort of product more likely than not. So, it is two years in and early

 days, so the short story is, I think, businesses have reflected on that and changed things. And

 there’s been a bit of nudging on that. I mentioned earlier there’s been 80 target

 market distribution stop orders that ASIC issued, so there is still thinking being done about getting

 that prism right. So that’s at this stage. I probably just want to add one thing, and that is

 the obligation includes in it the monitoring function, the review and monitoring, as well as an

 obligation to change your distribution approach, if necessary. So, I think that’s an area that

 ASIC will be turning its attention to, alongside the actual issuance side, so that the mix of the

 obligation does its role in promoting that outcome of the products being distributed more likely to

 the right cohorts.
Christine Yates, Moderator
Thank you, thank you. And, John, as we think about all this monitoring and how technology helps us do

 so many things these days. I’ll turn to you, John; that sort of brings us to outsourcing,

 because so many organisations don’t have the capability in-house and we have to outsource to

 third- and even fourth-party contractors rather than building in­house systems. So what practical

 steps can boards or execs take to ensure that these business activities are being appropriately

 managed?
John Lonsdale, APRA
So, we know that outsourcing is a very important part of regulated-out business. I mean, it delivers

 technology, it gives innovation, and it gives services that maybe the business can’t provide, so

 all of that’s good. But what we say to regulated entities is: whether you’re providing the

 service housing it in­house or going out, you need to make sure that you’ve got the appropriate

 risk measures around it. So, I think that’s the key issue. We’ve put out CPS 230, it’s

 a big standard, and we’ll put out some guidance early next year, I think, on that as well.

 Really, what that is about is saying, ‘Know your third-party, fourth-party, fifth-party

 providers. So really understand who they are, because we’re not regulating them; you’re

 involved with them. Know who they are, make sure there are robust controls in place and know what

 your critical operations are as well. And so, when I think about what we want people to do, our

 standard doesn’t come into play for another 18 months, but we don’t want to be in the

 world where it sort of comes into play and we’re not ready. So we’re asking regulated

 entities to really have a think now, and so it’s almost map the third-, fourth-, fifth-order

 parties, the material ones, and understand where they link into the critical functions as well: like,

 what makes them important. And the third thing I’d say is that, really, for some entities, this

 is going to involve a bit of system change, you’ve got to go through that; but, for other

 organisations, it will involve a much deeper cultural change for the organisation, so be aware of

 that. And, if you’re certainly in the latter camp, my message would be: ‘Start talking

 about it; start talking about the importance of it and, really, what we’re trying to do,’

 because, if we can nail this, I think it will really be an important sort of plank in the safety of

 the system and for entities.
Christine Yates, Moderator
Yes. Thank you; that’s good. And then, Brad, we’ll pick up on this theme of innovation.

 There’s so much happening in the payments system, so what are the key risks that you intend to

 mitigate or address – you can’t mitigate all of them, but address – through

 regulation?
Brad Jones
Look, operational risk is becoming a huge issue, obviously, right across the financial sector and

 parts of the payments ecosystem are obviously right at the pointy end of that. So, what we’re

 really focused on is making sure that entities are leaning into some of the vulnerabilities that are

 really the flipside of the opportunity coin. Then payments: there’s so much innovation going on

 in this space and, as a country, I think we really need to harvest all the benefits we can from

 what’s happening on the innovation side but, at the same time, it’s obvious that there are

 some key points of vulnerability. The point that John made about third parties is one that looms very

 large for us. For the institutions that we regulate, it’s not enough to say, ‘Well, these

 are third-party risks,’ and sort of assume that they’re not responsible. You are

 responsible for third-party risks, or the risks introduced through you turning to third-party vendors

 which can be an entirely sensible commercial decision, but it doesn’t absolve you from your

 responsibilities to manage those risks appropriately. And cyber is sort of right at the pointy end of

 that issue because there is, I think, an ongoing concern – and we talk about this frequently as

 a sort of regulatory community – about where are the key points of vulnerability to

 cyberattacks and through third-party vendors. It’s an issue that just keeps on cropping up in

 our conversations. That’s a particular area of focus.
Christine Yates, Moderator
Yes, a good pragmatic call­out, so thank you, thank you. And, Peter, we’ll look at just RegTech.

 So RegTech, again on this theme, can play a really critical role in how we really assist

 organisations meet their AML/CDF obligations. As you – well, for AUSTRAC, do you work with the

 RegTech sector, engage with them, provide that pragmatic guidance to help them get to the place that

 we need everyone to be?
Peter Soros, AUSTRAC
Look, there’s no doubt that RegTech absolutely has a role to play in this space, and we are

 actively engaged with the RegTech community. We hosted an event with the RegTech community this week,

 where we encouraged the collaboration and the work to get it to operate. It is going to absolutely be

 a fundamental part of it. But just like John and Brad have talked about, you are ultimately

 responsible as the business. And so, over and above what John and Brad have talked about, I think we

 just emphasise this very similar message potentially in a slightly different way. When you’re

 engaging with the regulatory technology or other outsourcing means, test, validate, assure yourselves

 that what you’re using is good and robust; because it may be cost effective, it may have a

 skillset that you don’t have but, if you’re not regularly testing and validating and

 assuring that it’s doing what you want it to, and whether that’s your internal assurance or

 getting someone in to come and have a look—we are strongly encouraging that as part of that

 innovation and testing mindset. We’re all for it, very supportive of it, but just keep testing.
Christine Yates, Moderator
Yes. Thank you, thank you. I might just turn now to some general questions for everyone. I’m

 just going to do a time check. Are we doing okay? Okay. So maybe I’d like you all just to touch

 on, if you don’t mind; we’ll start at the end of the couch, how important is interagency

 cooperation within Australia and globally?
Mark Adams, ASIC
It’s essential. I’m sure all my colleagues will say the same. Let me just give a few

 examples. There’s the informality. I don’t want to underestimate the informality, and I

 think that’s richer and deeper than it’s ever been. And that’s everything about what

 we’re seeing, how we’re doing things, where we’re learning, where we’re growing.

 It’s all those factors. Then there’s the formality. And you and this audience need to know,

 when there’s supervisory work going on, that we’re in dialogue to make that work as best

 and in a coherent and aligned fashion as much as possible with the sector. Then, if I just switch it

 to internationally, that’s really crucial as well – and many of us are represented on

 international standard-setting bodies – because those international standard-setting bodies

 aren’t just academic; they produce good guidance and content and practices, which are

 influential in influencing the way that our businesses should operate and also informing policy

 frameworks within this jurisdiction. So they’re just three examples where I think the

 interconnection is just essential, yes.
Christine Yates, Moderator
Yes, thank you.
Peter Soros, AUSTRAC
I’d add to that. Whether it’s operational engagement at the most junior levels of the

 organisation, we’re now picking up the phone or going to meetings together more than ever before

 or whether it’s at the end point, where we’re undertaking an enforcement outcome.

 We’ve done really collaborative enforcement work with ASIC in the casino sector, we’ve done

 some great joint enforcement work with APRA in the banking sector, and you’ll see more of that.

 None of us have the resources on our own that we’d all love, we’d always love more, but the

 more that we can collaborate and share, the better it is.
Christine Yates, Moderator
Thank you. John?
John Lonsdale, APRA
So, like, we can’t do our job without collaborating, and that’s the frank answer. I mean,

 the financial system is global; right? So it’s all interconnected. We can’t just be in our

 own bubble and do our own work; we’ve got to be cognisant of what others are doing and

 collaborate together. So, again, just to give you a feel, globally, we adhere to international

 standards. We’ve got to, as a mid-size economy. It’s important for the stability of the

 system. So we do that on banking, Basel; we do that on insurance; we do that on pensions. We’re

 involved in all of those international committees. I talk regularly with heads of prudential

 regulators – I spoke this week with two heads of prudential regulators offshore to understand

 what their priorities are and what they’re doing – and that actually helps us inform what

 is happening here: does that ring true? We’ve got supervisory colleges, so a number of our

 entities actually are operating globally as well, so we share information on that with the New

 Zealanders, so the Trans-Tasman Banking Council; I’m off there next month. So there’s a lot

 of global kind of work happening. And then, domestically, we’ve got MOUs with everybody here and

 very close working relationships. And the one that I would pluck out, I think, that is unique

 globally is the Council of Financial Regulators. It does not have powers itself, but it is a

 collaborative organisation of independent regulators and, when there are problems in the financial

 system – you saw it in March; you’ve seen it in the pandemic; you saw it in the GFC

 – I mean, that body and the way it works really comes to the fore for pinch point issues but

 also some of the longer term issues that we’ve got to address. So, it’s just critically

 important.
Christine Yates, Moderator
Fantastic; thank you. Another comment?
Brad Jones
I’ll just add two quick points. The first is: I’m sure you’ve all heard the expression

 about ‘never waste a crisis’. We’ve had two big ones in the last 15 years and, if

 there’s any good that’s come out of those periods: the Global Financial Crisis and the

 pandemic, it’s that it forged a degree of cooperation and collaboration domestically and

 internationally that maybe wouldn’t have happened in the absence of those events. And the second

 point I’d make is ‘commonality’. The commonality of issues that we confront, the

 agencies represented on this stage, but also internationally, is just really striking. We’re all

 dealing with, effectively, the same issues. They just play out slightly different in our patches. And

 so, yeah, it’s just become really existential that we’re speaking to one another on that

 basis.
Christine Yates, Moderator
Yes, very good. And, again, thank you for sharing because I think it’s a wonderful insight and

 should give everyone confidence on how Australia is being regulated. But thank you.
Question
Hi, I’m from Rhizome Advisory. I’ve got a question regarding AI and the expectation of

 regulation coming down the pipeline; what are your views on that?
John Lonsdale, APRA
AI is incredibly important as a productivity enhancer: better services to the community ultimately.

 But what we say to all our regulated entities, whether it’s AI or any other form of technology,

 is that you need to be prudent. You need to wrap risk management around it and you need to think

 through: what are the risks and what are the controls we need to have? And that needs to be carefully

 monitored, and boards need to be very aware, and senior management, of what’s happening. So

 that’s what I’d say.
Question
That’s sort of gazumped my question. I’m from Bendigo Bank, Adelaide. I had an AI question

 too and I was going to ask that one, but the second one is: how are the regulators thinking about AI

 about how it will help you do your job?
Peter Soros, AUSTRAC
Look, we are actively thinking about a bunch of use cases ourselves and starting to play in that

 space, as I said, both on the intelligence front and as part of our regulatory role. I’m very

 conscious, though, that we’re not alone. We operate in a big government ecosystem, and so

 we’re looking at leveraging some of our bigger partners who are engaging with that. But I think

 it’s fair to say that there are not only opportunities and benefits for you but also for us, and

 so we are engaging with that and thinking of use cases and seeing how it fits our remit. But

 we’re doing the exact same things that we ask you to do; that is really test, assure, understand

 your risks and think about the consequences of getting it wrong.
Christine Yates, Moderator
Thank you.
Mark Adams, ASIC
And I would just double down on that and say ‘absolutely right’. There’s just a couple

 of things I’d probably just mention. There is a whole-of-government activity looking at best

 practices, led by the Digital Transformation Authority, and I think we’re all probably

 intertwined with that, so that will assist us in that. And that point that Peter made: we need to be

 exemplar in the application of these advanced analytics in our work.
Question
I’m a digital banking and industry academic. I notice the capability for the takedown of scam

 websites, which I thought was a really interesting kind of innovation. Are we likely to see more of

 this come from government; and how can industry help with those kinds of initiatives?
Mark Adams, ASIC
Well, I can touch on that briefly. I mean, I’m not front and centre on this activity, but I

 think we made an announcement yesterday with the Assistant Treasurer. So one of, I think, the

 significant efforts around responding to scams is what can be done to mitigate that through exercises

 to take down and engage in that. So it is an important plank of the activity, and I think there is

 funding support for that over the near term. So we’ll have to keep seeing the strength of that

 contribution. There is the national scam centre, led by the ACCC, so there are bridges there for

 industry to engage with around the discussion around scams. So I’d want to just emphasise that

 there are avenues for industry to engage with that dialogue because it’s touching everybody. And

 that takedown example is an example of something: I think that fusion shell I mentioned. So there is

 the first sort of investment scam taskforce that’s been established with a short horizon, and

 that’s an example of what potentially could be other examples to support dealing with

 investment-scam-like activities, and that’s going to be really interesting to see what comes out

 on that.
Peter Soros, AUSTRAC
Yes. But there’s not going to be any one initiative or silver bullet that will solve scams;

 it’s absolutely a multifaceted solution, right. So sometimes there’ll be a takedown

 facility, sometimes it will be a law enforcement response, sometimes it will be hardening industry as

 the first line to stop things getting into the gateway. That’s why the ACCC’s Anti-Scam

 Centre, in the fusion cell, has all of those partners in there because we’re exploring all of

 those options and really making sure that as many bases or as many different treatments are covered

 as possible.
Question
Hello, I’m a non-executive director on some financial services entities. One of the many

 learnings from the recent public data breaches is in relation to protection of data and retention of

 data, and financial services has more sort of regulatory requirements in that regard than other

 sectors. So I’m just interested in your thoughts on data retention and data sharing, data

 protection.
John Lonsdale, APRA
Well, I’m happy to lead off. I mean, it’s a very important issue. It goes, for us, with

 operational resilience, and what we’re saying to all entities is not just know what you’re

 critical functions are and operations but know where your critical data is; right? Know what is

 critical, know where it is and know it’s safe, so wrap the risk management around it; so

 we’re saying that. We don’t have particular rules, to my knowledge, on how long to keep it.

 I mean, these are issues for the entity itself, but you need to be managing the risk.
Peter Soros, AUSTRAC
Yes. We have some obligations under our anti-money-laundering regime to keep records for certain

 periods of time, but all the same things apply that John said. you’ve got to have the

 protections, the frameworks, in place to do that, and it is a challenge; you’re always going to

 be susceptible. That’s why it’s not a one-off investment to protect your systems; it’s

 a continual battle. And for senior executives and independent directors, you have to be prepared to

 continue to fund it. It’s not a: ‘Oh, it’s orange this month; we’re going to

 whack some money at it and it will be green.’ It’s a continual investment that you’ve

 got to be prepared to continue to engage with.
Christine Yates, Moderator
Thank you. We don’t have time for any more questions. I’d like to invite Yasser up to the

 podium and, as Yasser joins us, I’d personally like to thank each of you and your agencies for

 the work that you do every day. Thank you.
Yasser El-Ansary
Thank you, Chris, and thank you to our regulatory panel; it was tremendously insightful, as we

 expected it to be. We really do appreciate the candour and the openness that you all bring to the

 discussion today. I think you’ll all agree that regulating the financial services sector is

 certainly a big challenge; we know that in a day-to-day context. We know that it’s vitally

 important, though, and the role that each of you play is absolutely critical to maintaining the

 stability of the great financial services sector that we do have in this market.
