BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: The Shift to Electronic Payments – Some Policy Issues – Sydney
DATE: 28/03/2023
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2023/sp-so-2023-03-28.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
The Shift to Electronic Payments – Some Policy Issues
Ellis Connolly
[
*
]
Head of Payments Policy
AFR Banking Summit
Sydney
–
28 March 2023
Q&A Transcript
Download
615KB
Thank you for the opportunity to speak at the Banking Summit.
The Australian payments landscape is continuing to evolve rapidly. At the RBA, we have a broad mandate to
 promote efficiency, competition and safety in the payments system. Today, I will focus on the remarkable
 shift that Australians have made to paying for goods and services electronically, particularly using
 cards. This shift has delivered significant benefits to businesses and consumers. It also raises some
 important payments policy issues and I’ll outline the approach that the RBA is taking to address
 them.
Cards are now the main way Australians pay
Over the past fifteen years, there has been a striking shift from paying by cash to cards. In the Consumer
 Payments Survey we conducted late last year, only 13 per cent of transactions were made using
 cash; this share has halved over the past three years (Graph 1).
[1]
Instead, consumers are making
 three-quarters of their payments using the card networks – half with debit cards and a quarter with
 credit cards. Australians make card payments more frequently than in many comparable economies, including
 those with very low rates of cash usage, such as Sweden (Graph 2). In some economies, merchants and
 consumers are now using fast account-to-account payment systems as an electronic alternative to cards,
 and I will return to this later.
Graph 1
Graph 2
Card payments technology has become much more convenient for consumers to use. Fifteen years ago, almost
 all in-person card transactions were made by inserting the card into a terminal and providing a signature
 or PIN for verification. These days, transactions mainly just involve tapping a card or a mobile device
 that securely stores card details (Graph 3). In addition, with the growth of e-commerce, consumers
 are making around 15 per cent of their card payments online.
Graph 3
Use of mobile devices for card payments has grown rapidly over recent years. Around a third of consumers
 made a contactless payment by tapping a mobile device in the latest Consumer Payments Survey. Adoption
 increased substantially across all age groups over the past three years, particularly for younger
 consumers (Graph 4).
Graph 4
The dominance of cards and the consumer shift to mobile devices raise some important issues within the
 RBA’s mandate. We are focusing our efforts on:
lowering card payment costs for merchants
supporting the development of alternative payment methods, such as the New Payments Platform (NPP),
 Australia’s fast payments system
enhancing the safety and resilience of retail payment systems.
Lowering card payment costs for merchants
The RBA has a longstanding focus on lowering card payment costs for merchants. Our regulation of
 interchange fees has directly lowered costs. In addition, merchants having the choice to recover their
 payment costs through surcharging has put competitive pressure on the card networks and payments service
 providers to lower their fees. Nevertheless, the cost of card payments can still be substantial for small
 businesses (Graph 5).
Graph 5
The trends in card payments I highlighted earlier are putting upward pressure on merchant payment costs.
 This has been most evident in debit card use. In the past, customers inserted their debit card into a
 terminal at the point of sale and selected ‘cheque/savings’ for it to be routed through the
 eftpos network or ‘credit’ for it to be routed via the international networks (Mastercard or
 Visa). It turns out that most people selected ‘cheque/savings’. The shift to tapping cards and
 mobile devices, however, has resulted in most debit card transactions being routed to Mastercard and Visa
 and away from eftpos. With the international networks on average costing around 20 basis points more
 to accept for in-person transactions, this has resulted in an increase in merchant costs for accepting
 debit card payments. In addition, the shift to online commerce has contributed to higher payment costs.
 It costs more to safely process online transactions, but there has also been less competition between the
 card networks, particularly prior to eftpos entering this market over the past year or so.
We have also observed that higher wholesale payment costs are charged for small businesses, and for mobile
 wallet and online transactions. These wholesale payment costs include: interchange fees, which are paid
 by acquirers to card issuers; and scheme fees, which are paid by acquirers to the card networks.
[2]
All
 these costs are then passed on by the acquirers to merchants. Although these costs are typically not
 visible to consumers, they ultimately pay for them through higher prices for goods and services.
Interchange fees are much higher for small businesses
. Very large businesses negotiate
 low ‘strategic’ interchange fees across all their card transactions. In contrast, the
 interchange fees for small business transactions tend to be much higher and we have noticed that they
 often face even higher rates for mobile and online transactions than when a card is tapped
 (Graph 6).
[3]
Graph 6
Scheme fees are higher for mobile and online transactions
. While scheme fees don’t
 seem to vary by the size of the merchant the way interchange fees do, higher scheme fees are charged
 on mobile and online transactions than when a card is tapped (Graph 7). There may be some good
 reasons for the card networks to charge higher fees for some types of transactions, such as to cover
 the cost of making online transactions more secure. At the same time, it is possible that these fees
 could be lower if there was more competition in payments, particularly for mobile and online
 transactions. I’ll provide more details in a few moments on what we are doing to promote
 competition by improving the transparency of scheme fees.
Graph 7
Reducing debit card payment costs for merchants through least-cost routing
The RBA is focused on increasing competition in the debit card market to keep downward pressure on payment
 costs for merchants. The main priority here is to allow merchants to choose the lowest-cost card network
 (eftpos, Mastercard or Visa) to process their debit transactions; this is known as ‘least-cost
 routing’ (LCR). As I mentioned earlier, the international networks on average cost around
 20 basis points more to accept than eftpos for in-person transactions. For merchants to take
 advantage of LCR, payment service providers need to upgrade their systems to support it for transactions
 made by tapping a card or a mobile device, or online.
To provide greater transparency on whether providers are supporting LCR, today we are publishing for the
 first time a report on LCR availability and take-up across the major acquirers (Table 1).
[4]
Table 1: Least-Cost Routing when Debit Card is Presented
Per cent
 of merchants, December 2022
(a)
Available to merchants
Enabled for merchants
Square
100
100
Suncorp Bank
100
58
Tyro
100
56
Westpac
100
30
Fiserv
100
27
Adyen
100
17
ANZ Worldline
98
23
Commonwealth Bank
89
42
National Australia Bank
55
14
Total
90
53
(a) Excludes very large (strategic) merchants and merchants that supply their own
 payment terminals.
Source: RBA
This first report covers transactions where a card is tapped. Providers have generally made good progress,
 with LCR available to be turned on for 90 per cent of their merchants. Where there are gaps in
 availability, this is mainly due to providers needing to upgrade old terminals. These providers have
 assured us that this will be completed over the next year. We will publish an updated report every six
 months, which will ensure that these providers are held publicly accountable for delivering on their
 commitments.
In contrast, the take-up of LCR by merchants remains disappointingly low, with just over half of merchants
 on plans with LCR enabled. Merchant groups have consistently highlighted that LCR is not easily
 accessible for merchants in practice. The report highlights that some providers have been much more
 successful than others in moving their merchants across to plans with LCR. Providers that have yet to
 enable LCR for all their merchants should proactively encourage them to take it up, since it makes our
 payments system more competitive and puts downward pressure on merchants’ payment costs.
For online transactions, the RBA set an expectation that providers would be offering LCR to merchants by
 the end of last year. We recently received the first round of reporting from providers. While a lot of
 work is underway, the industry has not met this timeline, which is disappointing. We expect to see
 substantial progress by June this year on enabling LCR for merchants online. In the interest of
 transparency, we intend to include a table on LCR for online transactions in the next report, so
 merchants can know which providers are actively supporting lower payment costs.
The final frontier for LCR is mobile wallet transactions through Apple Pay, Google Pay and Samsung Pay.
 This is particularly important given the rapid growth in the use of mobile devices for in-person card
 transactions. We have been engaging regularly with the mobile wallet providers over the past year and
 have concluded that it should be feasible to introduce LCR for mobile wallet transactions by the end of
 2024. The mobile wallet providers and other industry participants are working towards meeting this
 timeline.
Improving transparency of scheme fees and mobile wallet transaction fees
Another initiative we are pursuing is to improve the transparency of scheme fees. These fees are payable
 by both acquirers and issuers to the card networks for the services they provide. These fees tend to be
 complex and opaque. We have also heard reports that the number and level of schemes fees has been
 drifting up over time. To help address these concerns, the RBA has started collecting annual data on
 scheme fees to improve transparency (Table 2).
Table 2: Scheme Fees
Basis points of value of transactions,
2021/22
(a)
Gross fees
Rebates
Net fees
Domestic card transactions
Debit cards
– Issuers
15
13
2
– Acquirers
10
1
9
Credit cards
– Issuers
16
12
4
– Acquirers
13
2
11
International card transactions in Australia
All cards
165
8
157
(a) Includes scheme fees paid to eftpos, Mastercard and Visa.
Source: RBA
Scheme fees make a significant contribution to payment costs, with net fees of around $1.2 billion
 being paid by Australian issuers and acquirers to the card networks in
2021/22
. On average, the card networks charged issuers 15 basis points
 and acquirers 10 basis points of the value of the domestic debit card transactions they processed.
 However, the networks also provide rebates that are significantly larger for issuers than acquirers. Once
 we take these into account, the net scheme fees paid were 2 basis points for issuers and
 9 basis points for acquirers; this cost for acquirers then gets passed on to merchants. The scheme
 fees for domestic credit card transactions were a little higher than for debit cards. However, scheme
 fees were much higher for international transactions, which helps to explain why they are so expensive
 for consumers and merchants.
[5]
Beneath these aggregates, there is a lot of variation
 in scheme fees between the different card networks. By publishing these data each year, we hope to
 generate more competitive tension in the market. We will be keeping a close eye on the trends in scheme
 fees over time.
Greater transparency could also help to boost efficiency and competition for payments using mobile
 wallets. The mobile wallet providers require card issuers to enter into confidential agreements so that
 their customers can use these wallets to make card payments. As a result, there is very little
 information in the public domain about how much issuers have to pay the mobile wallet providers for this
 service. However, there are media reports that the cost could be over $100 million per year and
 would be growing quickly as more consumers use mobile wallets for payments. Given these developments, we
 would support steps to promote transparency of the payment costs associated with using mobile wallets.
There is currently some uncertainty about the extent to which the RBA’s regulatory powers apply to
 new players in the payments system, such as mobile wallet providers. To address this, we are assisting
 the Australian Government with its plan to reform the regulatory architecture for payments. This will
 include modernising the
Payment Systems (Regulation) Act 1998
with updated definitions of a
 payment system and its participants. Our preference will remain to engage with industry in a spirit of
 cooperation to address payments policy issues. These reforms will enable the RBA to credibly deal with a
 wider range of issues associated with new payments technologies and business models.
Supporting the development of Australia’s fast payments system as an alternative payment method
While cards are currently dominant in Australia, when we look to other countries in our region, we can see
 alternative models of electronic retail payments that are less reliant on cards. In Indonesia, Malaysia,
 the Philippines, Singapore and Thailand, merchants are providing QR codes that their customers can use to
 pay them by account transfer through fast payment systems. These merchants and consumers have a fast and
 low-cost electronic alternative to card payments.
We could see a similar wave of retail payments innovation unleashed in Australia through the NPP and its
 PayTo service. This service provides a convenient and secure way for consumers to authorise merchants to
 initiate a payment from their account via the NPP. PayTo will modernise the way we make direct debits by
 giving customers more control. It can also be used by merchants as an alternative to cards for online and
 instore purchases, using QR codes to make the process convenient for consumers. There are many fintechs
 developing innovative retail payment services that leverage PayTo. While the service was formally
 launched in July last year, only one of the major banks met the industry-agreed timeline to make the
 service available to its customers. It is difficult to promote PayTo to merchants without a strong
 network of banks offering it. The other three major banks have committed to connecting their retail
 customers by the end of April and they have indicated that they are on track to meet this timeline. This
 should deliver the critical mass of consumer accounts for payment services to launch using PayTo.
Enhancing the safety and resilience of retail payment systems
Australians are relying on electronic payments more than ever, so our retail payment systems must be safe
 and resilient. Historically, the RBA has supervised the safety of payment systems that handle high-value
 payments for key financial market infrastructures, given their potential to propagate stress through the
 financial system. This supervision has focused on the Reserve Bank Information and Transfer Service
 (RITS), Australia’s real-time gross settlement system. The RBA will now extend this supervision to
 include payment systems where an outage could cause significant economic disruption and damage confidence
 in the financial system. This will include the retail payment systems that the Government has declared to
 be critical infrastructure: Mastercard, Visa, eftpos and the NPP. We will draw upon the relevant
 international standard – the Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures – focusing on
 the payment system operators’ risk management frameworks, particularly regarding operational risk.
 We will also integrate the operators’ obligations under the Government’s critical
 infrastructure regulations. The RBA is consulting with industry on the updated framework and is engaging
 closely with other regulators to ensure that the regulatory burden on the industry is minimised.
A key focus will be on the safety and resilience of the NPP. The NPP processes payments
24/7
in real time and Australians expect the system to be available when
 they need to use it. This is particularly important given industry discussions on potentially retiring
 the Bulk Electronic Clearing System (BECS), which currently processes most account transfers, including
 direct debits and payroll. If BECS were to be closed, the NPP would become the main payment system for
 retail account transfers. For the NPP to be an effective replacement for BECS, the industry also needs to
 make sure accounts that send or receive payments are reachable. To monitor progress, the RBA will require
 financial institutions to report to us on their work to connect all relevant accounts to the NPP. All
 Australians should be able to access payments services using this important national infrastructure.
Conclusion
We have seen rapid change in the retail payments landscape over the past fifteen years. Cards have become
 the dominant retail payment method and consumers find them very convenient to use. At the same time,
 there are some policy issues raised by card payments that need to be addressed. We look forward to
 working with the industry to address these issues as we promote an efficient, competitive and safe
 payments system.
Endnotes
I would like to thank Cameron Dark, Boston Dobie,
 Troy Gill, Annalisa Heger, Qiang Liu, Thuong Nguyen, Grant Turner, David Wang, Ben Watson and Tim
 West for their excellent assistance in preparing this speech.
[*]
The RBA has conducted the Consumer Payments
 Survey every three years since 2007, with the latest survey conducted late last year. The survey
 is a representative sample of around 1,000 Australians. Participants are asked to complete a
 seven-day payments diary recording all payments they make during the week, and a post-dairy
 survey that asks qualitative questions about payment preferences. More results will be released
 mid-year in a planned
Bulletin
article and Research Discussion Paper.
[1]
Acquirers provide merchants with facilities and
 services to accept card payments. Issuers provide customers with cards and process payments for
 them.
[2]
The differences in interchange fees partly
 reflect differences in transaction size, with transactions involving tapping a mobile on average
 smaller than those involving tapping or inserting a card. However, even in terms of cents per
 transaction, mobile and online transactions are costlier: the average interchange fee per
 transaction is around 6 cents for tap/insert card, 9 cents for tap mobile, and
 15 cents for online.
[3]
The report on LCR availability and take-up is
 available on the RBA website: <
https://www.rba.gov.au/payments-and-infrastructure/debit-cards/least-cost-routing.html
>
 and <
https://www.rba.gov.au/payments-and-infrastructure/debit-cards/least-cost-routing/update-on-implementation.html
>
[4]
Interchange fees for international transactions
 are also very high, and the RBA has required card networks to publish these interchange fees on
 their websites.
[5]
