BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Australian Securitisation Markets: Responding to Change – Sydney
DATE: 21/11/2023
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2023/sp-so-2023-11-21.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Australian Securitisation Markets: Responding to Change
Carl Schwartz
[
*
]
Acting Head of Domestic Markets
Australian Securitisation Conference 2023
Sydney
–
21 November 2023
Audio
60.5MB
Q&A Transcript
Download
840KB
Watch video: Australian Securitisation Markets: Responding to Change
Introduction
It is a pleasure to be here with you at the Australian Securitisation Conference. For many years now the
 Reserve Bank has been invited to present at this annual event and the securitisation market regularly
 delivers plenty to discuss.
The Australian asset-backed securities (ABS) market is an important source of funding in Australian
 financial markets, particularly for non-bank lenders and the borrowers they serve.
[1]
For
 investors, it offers exposure to an increasingly diverse pool of issuers and products.
Today I will be mainly talking about how the securitisation market has evolved over recent years. To
 summarise, securitisation markets have continued to adapt to large changes in financial conditions. While
 securitisation pricing has responded sharply to tighter monetary policy, and total credit growth in the
 economy has slowed, overall securitisation issuance has been maintained at high levels. Underpinning the
 strength in issuance in recent years has been the non-bank sector, which has seen new entrants and
 existing lenders quick to switch attention to different borrower segments to support lending growth.
 Against that backdrop, I’ll wrap up with thoughts on a few things to watch for the period ahead.
In recent years there have been big swings in ABS pricing along with broader financial
 conditions
The onset of the pandemic was an anxious time for all, including securitisation markets. But the recovery
 in sentiment was swift amid comprehensive policy support from governments and others.
Within a year or so of the support measures announced from March 2020 – including the Reserve
 Bank’s comprehensive package
[2]
– yield spreads to the bank bill swap rate
 (BBSW) on AAA-rated ABS deals had halved to reach the lowest levels since the global financial crisis
 (GFC) (Graph 1). With BBSW at very low levels, these were very low borrowing costs.
Graph 1
By late 2022, however, these ABS yield spreads were back to, or above, their level at the start of the
 period. Spreads peaked not long after the commencement of the cash rate tightening phase in May 2022, and
 have moved lower since.
The big swings were evident in the AAA-rated notes of both RMBS and other ABS, and were even larger for
 lower rated mezzanine debt. Relative to past experience, movements in AAA-rated notes were largely
 contained to the broad range of post GFC pricing, but the speed of the adjustments was unprecedented in
 the post-GFC period.
Overall securitisation issuance has been resilient as financial conditions have tightened
Interestingly, at a broad level, issuance has been little changed even with the shift higher in spreads
 and tighter financial conditions in recent years. Annual issuance has been broadly maintained at around
 $50 billion over 2022 and 2023, the same level reached through 2021 (Graph 2). This has
 occurred even as system credit growth slowed; from around 9 per cent a year ago to around
 5 per cent more recently.
Graph 2
There are two broad shifts underpinning the strength in issuance throughout this period. One is increased
 issuance by non-banks. And a second, related development, is growth in different types of loans being
 securitised.
I will talk through these developments in turn.
Issuance in recent years has been underpinned by a further shift to non-banks
Non-bank lenders are the major issuers of ABS in Australia. This is not a recent development, but it has
 become more pronounced in recent years.
For many years, banks were the main issuers of asset backed securities, so that non-banks accounted for
 around one-quarter of issuance (Graph 3). This began changing around the mid-2010s. This partly
 reflected banks reducing issuance as they turned to other lower cost funding markets. And partly
 non-banks increasing issuance as they grew their lending at above system pace. Non-banks continued to
 increase their share of issuance through the pandemic period and they now account for around
 three-quarters of ABS issuance.
Graph 3
One reason for the further increase in the non-bank share of issuance during the pandemic period was that
 banks weren’t issuing much wholesale debt at all.
The Reserve Bank’s package of policy measures was a big factor behind this. In particular, the Term
 Funding Facility (TFF) offered low-cost three-year funding to banks between April 2020 and June 2021. It
 ultimately provided $188 billion in funding to banks.
[3]
As intended, this reduced their funding costs
 and helped to reduce interest rates for borrowers.
Banks’ lower funding needs were reflected in their much reduced issuance across senior unsecured
 debt, covered bonds and ABS (Graph 4).
[4]
In particular, there was no issuance of ABS by the
 major banks during the TFF drawdown period. The relative absence of bank debt across markets was one
 factor encouraging investors to purchase ABS as an investment with some comparable qualities.
Graph 4
Once the TFF drawdown period ended in mid-2021, mid-sized and smaller banks increased their issuance
 of ABS. The major banks, however, have issued very little over much of the past two years. Wider
 spreads in RMBS markets over the past two years have made RMBS issuance less appealing for banks
 compared with senior unsecured and covered bond issuance. That said, in recent months we have seen
 some more activity from larger banks, including a large public deal by one of the major banks, as
 spreads have narrowed. Given the step up in unsecured and covered bond issuance, diversifying funding
 through RMBS may also be more attractive at the moment.
A second reason for the increase in non-bank market share has been an increase in the number of
 non-banks issuing ABS (Graph 5). This year around 30 different non-bank lenders have issued
 ABS, a three-fold increase from the number about a decade ago. In contrast, the number of banks
 issuing ABS has declined over the period, with about 10 banks issuing this year.
One consequence of these new entrants and shifting practices is that concentration in the
 securitisation market has fallen, particularly for non-mortgage ABS. About a decade ago, the top four
 issuers of non-mortgage ABS accounted for nearly all issuance. Today they represent about half of the
 issuance. As a result, concentration in the non-mortgage ABS market is now similar to that in the
 RMBS market after being consistently higher for many years after the GFC.
Graph 5
A third reason, as hinted at in the preceding point, is that non-banks have been expanding issuance
 outside of prime RMBS, to non-prime RMBS and other ABS.
Non-banks have adapted to changing housing finance market conditions with increased non-prime
 RMBS issuance …
Favourable funding conditions and a strong housing market during much of the pandemic period supported
 non-bank lending. Annual system housing credit growth increased from 3 per cent at end 2019 to
 around 8 per cent by May 2022 and non-banks were able to continue to increase their share of
 the housing credit market.
As spreads on RMBS narrowed, non-banks were able to be more competitive on loan rates. For prime
 borrowers, one important feature of non-banks was their fast turnaround times. Amid rising house prices
 in 2021 and early 2022, borrowers worried about ‘missing out’ were willing to accept somewhat
 higher loan rates to secure a faster approval. Reflecting this environment, non-bank housing credit was
 growing about twice as fast as bank housing credit during those years (Graph 6 – upper panel).
Graph 6
As interest rates started increasing in mid-2022, funding costs for financial institutions increased but
 by more for non-banks than for banks. While non-banks source most of their funding through ABS in capital
 markets, banks have access to lower cost deposit funding, which tends to reprice more slowly. This made
 it more difficult for non-banks to compete on price with banks, with loans from non-banks becoming more
 expensive.
In this competitive environment, external refinancing increased to record highs, driven by borrowers
 searching for better deals on offer from a range of lenders. Much of this refinancing activity has flowed
 to the major banks, consistent with major banks offering rate discounts and cashback offers that
 non-banks were not able to match. In fact, the interest rate difference for new loans between non-banks
 and banks widened from approximately 40 basis points during 2021 to around 100 basis points in
 December 2022.
In addition, the housing market started to cool, meaning that borrowers were less worried about
 ‘missing out’ and therefore less willing to pay a premium for fast turnaround times. In this
 environment, non-bank housing lending slowed and has been contracting since the start of 2023, while bank
 housing credit has continued to grow.
The decline in mortgage lending by non-bank lenders has naturally resulted in lower RMBS issuance. This
 has been driven by prime RMBS issuance, which has fallen over 2023 to be, so far, around half the pace of
 the preceding two years (Graph 7). In contrast, and reflecting the changes in non-banks’
 lending focus, their non-prime RMBS issuance has increased by about 50 per cent over the same
 period.
Graph 7
… and non-banks have expanded personal and business lending and increased issuance of
 non-housing ABS
One part of the response to these competitive pressures is that some non-bank lenders have focused on
 personal and business lending, either as a new interest or growing an existing business.
In particular, lenders have identified auto loans, personal loans, self-managed super fund mortgages, and
 ‘specialist’ mortgages as growth areas where competition with banks is less intense. Within
 personal lending, auto loans have certainly been a hot segment of the market (Graph 8). New auto
 sales have picked up materially since the pandemic and were still growing at around 16 per cent
 for households in the year to October 2023.
Graph 8
In contrast with housing lending, non-bank business lending has continued to grow faster than bank
 business lending (Graph 6 – lower panel). As a result, non-banks have increased their market
 share of business lending at a time when business credit growth remains higher than for housing credit.
 In aggregate, the difference between interest rates that non-banks and banks charge small businesses has
 not moved as much as for housing. Also, some market participants suggest that tighter financial
 conditions have pushed more businesses, particularly smaller businesses, outside bank risk tolerances
 given associated prudential requirements. Some portion of this non-bank business credit is financed
 through securitisation markets.
Non-bank issuance of auto and equipment (A&E) ABS, the key category of non-mortgage securitisations,
 has risen to record levels over 2023 (Graph 9).
[5]
This is a segment of the market where
 non-banks have been the key issuers for a number of years. The major banks have not issued, at least
 publicly, an A&E ABS since 2018 and other banks have not issued since the first half of last year.
 Despite this, the number of issuers of A&E securitisation has increased steadily over the past few
 years. Some of the new issuers are non-banks that have entered the market after acquiring lending
 businesses from banks that have left the market. In 2023, a record 15 lenders have issued A&E
 ABS, with three being new issuers in this segment of the market.
Graph 9
So who is buying it?
Of course, high and steady issuance requires willing investors. Available data suggests that the
 investor base remains spread across foreign investors, banks and, to a lesser extent, super funds and
 other similar long-term investors. We hear from investors in liaison that they like the increase in
 the number of issuers and the diversity of ABS collateral types in recent years. Investors also like
 the diversification associated with having ABS backed by personal and business loans since there are
 more loans than in a RMBS (due to smaller loan sizes), reducing exposure to individual borrowers.
We also hear in liaison that issuers, and non-banks in particular, have put a lot of effort into expanding
 their investor base, especially overseas. One example is dual-currency deals, which are designed to
 appeal to foreign investors that otherwise may not buy Australian paper. The idea here is that some
 foreign investors may find it difficult to hedge the AUD exposure back to their domestic currency due to
 prepayment risk, and the foreign currency tranche removes that barrier for the investor. While the issuer
 may face a similar challenge with hedging, the issuer knows the asset pool better so arguably it is in a
 better position to manage the risk than a foreign investor.
Good credit performance to date and a broadly favourable outlook continue to support investor confidence.
 The sharp increase in ABS spreads during the early phase of tighter monetary policy suggested investor
 caution, particularly with the potential for rising housing repayments and declining house prices to
 weigh on housing loan performance. However, to date, unemployment has remained low, house prices have
 turned around and, in aggregate, housing loan arrears have not increased much from their very low
 starting point.
Looking ahead
The big swings in economic and financial conditions in recent years are good reason for humility when
 opining on what might transpire in the period ahead. I’ll restrict my crystal-ball gazing to
 suggesting three areas that might be topical for discussion at this conference next year.
First, developments in credit quality fundamentals. As outlined in the latest
Statement on Monetary
 Policy
, the Reserve Bank Board’s priority is to return inflation to target, but risks on
 either side remain. Repayments are an increasing share of household income and unemployment is forecast
 to rise. And the risk characteristics of the ABS market facing that environment have changed. By product,
 there is less prime RMBS, more non-prime RMBS and non-housing ABS, and by issuer, more non-banks.
[6]
The
 Reserve Bank’s latest
Financial Stability Review
concluded that the outlook for
 non-banks’ housing loan quality is more challenging than in recent years because some are relaxing
 lending standards and have found it difficult to retain more creditworthy borrowers in an environment of
 heightened competition with the banks.
[7]
A second potential area of interest is funding conditions around the remaining TFF maturities. Around
 $80 billion of TFF funding has already matured, with banks repaying $64 billion of TFF funding
 in the September quarter 2023. This was the first of two concentrated maturity periods, with the larger
 $96 billion maturity scheduled in the June quarter of 2024 (Graph 10). Banks have managed their
 TFF repayments smoothly to date: as shown earlier, banks have significantly lifted their bond issuance in
 recent years and, in recent months, increased RMBS issuance too.
[8]
Will their funding plans extend to
 a larger re-entry to the RMBS market? Put another way, while the lack of bank debt issuance when banks
 were drawing down the TFF provided more room for non-bank ABS issuance, will this work in the other
 direction when banks are paying back the TFF?
Graph 10
A third area of interest for ABS markets is the evolution of competition in lending markets. A period of
 intense competition in housing mortgage markets has eased in recent months, with fewer cashbacks on offer
 for mortgage refinancers and variable housing loan rates for new loans edging higher by more than the
 cash rate. The banks’ funding cost advantage over non-banks has also diminished somewhat with higher
 deposit rates as customers switch from at call to term deposits, and a narrowing in RMBS spreads. Where
 to from here? While a number of non-banks have proven very agile in finding markets outside of prime
 mortgage lending, will they maintain that flexible approach or will they look to consolidate their
 current market segments?
To conclude, ABS markets have shown considerable dexterity in adjusting to change. While I’m not
 confident to predict how this will continue to evolve, I confidently predict that we will have plenty to
 recap this time next year at the ASF’s annual conference.
Thanks for your attention and I look forward to your questions.
Endnotes
Thanks to Shan Jayawardhana, Faye Khammo and Ed
 Tellez for excellent assistance with this speech.
[*]
The ABS estimates that in June 2023 the
 outstanding assets of Australian securitisers were $165 billion.
[1]
See RBA, ‘
Supporting
 the Economy and Financial System in Response to
COVID-19
’.
[2]
Alston M, S Black, B Jackman and C Schwartz
 (2020), ‘
The Term
 Funding Facility
’, RBA
Bulletin
, December.
[3]
Johnson C (2022), ‘
Trends
 in Australian Bank’s Bond Issuance
’, RBA
Bulletin
, September.
[4]
Non-mortgage securitisations cover a wide range
 of collateral, including auto loans, mixed auto and equipment loans, business loans, commercial
 mortgage loans, small-to-medium business loans, personal loans, and buy-now-pay-later
 receivables.
[5]
As my former RBA colleague Jonathan Kearns noted
 in this forum last year, non-bank RMBS typically have lower average seasoning and higher loan to
 value ratios than bank RMBS, see Kearns J (2022), ‘
Securitisation: Past, Present and
 Future
’, Address to the Australian Securitisation Conference, Sydney,
 30 November.
[6]
RBA (2023), ‘
Financial
 Stability Review
’, October.
[7]
Banks use their Exchange Settlement (ES) balances
 to repay the TFF. These ES balances qualify as high-quality liquid assets (HQLA) for the purpose
 of banks’ regulatory liquidity ratios. However, most of the collateral that have secured
 banks’ TFF loans are self-securitised assets, which do not qualify as HQLA. Banks can source
 replacement HQLA if they choose to offset the impact of TFF maturities on their liquidity ratios,
 which are currently well above regulatory requirements. Bank bond issuance has been above average
 over 2023 to date, with some of this funding being used to purchase HQLA securities.
[8]
