BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: A Stocktake of Securitisation in Australia
DATE: 02/12/2024
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2024/sp-so-2024-12-02.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
A Stocktake of Securitisation in Australia
David Jacobs
[
*
]
Head of Domestic Markets Department
Address to the Australian Securitisation Conference
Sydney
–
2 December 2024
Q&A Transcript
Watch video: A Stocktake of Securitisation in Australia
Good afternoon, and thank you for inviting the RBA to speak once again at this year’s event.
We sit here at a time of strength for securitisation in Australia; 2024 has emerged as the strongest year
 for issuance in over a decade, relative to the size of the economy (Graph 1).
[1]
The
 market has been underpinned by strong investor demand, which has driven spreads lower despite high
 issuance.
Graph 1
Today I will take a step back to do a bit of a stocktake, covering why securitisation continues to matter
 to the economy, how the market has evolved over the past decade or so, and whether we should be worried
 about any systemic risks related to securitisation markets.
To get to the punchline – securitisation is evolving. It remains a stable source of funding for
 credit, and has shifted in three interesting and important ways: issuance has increasingly come from
 non-banks; the composition of borrowers has broadened toward those with less access to bank credit; and
 we hear from liaison that investor demand is supported by increased participation from foreign investors.
What should we make of these developments? Again, three observations:
First, they have allowed more households and businesses to borrow, especially some that have less
 access to credit from more traditional lenders (such as those who can’t easily provide the usual
 income verification and for vehicle financing). In this sense, the securitisation market continues to
 be a flexible source of market-based funding that supports a diversity of lenders in the Australian
 financial system. That is valuable for competition and innovation in the market for household and
 business lending.
Second, this shift amid favourable market conditions has given rise to the potential for some risk to
 build up in the system, leaving it a little more vulnerable to a shock. In particular, in servicing a
 broader group of borrowers, non-bank lenders have increased some types of higher-risk lending.
[2]
But
 in other ways risk exposures have declined, and overall there are limited signs of strain among
 borrowers so far. That in part reflects the resilience of the labour market, which has supported both
 household and business borrowers. More generally, any risks to the broader financial system remain
 contained by the small size of the non-bank sector.
[3]
Finally, there is an interesting picture around investor demand. There may be a cyclical element to
 the strength in demand which could turn if global financial conditions were to deteriorate,
 particularly with risk premiums compressed in many markets. But there also appears to have been a
 broader, structural deepening across different parts of the Australian domestic bond market.
Having given the headlines, I’ll now turn to each of those themes.
1. A stable source of funding
Securitisation has been a resilient source of funding for credit provision in the Australian economy over
 recent years. Securitisation helps to fund loans to Australian households and businesses, by packaging up
 those loans and selling them to investors as marketable securities. As you can see on this graph, the
 share of housing credit funded by securitisation has been broadly stable at around 6 per cent
 over the past decade (Graph 2). That is much lower than just before the global financial crisis
 (GFC), but the steep increase in securitised credit in that period was of course highly unusual.
Graph 2
So at this high level, it’s been a remarkably steady period. The resilience in securitisation in
 recent years is quite striking when we consider the headwinds that issuers have faced.
[4]
First, rising interest rates since 2022 have tended to make wholesale sources of funds such as
 securitisation less competitive compared with deposits (Graph 3). This is in part because not all
 types of deposits pay interest and also because deposit funding tends to reprice at a slower pace than
 funding from securitisation.
[5]
Graph 3
Another potential headwind to securitisation markets recently has been the resumption of bank bond
 issuance with the end of the Term Funding Facility (TFF). There was some question over whether the
 rebound in bank bond issuance would crowd out demand for asset-backed securities (ABS). This crowding out
 has not eventuated so far, with issuance in the ABS market remaining strong. I’ll come back to the
 reasons for this later.
2. A broadening market
So how has the market remained so resilient? One factor has been the flexibility in securitisation
 business models, which has seen some important changes in the shape of the market.
In particular, in recent years we’ve seen a lot more lenders entering the market – particularly
 non-banks (Graph 4). The number of non-banks issuing ABS in Australia has risen four-fold from a
 decade ago.
Graph 4
As a result, non-banks have accounted for most ABS issuance in recent years and much of the growth in the
 market in that time (Graph 5). Securitisation is a particularly important source of funding for
 non-bank lenders, given they can’t raise deposits. For example, residential mortgage-backed
 securities (RMBS) make up an estimated three-quarters of funding for Australian non-bank mortgage
 lenders. That said, securitisation also provides banks more diversity in their funding sources and access
 to a wider range of investors, particularly for smaller banks.
Graph 5
This growing role of non-banks within securitisation is not unique to Australia. It is seen in some other
 advanced economies and reflects a range of factors from regulatory reform since the GFC through to
 demographics.
[6]
This shift toward non-banks in the Australian market is closely tied to flexibility in non-banks’
 business models. We can see how this flexibility has played out in residential mortgages. These are still
 the staple of the Australian ABS market, with RMBS accounting for three-quarters of the ABS market.
The next graph shows the effect that non-banks have had on the mortgages underlying the RMBS market
 (Graph 6). Let me step through this. Here we are comparing the characteristics of the mortgages that
 underlie
marketed
RMBS (those sold publicly to investors, orange lines) with loans that
 banks have
self-securitised
(structured assets created by banks to use exclusively as
 collateral to access liquidity from the RBA, blue lines). These self-securitisations tend to closely
 reflect the banks’ overall mortgage portfolio along important dimensions.
[7]
This
 comparison is made possible by the data from our Securitisation Database.
[8]
Graph 6
So this is broadly comparing the characteristics of mortgages funded in the securitisation market with
 those funded by the banks.
[9]
The key takeaway here is that residential mortgages that are funded by securitisation have shifted toward
 investor loans and low- or alternative-documentation loans (which require less or alternative
 verification of income or assets).
[10]
You can see this in the left-hand panels. This
 mostly reflects non-banks’ increased share of the market, as they target their lending more towards
 these segments than banks. But non-banks have also increased their share of these types of lending within
 their portfolios over time.
At the same time, banks’ broader mortgage portfolios have shifted a little away from low-/alt-doc and
 investor loans (the blue lines on Graph 6).
[11]
So securitisation has broadened toward some household borrowers who might have less access to credit from
 traditional lenders. That is a long-running trend that started before the rise in interest rates, and has
 indeed has stabilised a bit of late.
As I’ll come to below, on the surface that might also suggest a shift to riskier loan segments. But
 it’s also worth pointing out there has been shift away from high-loan-to-valuation (LVR) lending and
 interest-only lending – which would work to reduce risks, and you can see this change in the
 right-hand panels. We’ve seen a similar shift in the broader banking system.
Looking beyond residential mortgages, we again see that the securitisation market has extended credit to a
 wider range of borrowers, against a wider range of collateral.
Non-bank lenders in particular have extended their presence to areas such as vehicle and equipment
 lending, and some lending to small and medium enterprises (SMEs). Again, these are areas less serviced by
 traditional finance. Securitisation of loans for vehicles has grown quickly in recent years
 (Graph 7), partly from non-bank securitisers taking over existing vehicle loan books after several
 banks withdrew from auto financing in 2021.
[12]
While there has been a lot of recent focus on this strong growth in ‘other’ ABS, these are
 currently still very small numbers in the scheme of overall credit. For example, business credit from
 non-bank lenders that fund themselves mostly through securitisation accounts for around
 1 per cent of overall business credit.
[13]
Graph 7
What explains this flexibility on the part of the non-banks? Non-banks tend to focus more on certain parts
 of the lending market where banks have more limited risk appetite – those differences in risk
 appetite reflects several factors, including prudential capital requirements. Non-banks are not directly
 bound by the same prudential requirements as banks, precisely because they do not take deposits.
[14]
As a
 result, they have more flexibility to extend loans based on their business models and risk appetite
 around lending standards.
Banks do set limits on the risk metrics of the loans funded through the warehouse facilities they provide
 non-banks. But non-banks still have greater flexibility in extending credit.
[15]
In all, this changing shape of the securitisation market speaks to some of the potentially beneficial
 roles it can play in the Australian financial system. Securitisation provides market-based funding to a
 diverse range of lenders that, in turn, provide important competition to bank-based financing and reach
 some households and businesses with more limited access to traditional bank credit.
3. The flipside of a broader securitisation market
I’ll now turn to possible risks.
Strong demand for ABS is good news for both ABS issuers and borrowers. But any increase in risk appetite
 may also come with risks to investors and the broader system.
To date, the performance of underlying collateral has underpinned the strength in the Australian
 securitisation market. As you know, investors in rated Australian RMBS have never suffered credit losses
 from these investments.
[16]
This is largely because losses on the underlying
 loans have been extremely low, and are typically covered by available income remaining in the mortgage
 pool after required payments have been made.
[17]
Our assessment a few years ago had been that loans funded through securitisation appeared to be no riskier
 than the broader population of mortgages on some key measures.
[18]
But as I’ve just shown,
 there have been some shifts toward different types of borrowers, which warrants revisiting this view.
So what do we see? So far, arrears rates for mortgages underlying marketed RMBS seem to be very similar to
 that of mortgages extended by banks (Graph 8). As you would expect at this stage of the economic
 cycle, arrears rates have risen. But they are not high from a historical or international
 perspective.
[19]
So at this stage, it’s not obvious that the
 relative risks of RMBS have shifted noticeably.
Graph 8
We have a good picture here of mortgage arrears. But it’s harder to see how business loans in ABS are
 performing. That’s because while we can get great insights into mortgage arrears from our
 Securitisation Database, data on non-bank lenders’ business lending is limited. I understand that
 the ASF has been working to standardise data reporting for SME lending, to better support investors in
 managing their exposures to these products. This is where liaison information from you is also
 particularly useful – we hear that stress is emerging in some areas of business lending, including
 in the construction sector and for borrowers with relatively low credit ratings for vehicle
 financing.
[20]
But these areas of stress are small and isolated,
 and lenders generally do not expect them to become more widespread at this stage.
This is of course not to downplay the pressures felt across the community from high inflation and
 restrictive monetary policy. Even though the share of borrowers that are experiencing severe financial
 stress remains small, many households and businesses continue to experience pressure on their budgets.
 This has been a consistent area of focus in our
Financial Stability Review
publication.
[21]
The performance of the underlying loans will affect ABS investors differently, given that the distribution
 of risk depends on specific portfolio choices. Investors themselves should be well placed to test how
 their investments would behave under different scenarios. Investors in RMBS tend to be sophisticated and
 we could expect them to be well placed to understand and manage the risks arising from these
 investments.
[22]
As a central bank, however, we are interested not only in the risks borne by individual investors and
 lenders – we also have a responsibility to monitor potential risks from a system-wide perspective.
 A buoyant securitisation market could mean a shift into riskier lending for the system as a whole.
The key point I want to reiterate is that risks from non-bank lenders are currently somewhat limited by
 the small size of the sector, limited connections to the rest of the financial system, and their funding
 being sourced mainly from sophisticated investors.
But markets evolve, and it is worth monitoring a number of risks. One thing we monitor is banks’
 exposure to non-bank securitisers through warehouse facilities. This exposure remains very low, at around
 1 per cent of bank assets. Banks also impose lending standards for the loans originated in
 warehouses they fund, in line with their own risk appetite and APRA’s capital requirements, with
 RMBS reporting requirements further enforcing discipline on loan quality.
If economic conditions were to worsen, there are also important mitigants against any systemic risks
 arising from non-banks’ mortgage lending. These points were discussed more broadly in our most
 recent
Financial Stability Review
. First and foremost is the resilience of households,
 supported by a robust labour market and sizeable savings buffers.
[23]
The vast majority of borrowers
 also have a lot of equity in their homes thanks to prudent lending standards and the increase in housing
 prices over a number of years, which limits the risks to the financial system. Very few loans in arrears
 are estimated to be in negative equity (indeed we saw this a moment ago with the low levels of high-LVR
 loans). While selling a property is usually a last resort and a very disruptive solution for borrowers in
 financial difficulty, almost all borrowers in this situation would be able to repay their loans in
 full.
[24]
So while there has been a potential for risk to build up, there are limited signs of strain so far and in
 any event it would be quite contained.
4. Strong investor demand – cyclical and structural
So far, I have focused on the issuers of ABS, and the ultimate borrowers whose loans are funded by those
 securitisations. But there has also been an important evolution in terms of the investor base in ABS.
Rewinding to 2023, a major question mark over the market was how investor demand might respond to banks
 resuming bond issuance in the lead up to the end of the TFF. During the pandemic and with the TFF in
 place, there was very little bank bond issuance. That saw investors shift into ABS as a substitute, and
 ABS issuance by non-banks increased rapidly (the shaded area in Graph 9).
[25]
A
 question that some people asked last year was whether an expected rebound in bank issuance would crowd
 out ABS demand. But this crowding out has not eventuated, with issuance in the ABS market continuing to
 be strong even as banks have returned to wholesale funding markets.
Graph 9
The strength of investor demand has meant that pricing has been tight even while there has been record
 issuance. Tighter pricing has been particularly noticeable for the riskier tranches, with the gap between
 the highest-rated prime RMBS and mezzanine tranches near its decade-low (Graph 10).
Graph 10
A key message we hear is that offshore investors have contributed, at least in part, to the strength of
 demand. Market commentary suggests that around half of RMBS orders have been from offshore accounts in
 the first three quarters of 2024.
[26]
Foreign investor demand has been especially strong
 for riskier tranches. That said, foreign ownership of ABS has been relatively stable for some time
 (Graph 11).
Graph 11
Our liaison meetings suggest that some of you are concerned about how persistent this foreign demand may
 prove. Indeed, narrowing in risk premia is not unique to the securitisation market – we have also
 seen compressed risk premiums in other markets for risk assets. The equity risk premium at around its
 lowest level in a few decades and spreads on non-financial corporate bonds have tightened this year.
The RBA’s recent
Financial Stability Review
pointed to low risk premiums globally as a
 potential vulnerability for Australian markets. They potentially leave global asset prices sensitive to a
 variety of potential shocks. That includes if expectations for a soft landing in the global economy were
 to come into question.
That said, if we look over a longer horizon there do also appear to be structural factors supporting
 demand. We see that in other segments of the domestic Australian bond market as well. If we zoom out for
 a moment from ABS to look at the broader fixed-income market, a consistent message we’ve heard from
 liaison is the development of the domestic bond market in recent years, across a range of sectors.
We see that, for example, in corporate bonds (and I’m using the broad definition of that here –
 financials and non-financials). Australian companies issue a similar volume of bonds offshore as they did
 a decade ago, and at that time most of their issuance was offshore. But their bond issuance in Australia
 has doubled in that time, and they now issue almost as much in Australia as they do abroad
 (Graph 12). There has been a cyclical component to this. But liaison suggests that structural
 support has come from more involvement from Asian investors and domestic super funds.
Graph 12
With more issuers participating regularly and a deeper pool of investors, we have also heard that this has
 become a virtuous circle where ‘liquidity brings in more liquidity’ as connections deepen and
 conditions become more attractive to both issuers and investors. This deepening of the domestic bond
 market may be part of a broader trend where increased liquidity for new issuance and investor engagement
 have supported demand for Australian fixed-income products, including ABS.
Australian issuers have of course raised capital directly in offshore markets for some time. But a
 deepening of the domestic market is a welcome development. It supports more diverse funding sources and
 greater wholesale market access, so benefits both issuers and investors.
Taking stock – and what’s next?
To conclude, securitisation markets have been resilient and market conditions have been very favourable
 for issuers this year despite some key headwinds. Over the past few years we’ve seen a broadening of
 issuers, borrowers and investors.
How these trends play out from here will continue to shape the market in the period ahead. There will be
 many interesting questions.
To what extent will the market continue to provide competition in the Australian financial system? If the
 past few years are any indication, securitisation will continue to be an important source of funding for
 some non-bank lenders. That includes those that may wish to expand their activities in markets less
 serviced by banks. The extent to which they expand further in these markets will depend on various
 factors, including demand for this type of lending and funding conditions more generally.
How will the market weather an evolving economic environment? Much of the outlook for securitisation
 markets depends on the continued strong performance of the underlying collateral and the lending
 standards of issuers.
And will a deepening investor base help foster the longer-run growth of market-based finance in Australia?
 While some of the strong investor demand for securitisation may reflect global cyclical factors and is
 therefore influenced by developments in offshore markets, a structural deepening of demand in
 Australia’s fixed income markets does also appear to be playing a role.
We will continue to watch these developments with interest in the period ahead. Thanks for your time and I
 look forward to welcoming your questions.
Endnotes
I am grateful to Iris Chan, Amelia Gao, Shan
 Jayawardhana and Sharon Lai for their valuable help in preparing this speech.
[*]
Asset securitisation is the process of converting
 a pool of illiquid assets, such as residential mortgages, into tradeable securities. For further
 details, see Arsov I, I Kim and K Stacey (2015), ‘
Structural Features of Australian Residential
 Mortgage-backed Securities
’, RBA
Bulletin
, June.
[1]
Non-bank lenders that securitise loans are a
 subset of non-bank lenders. For further details, see Hudson C, S Kurian and M Lewis (2023),
 ‘
Non-bank
 Lending in Australia and the Implications for Financial Stability
’, RBA
Bulletin
, March.
[2]
For a broader assessment of the financial
 stability implications of non-bank financial institutions, see RBA (2024),
Resilience
 of the Australian Financial System
,
Financial Stability Review
, September.
[3]
My colleague Carl Schwartz spoke about these
 potential headwinds last year. Schwartz C (2023), ‘
Australian Securitisation Markets: Responding to
 Change
’, Speech at the Australian Securitisation Conference, Sydney,
 21 November.
[4]
As discussed later, non-banks rely on
 securitisation as a source of funding far more than the banks, which means their ability to offer
 loans on competitive terms is more closely linked to conditions in securitisation markets. See
 Schwartz, n 4 and De Zoysa V, J Dunphy and C Schwartz (2024), ‘
Bank
 Funding and the Recent Tightening of Monetary Policy’,
RBA
Bulletin,
April. The flipside of this (discussed later in the speech) is that while non-bank lenders cannot
 accept deposits for funding, they also have less onerous regulatory obligations. See Robinson M
 and S Tornielli di Crestvolant (2024), ‘
Financial
 Stability Risks from Non-bank Financial Intermediation in Australia
’, RBA
Bulletin
, April.
[5]
Financial Stability Board (2024),
 ‘Evaluation of the Effects of the G20 Financial Regulatory Reforms on Securitisation:
 Consultation report’, July.
[6]
While banks are able to add or remove loans from the
 pool underlying a self-securitisation, APRA imposes strict rules to limit the active management
 of such pools. For more information, see Hughes A, ‘
How
 the RBA Uses the Securitisation Dataset to Assess Financial Stability Risks from Mortgage
 Lending
’, RBA
Bulletin
, July.
[7]
The RBA’s Securitisation Database comprises
 loan-level data on the assets ‘backing’ many ABS issues, reported as a condition for an
 ABS to be eligible as collateral in the RBA’s market operations. The Securitisation Database
 provides timely and detailed information on mortgages underlying marketed RMBS and
 self-securitisations, and complements other datasets for monitoring the financial stability risks
 associated with mortgage lending in Australia. Work by the RBA has shown that this dataset
 broadly represents the wider Australian mortgage market across many important dimensions such as
 the composition of lending, borrower type and loan types. For more information, see Hughes, n 7,
 and Fernandes K and D Jones (2018), ‘
The
 Reserve Bank’s Securitisation Dataset
’, RBA
Bulletin
, December.
[8]
The comparison is largely affected by a couple of
 things. One is the changing split of the RMBS market between banks and non-banks – given
 each tend to make different types of loans. Second is changes in lending preferences for each
 lender type. A potential third factor that can affect comparisons in this chart is any difference
 between the loans underlying banks’ marketed RMBS and those they self-securitised; however,
 this has not been a major driver of compositional changes between marketed RMBS and
 self-securitisations.
[9]
Low- and alt-doc loans are often used by
 borrowers with irregular income sources, such as self-employed individuals or those with
 non-traditional income sources. These still require significantly more verification than the
 ‘no doc’ loans that became prevalent abroad ahead of the global financial crisis.
[10]
In late 2014, APRA announced a policy that
 required banks to limit their lending to housing investors. In early 2017, APRA imposed limits on
 interest-only mortgages. These limits have since been removed and replaced with longer-term
 solutions. For further details, see Garvin N, A Kearney and C Rosé (2021), ‘
Macroprudential Limits on Mortgage Products: The
 Australian Experience
’, RBA Research Discussion Paper 2021-07.
[11]
Allied Credit acquired Macquarie Bank’s
 auto dealer finance business, and Westpac sold its auto finance business to Angle Auto Finance in
 2021. For more information, see Davison L (2023), ‘Autos Proliferate’,
KangaNews
, November.
[12]
More generally, non-banks account for around
 11 per cent of business credit.
[13]
APRA does have the power to directly influence
 non-bank lending standards if they pose a material risk to financial stability. For more
 information, see Hudson
et al
, n 2.
[14]
Securitisers’ funding comes mostly through
 warehouse facilities during the loan origination phase, and then from the securitisation market
 once loans are packaged and sold to investors. Warehouse facilities act like a line of credit and
 are collateralised by the securitisers’ originated loans. For more information, see Hudson
et al
, n 2.
[15]
For instance, see Mitchell L (2023), ‘What
 Sophisticated Investors Know & Love’, April.
[16]
The excess interest spread is the difference
 between the interest rate charged on mortgages and that paid as periodic coupons to RMBS
 investors. Losses can be offset by deducting funds from the excess interest spread.
[17]
Kohler M (2017), ‘
Mortgage Insights from Securitisation
 Data
’, Speech at the Australian Securitisation Conference, Sydney, 20 November.
[18]
For non-banks more broadly (i.e. beyond
 securitisation), housing arrears are also not high from a historical perspective but they have
 risen more rapidly than banks’ arrears in the current monetary policy tightening phase. This
 more rapid increase reflects, in part, prime borrowers refinancing their loans from non-banks to
 banks: see RBA, n 3.
[19]
RBA, n 3.
[20]
RBA (2024),
Resilience
 of Australian Households and Businesses
,
Financial Stability Review
,
 September.
[21]
RBA, n 3. Data from the ABS shows that
 households own less than 1 per cent of outstanding ABS as of June 2024.
[22]
See Kent C (2024), ‘
The Financial System and Monetary Policy in
 Australia
’, Sir Leslie Melville Lecture, Australian National University,
 18 November.
[23]
See RBA, n 21.
[24]
See RBA (2024), ‘
Review
 of the Term Funding Facility
’, October.
[25]
See He S (2024), ‘Another Annual Issuance
 Record Falls as Australian Dollar Securitisation Soars’,
KangaNews
, October.
[26]
