BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Panel Participation at the Regulators 2024 (FINSIA)
DATE: 08/11/2024
SPEAKER: Brad Jones
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2024/sp-ag-2024-11-08.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Panel Participation at the Regulators 2024 (FINSIA)
Brad Jones
Assistant Governor (Financial System)
Regulators 2024 (FINSIA)
Sydney
–
8 November 2024
Good afternoon, and thank you to FINSIA for the opportunity to discuss some of the RBA’s
 regulatory and supervisory priorities in our payments policy and financial stability work.
Australia has a payments system that we can be proud of. By global standards, it is fast, efficient and
 reliable. At the same time, the Australian payments landscape is rapidly evolving, and there is always
 room for improvement. Alongside opportunities for new business models and technologies to emerge, there
 are also some challenges for the system. Regulators are leaning into these challenges and industry will
 need to as well.
The Payments System Board is focused on fostering competition and innovation in a regulatory environment
 that promotes the ongoing safety and security of the Australian payments system. In overseeing the
 activities of clearing and settlement facilities with our colleagues at ASIC, RBA staff and the Payments
 System Board (PSB) are equally focused on ensuring that these critical operations are run in a way that
 supports the stability of the Australian financial system. With this in mind, let me share with you the
 PSB’s five strategic priorities that were set out in the recently released Annual Report.
[1]
Priority #1: Promoting the safety and resilience of payments and market infrastructures
Australians increasingly depend on the availability of electronic payment systems, and our financial
 system is reliant on the smooth functioning of market infrastructures.
The orderly migration of Bulk Electronic Clearing Service (BECS) payments to more modern payment rails,
 such as the New Payments Platform (NPP), is of critical importance, recognising that BECS has been
 Australia’s primary system for account-to-account payments for over 30 years (facilitating most
 salary, welfare and pension payments). The industry target date of 2030 is ambitious and will require a
 concerted and coordinated effort by industry to meet. This effort must include close engagement with a
 wide range of stakeholders. In the meantime, the RBA is conducting a risk assessment to identify and
 understand how the transition risks are being managed.
Beyond BECS, and in light of the worsening cyber and geopolitical risk environment, the operational
 resilience of Australia’s payment systems is a principal focus for the PSB. RBA staff are closely
 monitoring the ability of market infrastructures to upgrade their technologies and manage these risks,
 including relating to third-party service providers.
Priority #2: Supporting reforms of the regulatory framework for payments and market infrastructures
As regulators need to have the powers to address emerging issues in the payments system, the PSB continues
 to strongly support the Government’s ongoing reforms to modernise the regulatory framework. RBA
 staff are also operationalising our new crisis management and supervisory powers for clearing and
 settlement facilities that featured in the recent reforms to financial market infrastructure regulation.
Priority #3: Lowering the cost of card payments for merchants, especially small businesses
The RBA recently launched a review of merchant card payment costs and surcharging. Options under review
 include those aiming to reduce the level and complexity of wholesale fees in card payments and promoting
 greater transparency for merchants. The review is also examining whether limits need to be placed on
 surcharging. Stakeholder submissions on these issues are invited by early December.
[2]
Priority #4: Improving cross-border payments, which remain expensive, slow and opaque
The PSB is encouraging the adoption of internationally harmonised messaging capabilities and enhanced
 functionality for cross-border payments. A recent example was the launch of the NPP’s International
 Payments Service, which will significantly speed up incoming cross-border payments. RBA staff also
 continue to examine options for linking fast payment systems across countries.
Priority #5: Actively shaping the future of digital money
This is a clear priority for the PSB and also features in the RBA’s Corporate Plan. In September, we
 published a paper with Treasury that set out our assessment of the case for central bank digital currency
 (CBDC) in Australia, and for the first time laid out a three-year roadmap for future work.
[3]
At
 present, we assess the benefits to the economy as more promising, and the challenges less problematic,
 for a wholesale CBDC compared with a retail version that would be available to the general public.
As I recently discussed, the RBA has made a strategic commitment to prioritise our applied research on the
 role that CBDC could play in lifting the efficiency and resilience of wholesale markets in Australia.
[4]
To that
 end, we are about to invite responses to a consultation paper on a new research project, Project Acacia.
 With industry partners, we look forward to exploring how innovations in digital money and infrastructure
 could increase the efficiency and resilience of wholesale markets where money and assets are tokenised.
Broader financial stability risks
Before I turn the floor open to questions, it would be remiss not to briefly mention that our focus on
 financial stability extends beyond the areas of payments and market infrastructure. As I discussed last
 year, and as set out by recent editions of the
Financial Stability Review
, we see risks to
 financial stability as taking two broad forms.
[5]
Traditional cyclical risks generated from within the financial system
These include the effects of higher interest rates or an economic downturn on the resilience of
 households, firms and banks. These types of risks have long featured in our surveillance work and will
 continue to do so.
Non-cyclical risks generated from outside the financial system
These have become more prominent in recent times and there is generally little historical precedent to
 guide us in navigating them. Foremost here are geopolitical risks, operational risks (including but not
 limited to cyber risks) and the risks associated with climate change.
Our assessment is that this second category of risks continue to build in troubling ways. They not only
 have the potential to be systemic, but could also cut across the financial system, economy and society in
 complex ways. For these reasons, the RBA and other member agencies comprising the Council of Financial
 Regulators are stepping up the intensity of work in these areas. At the same time, the worsening threat
 landscape – which is more structural than cyclical in nature – requires industry to actively
 prepare for a much more challenging operating environment in the years ahead.
Thank you.
Endnotes
RBA (2024), ‘
Payments System
 Board 2024 Annual Report
’.
[1]
RBA (2024), ‘
Merchant
 Card Payment Costs and Surcharging
’, Issues Paper, 15 October.
[2]
RBA and Australian Treasury (2024), ‘
Central
 Bank Digital Currency and the Future of Digital Money in Australia
’, September.
[3]
Jones B (2024), ‘
Financial Innovation and the Future of CBDC in
 Australia
’, Speech at the Intersekt Conference, Melbourne, 18 September.
[4]
See, for instance, RBA (2024), ‘
Financial
 Stability Review
’, September; Jones B (2023), ‘
Emerging Threats to Financial Stability –
 New Challenges for the Next Decade
’, Sydney, 31 October.
[5]
