BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Five Years of Financial Crisis – Sydney
DATE: 12/10/2024
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2012/sp-so-241012.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Five Years of Financial Crisis
Luci Ellis
Head of Financial Stability Department
Address to the CPA Australia Finance and Accounting Expo 2012
Sydney
–
24 October 2012
Audio
21.59
MB
global economy, global financial crisis
It's a pleasure to be back at this conference. Thank you once again for the kind
 invitation. When I last spoke to this group two years ago, I noted that it
 had been three years since interbank markets became disrupted. Already then
 we had seen after-effects in places like Greece that had nothing to do with
 the origins of the crisis. So we've been coping with some level of financial
 crisis and distress for five years now.
What I'd like to do today is take a step back and consider the beginnings of
 the crisis. I would like to discuss why neither its genesis nor its propagation
 to the global financial system were anticipated and why it was not prevented.
 And I'd like to set out some of the lessons to take from this crisis,
 including some mistaken conclusions that should not be taken on board.
The Beginning
Before the crisis, global financial conditions could be best described as ‘too
 good to be true’, and we knew it. Looking back at the
Financial Stability Reviews
we published in 2006 and early 2007,
 and indeed those from foreign agencies, it is clear that we knew all was not
 well.
[1]
Investors were accepting very low prices for taking on risk (Graph 1).
 Credit growth was very strong in a number of countries.
Graph 1
Prior to August 2007, there were some early shudders – false starts, if you
 like – that caught many people's attention. We saw the wobble of
 an exchange rate here, the collapse of a hedge fund there. I remember sitting
 in meetings at the BIS in early 2007 talking about some of these events. The
 question on everyone's lips was: is
this
the Big One?
So a lot of people in policy circles and elsewhere were alert to the vulnerabilities
 in the system. Lots of people knew that there was a chance something could
 go seriously wrong. But nobody, no matter what they claim now, really anticipated
 quite
how
it would play out.
The Meltdown
A lot of people were aware that the risks in the US mortgage market had risen. But
 few realised that it had reached the point that it was no longer a housing
 boom of the kinds we had seen before. Some people were aware that lending
 standards had eased, but few appreciated just how far things had gone in the
 United States. I know I didn't at the time. I wrote a paper
 in 2006 pointing out that not
all
housing booms result in macroeconomic busts, though they can
 also worsen downturns that happen for other reasons (Ellis
 2006).
[2]
That conclusion remains true: not all booms end in crisis, even though the US one
 did. And it was a pretty good prediction for the countries I actually
 mentioned in the relevant passage – Australia, the UK and the Netherlands.
 But it would have been a terrible forecast for outcomes in the United States,
 a country I wasn't referring to in that section. Foreign observers like
 the RBA didn't realise how overstretched the US housing market had become,
 because there simply wasn't the data to show that lending standards had
 eased more in the US than elsewhere. The US authorities and most other observers
 in the United States largely missed it too. They weren't routinely comparing
 their situation with other countries and didn't see how exceptional it
 had become.
To be sure, some private sector commentators were concerned about the US housing
 bubble. But the metrics they cited, such as the ratios of housing prices to
 incomes or rents, would not have told you that the US housing market was in
 a more vulnerable position than those of other countries. Prices and debt
 actually rose less in the United States than in several other countries where
 booms ended much less painfully. The poor lending practices that created so
 many bad loans in the United States simply weren't sufficiently visible
 in the usual data. Most of the activity was in new, non-bank lenders that
 didn't attract much scrutiny from regulators. And some banks didn't
 even seem to recognise that they were easing up on lending standards. You
 can see in this graph that bank senior loan officers knew that they were tightening
 standards in 2007 and 2008, but they didn't report much easing before
 that (Graph 2). They didn't see it as easing; in their eyes, they
 were just responding to competition.
Graph 2
Housing prices had only fallen around 5 per cent in the US by mid 2007,
 but already this was enough to put several lenders out of business. Because
 they securitised their loans, they didn't think they needed to absorb
 losses and they had no balance sheet to do so: they were volume businesses.
 But when the loan went bad so quickly that it obviously should never have
 been granted, contractually the investors in the resulting mortgage-backed
 security could ‘put back’ the loan to the originator. There were
 a shockingly large number of these early defaults.
Property busts, especially commercial property but sometimes also housing, often
 spark domestic banking crises. If the US had had a banking crisis all on its
 own, perhaps that crisis could have been dealt with differently. But this
 crisis went global, and it was this connection between US mortgage markets
 and the global system that wasn't well understood, and that essentially
 nobody predicted. How did that happen? First, some of the central actors in
 the US mortgage finance boom were a few dozen global banks, heavily interconnected
 with global banks headquartered elsewhere. Second, the securities backed by
 these mortgages were in some cases bought by foreign banks or their affiliates.
 So instead of sweeping the risk out of the banking system, securitisation
 spread some of the losses
through
the banking system.
A third factor that helped turn this local housing bust into a global panic was that
 the resulting securities were long-term assets, but they were funded by very
 short-term funding. Maturity transformation – borrowing short and lending
 long – is a normal function of the banking system. It is also an important
 reason why banking institutions have to be prudentially
 regulated.
[3]
They have to hold capital and some liquid assets to avert a run, and they have to
 be able to access central bank liquidity in the event of a general panic.
But in the US the banking system wasn't the main provider of mortgage credit.
 The loans were packaged up into securities, often passed from bank to bank
 in a complex production chain before landing in the balance sheet of an ultimate
 investor or investment vehicle. Often the investment vehicles were funded
 very short term: investors were using these vehicles for transactional purposes
 like funding their payroll, expecting the funds to be liquid without a proper
 liquidity backstop (Pozsar
et al
2010). One thing that policymakers didn't expect
 is that the professional investors in these kinds of funds were even more
 flighty and prone to run than retail depositors.
As I mentioned, there were only a few dozen institutions involved in running the
 securitisation machine. There were, however, many more ultimate investors
 in the final securities. Often they did not understand the risks in those
 securities. The structures were quite opaque, and the language describing
 the underlying mortgages – subprime, Alt-A,
 HELOC
[4]
and so on – did not give a good sense of the quality of those loans. The same
 label was applied to loans that performed very differently, depending on who
 made the loan and where the home was.
As the mortgage losses piled up, the prices of these securities fell. The firms and
 investment vehicles that held those securities began to incur losses. The
 consequences of this were another thing that policymakers didn't anticipate.
 Not only did they not appreciate how exposed the major global banks, and some
 minor ones, were to these bad assets. They also didn't appreciate how
 much everyone would panic because they didn't know
which
of their counterparties were exposed to those bad assets, and
how far
the prices of the securities would decline. Banks became
 unwilling to lend to each other on an unsecured basis, and the price of such
 lending rose drastically (Graph 3).
Graph 3
Securitisation was meant to be this wonderful thing that got risk out of the banking
 system, but actually it just moved it to other parts of the banking system,
 out of sight of the US regulators, and apparently out of mind of banks'
 management.
Since I am speaking to an audience of accountants, I should also mention the role
 that valuation practices played in the crisis. Because these securities were
 so opaque, investors were unusually uncertain about how they should be priced.
 Sometimes they just relied on the credit rating, which creates its own problems.
 Sometimes they relied on the pricing models of the bank that sold them the
 securities, which raised all sorts of governance issues. But even if they
 did their own valuations, marking to model became all but infeasible. It wasn't
 enough just to disclose what kinds of mortgages were behind the security,
 because the marketing labels didn't reveal enough about loan quality.
 There was subprime and subprime. The level of detail about the lending standards
 mattered enormously, and so did the details of the valuation models based
 on that information.
The Subsequent Convulsions
After the panic following the failure of AIG, Lehman and others, it wasn't long
 before the macro data took a turn for the worse. The global economy headed
 for a serious downturn: the contraction in the G7 economies was unlike anything
 seen in decades (Graph 4).
Graph 4
Why did economic activity contract so quickly, and in so many countries quite removed
 from the financial centres where the trouble began? I don't think there
 is yet a definitive answer to this question. There are several plausible possibilities
 but two in particular come to mind. First, there was a big news effect. Remember
 it wasn't just Lehman that failed in those critical weeks. There had been
 a cascade of failures, especially in the United States. There was a real sense
 that the global financial system was at risk of collapse. It's understandable
 that many households and firms saw that news, and decided to rein in their
 spending to protect themselves better from a coming downturn. In doing so,
 they helped create that downturn. Keynes' ‘animal spirits’
 remain highly relevant to macroeconomic outcomes, even now.
Second, reinforcing that effect, some recent empirical work has shown that a few
 large organisations can have disproportionate effects on economic activity
 – firm-specific effects don't just wash out in the aggregate (Gabaix
 2011). For example, this research cites evidence that 35 per cent
 of Korean exports are accounted for by just two firms, and only 10 or so firms
 account for the same fraction of Japanese exports. With that in mind, it isn't
 hard to imagine how these large reactions occurred in apparently distant countries.
 If both those Korean firms changed their production plans because of concerns
 stemming from the crisis, of course we would see a large effect in the macroeconomic
 data. In that light, perhaps the sharp declines in real output can be more
 easily understood, even if they seemed shocking at the time (Graph 5).
Graph 5
And as economies turned down and risk aversion rose, we started to see the effects
 on parts of the world that were apparently unconnected to the original crisis.
 Business models that seemed to work when credit was easy started looking less
 sensible. We are seeing that especially clearly in Europe recently. But there
 have been several other waves of turmoil in between, in places like Dubai
 and eastern Europe.
The Lessons
The last five years have taught a number of lessons to policymakers, market participants
 and outside observers such as academics. But have we learned the right lessons?
We learned that short-term wholesale funding markets can be even flightier than supposedly
 unsophisticated depositors. So banks needed to change their funding mix, and
 in Australia at least, they have. But the firms overseas that got into trouble
 because of their funding models tended to have much higher shares of wholesale
 funding, and shorter maturities, than we see in Australia today. It would
 be a mistake to conclude that any level of wholesale funding is dangerous.
We should also bear in mind that some of the metrics people use to assess funding
 structures can be quite misleading. I am thinking particularly of the loan-to-deposit
 ratio. This ratio is higher in Australia than it is in some other banking
 systems, though not out of line with a few others (Graph 6). But if you
 see a bank with a very low level of this ratio, well below 100 per cent,
 ask yourself what the bank is doing with that deposit funding instead. They
 are investing it in securities and other kinds of investment. And as we saw
 in the crisis, those securities can often be far riskier than regular lending.
 So it would be a mistake to focus on these kinds of metrics.
Graph 6
We also had yet another iteration of the old lesson that property market dynamics
 can drive episodes of financial instability. Ten years ago, the global debate
 about whether monetary policy should respond to asset prices was rather unhelpfully
 focused on equity markets, which at the time did not have the kind of leverage
 that is the nub of the problem. The crisis has shown that property markets
 are usually more relevant to financial stability. These markets have the boom–bust
 dynamics and leverage needed to turn an asset price downturn into a financial
 crisis. But it would be a mistake to conclude that the biggest – or
 indeed the only – risk to financial stability stems from home mortgage
 lending. Quite frankly I consider it irresponsible to fixate on one source
 of risk to the exclusion of others that are more relevant or pressing. Let
 me be clear: risks from housing markets are not zero, and never will be. But
 commercial real estate or property developers are still more likely to pose
 risks to a financial system, and through it, to the real economy. The longer
 history of financial crises all over the world has taught us that. And there
 are other risks within the financial system itself that are at least as worthy
 of attention. Any sensible policy for promoting financial stability monitors
 all reasonable potential risks, and responds proportionately according to
 their relative importance.
It would likewise be a mistake to conclude that just because housing markets in some
 countries have caused problems, they always will, in all countries. The US
 market is quite unusual. Housing booms have to end sometime, but they don't
have
to end in tears. Among other things it takes the passage of
 time and diligent attention from the regulators to ensure housing booms don't
 end in a harmful bust, but it can be done.
We learned that the major banking systems of the world needed more capital, and that
 the capital needed to be real, loss-absorbing capital. That is why the Basel
 III package was so crucial. But it would be a mistake to think that the answer
 to every problem is more capital. I can well imagine a situation where bank
 management and regulators become complacent about highly capitalised banks.
 They might think their bank can't possibly burn through all that capital
 and fail. Just like ‘that ship couldn't possibly sink’.
If the same bank gets more capital but changes nothing else, it will be safer. There
 will be more shareholders' funds to absorb any losses that might occur.
 But all else is not equal. The bank with more capital might feel emboldened
 to try to grow faster, or to take on other risks. Or it might be being
required
to hold that extra capital, because it has a business model
 that is inherently riskier in ways the Basel risk weights don't capture
 properly. For example, its business might be quite geographically concentrated.
 The Basel framework already handles cases like this using what is known as
 Pillar 2. Supervisors can and do require banks to hold more capital to cover
 these kind of bank-specific risks. In Australia, APRA routinely sets some
 institutions' Prudential Capital Ratios to be higher than the Basel minimum.
 Business models differ, and thus so do inherent risks. Because of that, I
 wouldn't
necessarily
expect a bank with higher capital to be safer than one with lower capital. It might
 or might not be. It depends on whether the additional capital was enough to
 cover these less easily measured risks.
So we should not be surprised that banks with high reported capital ratios were not
 less likely to fail than banks with lower capital ratios. Part of the problem
 is that the rules differ slightly across countries, even under Basel II. More
 broadly, though, this is an example of the well-known trope that ‘you
 become what you measure’. If you tell people to fulfil a particular
 metric, they will do so. But in doing so, the metric will start to lose its
 relationship with the thing you really care about. For this reason, I doubt
 that we will ever find the single variable that would ensure financial stability
 if only banks could be made to meet it. This is why diligent supervision is,
 if anything, more important than how simple or complex or clever the rules
 might be.
Finally, there was a further lesson reinforcing our existing view that the pursuit
 of financial stability requires thinking holistically. The people who knew
 that the US mortgage market had become imprudent didn't know how
 the resulting credit risk was being distributed globally. The people who understood
 structured finance didn't know much about housing and mortgage markets.
 The system was too complex and interconnected for one person to be expert
 in all its elements and links. In fact we should not expect any system to
 be entirely within a single person's expertise. This is why interagency
 cooperation – and international cooperation and information sharing
 – is so important.
To conclude, five years on we are still in a world where risk aversion is high and
 some parts of the financial system seem dysfunctional. In some countries –
 though not Australia, I believe – the supply of credit is tighter than
 the underlying risks would require. I hope I won't come back in five years'
 time to deliver a speech titled ‘Ten Years of Financial Crisis’.
 But I do think that the experience of the past five years has affected a whole
 generation of financial market participants and policymakers. We will never
 be able to regulate the financial boom-bust dynamic away entirely. There will
 always be people with the risk appetite and the incentives to become over-exuberant.
 It would not surprise me, though, if the next five or ten years see a lot
 less of that over-exuberance than we saw in the five or ten years leading
 up to 2007. The challenge will be to be ready to respond when those memories
 fade and the next generation of the overconfident are gearing up for a party.
Thank you for your time.
Endnotes
I particularly have in mind the second paragraph from the Overview of the September
 2006
Financial Stability Review
, which pointed out that
 valuations were based on favourable expectations and susceptible to disappointing
 news. The APRA
Annual Report
for 2004/05 noted concerns that
 risk was being underpriced and emphasised that business strategies should
 not lose touch with economic realities (p 9).
[1]
The relevant discussion is on pages 29–30. It wasn't until I went to the
 BIS in 2007 and was working on related topics that I realised how bad things
 were in the US mortgage market, especially relative to other countries.
[2]
In Australia, not all deposit-taking institutions are called ‘banks’;
 they include credit unions and building societies. All these institutions
 are prudentially regulated by APRA, and collectively they are known as authorised
 deposit-taking institutions (ADIs). I use the terms ‘banking institution’
 and ‘banking system’ to mean all types of financial firm engaged
 in banking business, regardless of their label.
[3]
HELOC stands for home equity line of credit.
[4]
References
Ellis L (2006), ‘
Housing and Housing Finance: The View from Australia and Beyond
’,
 RBA Research Discussion Paper 2006-12.
Gabaix X (2011), ‘The Granular Origins of Aggregate Fluctuations’,
Econometrica
79(3), pp 733–772.
Pozsar Z, T Adrian, A Ashcraft and H Boesky (2010), ‘The Shadow Banking System’,
 Federal Reserve Bank of New York Staff Report 458, available at <http://www.ny.frb.org/research/staff_reports/sr458.pdf>.
