BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: The Future of the Payments System
DATE: 12/12/2024
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2024/sp-ag-2024-12-12.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
The Future of the Payments System
Brad Jones
[
*
]
Assistant Governor (Financial System)
AusPayNet Summit 2024
Sydney
–
12 December 2024
Audio
40MB
Q&A Transcript
Download
511KB
Watch video: The Future of the Payments System - Speech delivered by Brad Jones, Assistant Governor (Financial System), AusPayNet Summit 2024, Sydney
Thank you for the invitation to open the batting at this year’s AusPayNet Summit. This forum is
 always a highlight on the calendar − for industry and policymakers alike − and I am sure this year will
 be no different.
Not so long ago, opining on the future of the payments system may have been a somewhat mundane affair. Not
 a great deal changed from one year to the next, and not too many folks, other than the true payment
 system diehards, were interested.
Not so now.
For a start, our payments system is rapidly evolving. New innovations are springing up at a dizzying pace.
And the payments system has never been more critical to the functioning of the economy. Almost
 $300 billion in payments now settle across the RBA’s central infrastructure each day. This is
 equivalent to Australia’s annual GDP flowing through the payments system every 10 days.
Furthermore, debates over the future of money and payments now regularly feature in the public square
 – and as I am discovering, the public square very much extends to summer barbeque conversations. In
 some sense, money and technology have always been the subject of popular fascination, but this seems
 especially true today.
In short, to channel a former Prime Minister, it has never been a more exciting time to be in payments.
My remarks today will focus on the challenges and opportunities in front of all of us involved in
 payments. There is no shortage of both. But before diving in, let me briefly set the scene by
 highlighting where our payments system stands today, and the RBA’s role in it.
The current state of Australia’s payments system
Australia has a payments system that we can be proud of. By global standards, it is fast, efficient and
 reliable. This is evident not only in the data, but from the discussions that I and my colleagues at the
 RBA and on the Payments System Board regularly have with our international counterparts. It is also worth
 noting that for the better part of a couple of decades, retail merchant card payment costs have trended
 lower in Australia in response to increased transparency and competitive tension in the market for
 payments services (Graph 1). Some of this competitive tension has arisen organically, and some of it
 has come about as a result of intervention by the RBA.
Graph 1
This brings me to the mandate of the RBA and the Payments System Board.
[1]
At the broadest level, this
 mandate is to help shape the payments system so that it works in the best interests of Australian
 households and businesses. Our north star is promoting the public interest. We strive to achieve this
 through a combination of suasion, regulation and working with industry participants to help overcome the
 coordination issues that can bedevil payment systems.
In seeking to promote efficiency, competition and safety in the payments system, we also recognise the
 important role of innovation in serving the public interest. Australia’s productivity growth
 challenges make this all the more pertinent. One can think of the New Payments Platform (NPP) as a
 notable example of this focus (Graph 2). More recently, this year the RBA materially raised the
 activity threshold beyond which securities settlement facilities must comply with the Financial Stability
 Standards. It was assessed that the higher threshold struck a more appropriate balance between the public
 interest in the management of financial stability risks, and the public interest in avoiding excessive
 regulatory burden (particularly on small enterprises). And as I will discuss later, we also recently
 launched a new project with industry to examine how central bank digital currency, stablecoins and
 tokenised bank deposits could, along with new infrastructure arrangements, support innovation and
 resilience in wholesale tokenised asset markets.
Graph 2
Where innovation promises to not only enhance efficiency but also resilience and safety in our financial
 system, all the better. This recognises that we are entering a new era for operational risk – a
 result of rising geopolitical tension and other sources of potential disruption that include third-party
 vendors. For these reasons, strengthening resilience in our payment system and our financial market
 infrastructure is a key area of focus for the RBA in its work with other member agencies on the Council
 of Financial Regulators.
[2]
This aside, the RBA is also working with the government to make sure that Australia’s regulatory
 architecture is fit for purpose in the 21st century. This is a pressing issue given the foundational
 legislation setting out the RBA’s powers was drafted in another era – one prior to the
 emergence of the digital economy that will be essential to Australia’s future prosperity.
If there is one message to takeaway from my remarks today, it is this – while we should recognise
 that Australia has a world class payments system today, it would be a mistake to assume the same will be
 true in five or 10 years’ time without a concerted effort from everyone involved in payments.
 Of course, the RBA has a key role here and we remain committed to working constructively with industry in
 promoting the public interest. But ultimately, how industry responds to these challenges and
 opportunities will determine whether it will be able to deliver the services that Australians will need
 and should expect in the future.
Account-to-account payments
In the spirit of facing into challenges, let me begin with account-to-account payments. In her speech to
 this Summit last year,
[3]
the Governor spoke about industry’s decision to
 target the decommissioning of the BECS framework by 2030. The setting of a target date by industry has
 helped to focus attention across the ecosystem. But there is much to do here.
BECS is the workhorse of the account-to-account payments system. While the share of account-to-account
 transfers made through the NPP has increased notably (Graph 3), BECS is still used to process the
 majority of account-to-account payments. This includes payroll, pension and support payments that are
 critical to Australians.
Graph 3
Given the importance of BECS to our financial system, this year the Payments System Board asked RBA staff
 to undertake a risk assessment of the intended decommissioning. The risk assessment, which will be
 reported to the Board in March 2025, is drawing attention to some issues that will need to be addressed
 to facilitate an orderly decommissioning.
In the course of engaging with a wide range of stakeholders – banks, payment service providers,
 payment schemes, end users and government agencies – RBA staff have heard plenty of support for the
 migration to more modern payment rails such as the NPP. There are features of the NPP that many
 stakeholders find beneficial, including
24/7
operation, real-time
 settlement, richer data and enhanced data exchange capabilities.
At the same time, some stakeholders have raised concerns about aspects of the migration. I will set these
 out in a moment, but my colleagues at the RBA and on the Payments System Board see the central challenge
 as this – industry is yet to arrive at a shared vision of the desired features of
 account-to-account payments in Australia. This is a foundational issue. While the point of departure has
 been announced by industry – transitioning from BECS as we know it – establishing a common
 vision of the features underpinning a desired end state will be essential if a program of this scale is
 to succeed. Once a consensus has emerged here, a roadmap with milestones can guide industry progress
 toward the ultimate objective.
Now let me share with you some of the feedback we have heard so far:
There has been insufficient industry coordination, planning and certainty regarding the
 transition.
This in turn has had made it difficult for industry participants to press
 on with their individual plans, including those who will have a key role in ensuring the ongoing
 competitiveness and safety of the system.
There is scope for the needs of end users to be given more prominence in industry discussions
 on the future of account-to-account payments.
BECS is the payment rail used to make the
 majority of essential payments to millions of Australians, so any replacement must be capable of
 reliably meeting end user needs.
A solution for the processing of bulk payments will be important.
[4]
Key
 end users need confidence that bulk payments will be supported into the future, recognising that many
 have integrated systems that manage the initiation and reconciliation of payment instructions. The
 NPP and the fast settlement service (FSS) will need to have capacity to handle a much higher volume
 of payments.
The cost of the transition and per transaction costs in the future system are a concern for
 some stakeholders.
End users, including those who do not have advanced functionality
 requirements, understandably want options that represent value for money. The RBA is working to
 better understand the pricing of account-to-account payments.
Many stakeholders have expressed a desire for resilience to feature prominently in future
 account-to-account system arrangements.
BECS outages have typically been low
 (Graph 4). Contingency arrangements in the future system will need to ensure that end user needs
 can continue to be met even when operational issues are experienced.
[5]
This
 suggests resilience will need to be built into the solution from the outset. As mentioned earlier,
 the RBA and the Australian Prudential Regulation Authority (APRA) are stepping up their focus on
 operational resilience in the financial system, including payments.
[6]
End users will be unable to move payments from BECS until all customers can receive payments
 via an alternative channel.
Some banks using BECS are yet to connect to the NPP, and
 even for those that have done so, some of their BECS-reachable accounts are not currently reachable
 via the NPP. It might be that not all of these unreachable accounts will need transactional
 capabilities in the future, but this is something institutions need to examine.
Graph 4
Let me offer a positive take on this feedback. It has surfaced some issues that, if addressed
 appropriately, can give industry a solid basis on which to move forward. The focus on resilience,
 functionality and end user needs is particularly relevant here. The announcement by industry of a target
 date of 2030 for BECS decommissioning has already sparked some useful dialogue. But all stakeholders need
 a voice, and a broad consensus on some key issues is now essential if Australia’s account-to-account
 payment system arrangements are going to be fit-for-purpose in the next decade. Time is now of the
 essence.
Review of Retail Payments Regulation
As many of you will be aware, the RBA recently launched a Review of Retail Payments Regulation.
[7]
While we
 hoped to conduct a broad review, including of issues arising from new types of players and technologies
 in digital payments, proposed amendments to the
Payment Systems (Regulation) Act 1998
(PSRA)
 that would bring relevant participants into the RBA’s regulatory remit currently remain before the
 Australian Parliament. Given the limitations of our remit under the current PSRA and the significance of
 the issues, it is important that these reforms are passed as soon as possible.
For now, we are focused on whether there are further actions the RBA could take to put downward pressure
 on merchant card payment costs and whether the surcharging framework remains fit for purpose. These
 issues can be dealt with under the PSRA in its current form and are inextricably linked: merchants are
 less likely to surcharge if their payment costs are low. Given the shift towards electronic payments,
 card payment costs are an ongoing concern for merchants, as they are for consumers. Keeping downward
 pressure on merchant fees for card payments, particularly for smaller merchants that tend to be charged
 higher fees, will keep consumer costs down, and so is an important priority for the RBA.
The Issues Paper for the Review outlines a broad suite of issues and possible policy responses for
 stakeholders to consider. We have asked for feedback on the following:
the current level of interchange fee benchmarks and caps, and whether there is a case for more
 structural changes to interchange regulation
[8]
whether further regulatory action could increase competitive pressure on scheme fees and whether
 further action is required to promote least-cost routing for in-person transactions
options to reduce complexity and improve transparency to facilitate merchants shopping around to get
 the best value, as this would boost competition in the acquiring market.
As the payments landscape has evolved significantly since the surcharging framework was introduced in
 2003, it is timely to review whether the current rules are still achieving their intended purpose. There
 are arguments on both sides of this debate, and we recognise that some views are strongly held. We are
 open to exploring all possible options to find a position that will best serve the public interest,
 consistent with our legislative mandate.
Some of the arguments for retaining the current surcharging framework include:
it provides a price signal to consumers to use a lower cost payment option – where consumers
 vote with their feet, this puts competitive pressure on card networks to lower their wholesale fees
merchants value the ability to surcharge to recover the cost of payment choices made by customers
surcharging rules have made a significant contribution to the long-run decline in average fees that
 merchants pay for card transactions (recall Graph 1).
However, the decline in cash usage, increased prevalence of surcharging and changes in the way merchants
 are charged for card payments have led to reasonable concerns about the current framework. In particular:
Fewer consumers transact with cash today and are therefore unable to avoid card surcharges at the
 point-of-sale.
Many small merchants are now on blended or single-rate payment plans that charge the same fee to
 merchants for accepting all types of cards. This dulls the price signal to consumers, and can mean
 users of cheaper card payments cross-subsidise users of more expensive cards.
Consumers are sometimes unaware of the surcharge amount before paying and/or surcharged for amounts
 in excess of merchants’ cost of acceptance.
[9]
We received over 70 submissions to our Issues Paper, many from institutions represented here today.
 Thank you to those who took the time to set out their views. We plan to publish submissions on our
 website in January, and to take a summary of the feedback you have provided to the Payments System Board
 in March. Following this, we aim to release a consultation paper with potential policy actions around
 mid- 2025. Thereafter a conclusions paper would set out the Board’s final decisions, likely by the
 end of the year.
Cross-border payments
I’ll now turn to the topic of cross-border payments.
Australian businesses and households that undertake international activities need efficient and safe ways
 to send and receive money. But cross-border payments services are still more expensive, more opaque and
 slower than their domestic counterparts. Enhancing cross-border payments is therefore one of the Payments
 System Board’s strategic priorities and an international commitment for Australia under the
 G20 Roadmap.
A recent review by the Financial Stability Board indicated that much more progress is needed to move
 toward the G20 Roadmap cost targets.
[10]
Lowering the cost of cross-border payment services
 has proven challenging almost everywhere. In Australia, we estimate that the average cost of sending
 A$1,000 to other countries still significantly exceeds the relevant G20 targets
 (Graph 5).
[11]
Graph 5
However, the cost of sending money overseas from Australia can vary significantly across providers. Banks
 are generally more expensive than non-bank providers, reflecting the size of the mark-ups they typically
 apply to the wholesale foreign exchange rate. By contrast, there are some non-bank digital providers
 offering prices that are around, or a bit below, the G20 target levels. These differences highlight
 the importance of transparency over prices and of customers shopping around.
[12]
The speed of cross-border payments is another area where more progress is required. Bank-intermediated
 cross-border transactions often take a day or more to reach the recipient. Slow processing reflects a
 range of factors including differing operating hours, inconsistent payments messaging practices, and
 complex compliance checks.
Making use of the new NPP International Payments Service, which allows the final Australian dollar leg of
 inbound cross-border payments to be processed on a near real-time
24/7
basis, will help. There are also a range of ISO 20022 messaging
 initiatives where more progress is needed.
[13]
Achieving international consistency in the data
 carried in payments messages will reduce the need for manual intervention by providers in the processing
 of cross-border payments, and therefore increase the speed and lower the costs of transactions.
Finally, the RBA continues to participate in initiatives like Project Mandala, a collaboration with the
 Bank of International Settlements (BIS) Innovation Hub and the central banks of South Korea, Malaysia and
 Singapore. This project examines a common technical model for automating regulatory compliance processes
 in cross-border payments, including sanctions and AML/CTF requirements, with a view to increasing the
 speed of compliance procedures and reducing failed transactions.
[14]
The future of digital money
This leads me to another focus area for the RBA and the Payments System Board – shaping the future
 of money in Australia. A central element of this program is determining whether there is a public policy
 case to introduce a central bank digital currency (CBDC) in Australia, and if so, in what form. We
 recently published a report with Treasury that provided an updated assessment of the case for a CBDC in
 Australia, and outlined, for the first time, a three-year roadmap for future work.
[15]
Our current assessment is that a public interest case to issue a retail CBDC has yet to emerge in
 Australia. At the present time, we see the potential benefits of a retail CBDC as modest or uncertain,
 relative to the challenges it would likely introduce. However, as these trade-offs could evolve over
 time, and as more international experience comes to light, the RBA and the Treasury will continue to
 examine the issues.
Like a number of central banks in advanced economies, we see the potential case for a wholesale CBDC as
 more promising, though not definitive at this point. A wholesale CBDC could have a key role in
 facilitating the settlement of transactions in tokenised asset markets, and in enhancing cross-border
 payments. This recognises the key role of central bank money in serving as the ultimate safe settlement
 asset, particularly in systemically important markets – a point emphasised in international
 standards. Implementing a wholesale CBDC is also likely to be less disruptive and pose fewer policy
 challenges than issuing a retail CBDC. It would represent a more incremental change to existing
 arrangements where digital central bank money is already issued to eligible financial institutions in the
 form of Exchange Settlement Account balances. But there are still issues that require closer scrutiny
 here.
In that respect, we have made a strategic commitment to prioritise our applied research agenda on
 innovations in wholesale digital money – namely, wholesale CBDC, tokenised bank deposits and
 stablecoins. Our most immediate priority is to launch a new research project with the Digital Finance
 Cooperative Research Centre (DFCRC), known as Project Acacia. Our focus here is on opportunities to
 uplift the efficiency, transparency and resilience of wholesale markets through tokenised money, assets
 and new settlement infrastructure. We recently published a consultation paper seeking industry feedback
 and inviting expressions of interest to collaborate with the RBA and the DFCRC as part of this
 project.
[16]
I encourage anyone who is interested to reach out to
 our project team.
In addition to Project Acacia, we have a number of other CBDC initiatives in line over the next year. We
 are currently exploring options for engaging with the public to better understand their needs,
 preferences and concerns relating to CBDC. We are also planning to convene industry and academic forums
 to provide more systematic engagement with external experts on retail and wholesale CBDC issues.
In short, we have an ambitious agenda on the future of money. But all our efforts are directed to ensuring
 that our future monetary arrangements are fit for purpose in the digital age.
The future of cash
While cash use has declined in recent decades, it remains an important means of payment for many folks in
 our community (Graph 6). A significant number of Australians still primarily rely on cash to
 participate in the economy, including our more vulnerable members of society. Cash remains an important
 store of value, particularly during periods of economic uncertainty. And in serving as a backup means of
 payment when electronic payment methods are unavailable, including during system outages or natural
 disasters, cash helps to promote a more resilient payment system overall. For these reasons, the
 government and the RBA remain committed to supporting access to cash.
Graph 6
However, as cash use has declined, the cost of moving it around the country has increased. A significant
 effort to put cash-in-transit services on a more solid financial footing is now underway across industry.
 But there is still considerable work to be done to develop a sustainable long-term model for cash
 distribution. The challenge now for industry is to deliver more efficient cash distribution services,
 while meeting the public interest in ensuring cash remains an affordable and viable means of payment for
 Australians.
Conclusion
Let me wrap up. Australians expect their payments to be convenient, reliable and represent value for
 money. At the RBA, we share these expectations. We want to see a payments system that is a hotbed of
 innovation and competitive tension, driving efficiency up and costs down. And we want to see a payments
 system that is safe and resilient – one that Australians can rely on.
As we contemplate what shape the payments system of the future might take, my colleagues and I at the RBA
 and on the Payments System Board are committed to working constructively with AusPayNet and the wider
 industry. We are in this together. There is much to celebrate in the Australian payments system, but as
 I’ve made clear today, also much to do.
On that note, I look forward to taking your questions.
Thank you.
Endnotes
I would like to thank my colleagues in Payments
 Policy Department for their valuable assistance in the preparation of these remarks. All errors
 of omission and commission are my own.
[*]
More formally, the Payments System Board’s
 responsibilities and powers are set out in four separate Acts. These are:
Reserve Bank Act
 1959
;
Payment Systems (Regulation) Act 1998
;
Payment Systems and
 Netting Act 1998
; and
Cheques Act 1986
. The Reserve Bank Act, as
 amended, gives the Payments System Board responsibility for determining the RBA’s payments
 system policy. It must exercise this responsibility in a way that will best contribute to:
 controlling risk in the financial system; promoting the efficiency of the payments system; and
 promoting competition in the market for payment services, consistent with the overall stability
 of the financial system.
[1]
Council of Financial Regulators (2024),
 ‘Quarterly Statement by the Council of Financial Regulators – December 2024’,
 Media Release No 2024-05.
[2]
Bullock M (2023), ‘
Modernising Australia’s Payments
 System
’, Speech to the Australian Payments Network Summit, Sydney, 12 December.
[3]
Bulk payment functionality allows payment
 instructions to be grouped together and sent as a single payment file, supporting efficient
 processing of large volumes of payments (compared with sending each payment individually). Bulk
 payments are widely used by government departments and companies for regular payments such as
 welfare, salary and dividend payments and the payment of bills.
[4]
BECS is a technologically simpler solution than
 modern payment rails. While this simplicity means that it is no longer fit for purpose for many
 payment use cases, it does have some desirable features. In particular, end users do not expect
 instant payments processing across BECS. When operational issues affect availability of the
 service, the payments can be delivered in a subsequent batch settlement without much impact to
 the end user.
[5]
This includes through the geopolitical risk
 program under the Council of Financial Regulators, and in the case of APRA, through CPS 230.
[6]
RBA (2024), ‘
Merchant
 Card Payment Costs and Surcharging – Issues Paper
’, October.
[7]
This could include having only interchange caps
 instead of both caps and benchmarks, removing ad valorem interchange caps and benchmarks (so that
 they are solely cents-based), or limiting the number of interchange categories.
[8]
This includes the impact of other service costs
 being bundled into the surcharge that is passed onto consumers.
[9]
Financial Stability Board (2024), ‘Annual
 Progress Report on Meeting the Targets for Cross-border Payments: 2024 Report on Key Performance
 Indicators’, 21 October.
[10]
The Financial Stability Board has, for the
 purposes of its targets, defined remittances as low value, high volume payments primarily sent to
 recipients in emerging market and developing economies. Retail payments are all other payments
 under US$100,000.
[11]
This task has been helped by recent updates to
 the guidance from the Australian Competition and Consumer Commission on how international money
 providers can improve the transparency of these services. This included guidance around how
 international money providers should display information to consumers, requiring standardised
 illustration of costs and other service features, such as the time it will take for the recipient
 to receive the funds. See ACCC (2024), ‘Best Practice Guidance for Foreign Cash and
 International Money Transfer Services’, October.
[12]
For instance, the RBA is working to ensure that
 the Australian industry adopts the globally harmonised ISO 20022 messaging requirements for
 cross-border payments. Work is underway to plan the NPP’s adoption of globally harmonised
 ISO 20022 messaging, and we expect industry to have adopted the globally harmonised ISO 20022
 messaging requirements for high-value and fast payments by the end of 2027.
[13]
See BIS Innovation Hub (2024), ‘Project
 Mandala: Streamlining Cross-border Transaction Compliance’.
[14]
For the paper, see here: RBA and Treasury
 (2024), ‘
Central
 Bank Digital Currency and the Future of Digital Money in Australia
’, September. See
 also Jones B (2024), ‘
Financial Innovation
 and the Future of CBDC in Australia
’, Speech at the Intersekt Conference, Melbourne,
 18 September.
[15]
RBA (2024), ‘
RBA and DFCRC Joint Consultation Paper Project
 Acacia – Exploring the Role of Digital Money in Wholesale Tokenised Asset
 Markets
’, Media Release No 2024-25.
[16]
