BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: The Australian Economy – Prospects for 2006 and Beyond – Sydney
DATE: 06/02/2024
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2006/sp-ag-240206.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
The Australian Economy – Prospects for 2006 and Beyond
Malcolm Edey
Assistant Governor (Economic)
Address to the 2006 CEDA/Fujitsu Economic & Political Overview
Sydney
–
24 February 2006
Good morning and thank you to CEDA for the opportunity to speak today.
As you know, the Reserve Bank has had quite a lot to say about the economy just recently,

 particularly through our quarterly policy statement and half-yearly parliamentary

 appearance last week. That material is still very current, and in my presentation

 this morning I'm going to draw out a few of the main themes from those statements.
Let me start with some general observations about the current business cycle (Graph 1).

 Economists often focus very closely on short-term movements in the data, but

 it's important also to have a sense of where we are in relation to the overall

 business cycle. A good starting point is to compare Australia's three most

 recent periods of economic expansion, which began in the mid 1970s, the early

 1980s and the early 1990s. The current expansion, which is now in its 15th

 year, is already roughly twice as long as the two previous ones. Average growth

 during the current expansion has been 3.7 per cent per annum, which is one

 of the best performances over this period in the developed world. It is true

 that this is not quite as high as the average growth rate achieved during the

 1980s, but the current expansion more than makes up for that by its extended

 duration.
Graph 1
One of the benefits of a long expansion is that unused resources of both labour and

 capital are, over time, brought back into productive use. There are a number

 of different indicators that can be used to illustrate that. Businesses have

 for some time been reporting that capacity usage is high. For example, according

 to the NAB survey, which is broadly representative of the non-farm economy,

 the level of capacity utilisation at the end of last year was the highest since

 the survey began – exceeding the level reached in 1989, which was

 itself a cyclically strong year (Graph 2).
Graph 2
It is also clear that utilisation of labour has substantially increased over the

 course of the expansion. One indicator of that is the unemployment rate, which

 has come down from a peak of nearly 11 per cent in 1993 to an average of just

 over 5 per cent in the latest year (Graph 3). It is worth noting here

 that it is quite normal for the unemployment rate to fluctuate in the short

 term around its trend. There were a couple of periods where unemployment increased

 moderately during the current expansion, but the overall trend has been downwards,

 and this has brought the unemployment rate to around its lowest level since

 the 1970s.
Graph 3
Consistent with the strong labour market, other indicators, particularly the business

 surveys, have been pointing to high levels of labour scarcity. Using the NAB

 survey, this point can be seen by looking at the way businesses respond to

 the question of what factors are significantly constraining their output (Graph 4).

 Throughout the history of this survey, the most popular response has almost

 always been ‘sales and orders’ – in other words a lack of demand. But

 for the past year or so, businesses have been in the unusual position of reporting

 that the main constraint was a lack of suitable labour.
Graph 4
A survey of small and medium-sized businesses conducted by Sensis gives the same

 picture (Graph 5). In this survey the question is put slightly differently,

 with businesses being asked to nominate their main sources of general concern.

 It is interesting to note that the most consistently popular answer is ‘none’

 – i.e. they are not worried about anything – a result that might

 serve as a useful corrective to gloomy economic reporting. The next two most

 popular responses typically have been ‘lack of work or sales’ and ‘finding

 quality staff’. As with the NAB survey, the number of businesses citing lack

 of sales is almost always the bigger of the two, but this ranking has been

 reversed in the past 12 to 18 months.
Graph 5
Overall then, the current expansion has been marked by good economic growth over

 an extended period, and this has brought about a significant re-employment

 of unused resources, both capital and labour. Referring to this in our recent

 policy statements, the Bank has been making the point that the economy is now

 operating with more limited margins of spare capacity than at earlier stages

 of the expansion. This is an important part of the background to the Bank's

 forecast of a rise in underlying inflation in the year ahead.
So much for the medium-term background. What are the factors shaping the outlook

 for growth in the period ahead? In addressing that, I will focus briefly on

 three main areas.
Graph 6
The first is the global business cycle (Graph 6). The world economy is currently

 in a solid expansion, and one which, on past experience, may still have a good

 way to run. Last year, world GDP is estimated to have grown by 4½ per

 cent, the third year in a row when growth has been above average. As well as

 the overall pace of growth, it is encouraging to note that the world recovery

 has been increasingly broadly based. Initially, it was led mainly by the US

 and China, and both of those economies are still performing well. But in addition

 to that, we are now seeing good growth in a number of other regions around

 the world. The latest figures for Japan showed growth of 4½ per

 cent over the past year, its fastest for more than a decade, and there are

 good signs that the structural problems of debt and deflation in Japan are

 being wound back. We are also seeing very good growth in other parts of east

 Asia and in India, Latin America and emerging Europe. Looking at the overall

 composition of world GDP growth, it is notable how much of the growth now is

 coming from outside the core of developed countries in North America, Japan

 and western Europe (Table 1).
Table 1: World GDP Growth
Year-average, per cent
Share of world GDP
*
2005
Estimate
2006
Consensus forecast
2007
Consensus forecast
United States
20.9
3.5
3.2
3.0
Euro area
15.3
1.4
2.0
1.8
Japan
6.9
2.8
2.3
2.2
China
13.2
9.9
9.0
8.5
Other east Asia
7.0
4.8
4.9
4.8
India
5.9
7.6
7.1
7.1
Latin America
7.2
4.3
4.1
3.8
Emerging Europe
7.0
5.5
5.5
5.4
World
100.0
4.6
4.5
4.2
*
2004, at PPP exchange rates
Source: data – IMF and Thompson Financial; forecasts – Consensus
The world outlook is never risk-free of course, and many observers have focused on

 possible risks to growth arising from high oil prices and from world current

 account imbalances. But there is little sign that these factors are holding

 back the global expansion at present, and most forecasters expect a further

 year of above-average growth in 2006. If anything, these forecasts have tended

 to edge up in recent months, in response to generally strong economic indicators

 in most countries. In general terms, then, the world economic situation is

 providing a favourable environment for growth in Australia.
The second area to highlight is the increase in Australia's terms of trade (Graph 7).

 This is closely related to the first point. One of the consequences of the

 strong global economy, and particularly the growth of Chinese industrial demand,

 has been sustained upward pressure on a range of commodity prices. Over the

 past three years this has lifted Australia's terms of trade by around 30 per

 cent, the largest cumulative increase that we have experienced since the early

 1970s. It is not hard to appreciate that this provides a significant boost

 to incomes and spending. With exports representing about a fifth of GDP, each

 10 per cent increase in the terms of trade adds about 2 per cent to the value

 of national income.
Graph 7
The expansionary effects of the rise in Australia's terms of trade can be seen particularly

 in the business sector (Graph 8). Businesses at the moment have strong

 balance sheets and they are well placed to take advantage of the current favourable

 conditions. Business investment is now undergoing a major upswing, having expanded

 by 18 per cent over the past year and at an average rate of 14 per cent over

 the past three years. Not surprisingly, the growth has been led by the resources

 sector. But given the high level of capacity utilisation across the economy

 as a whole, it is also not surprising to see a more broadly based pick-up in

 investment growth in a range of other industries. The broad strength of the

 business sector has been evident in the growth of corporate profits and in

 the performance of the share market. Share prices in the Australian market

 have outperformed those overseas in the past few years and, unlike most other

 major markets, have moved well beyond their 2000 peak.
Graph 8
The third area to look at is household spending. In contrast to businesses, households

 have eased back on their spending growth in the past year or two (Graph 9).

 We can see this for example in the growth of retail sales and in household

 consumption, both of which are now running at below-average rates, after the

 unusually rapid growth seen a couple of years ago. The main factor behind this

 correction seems to be a process of balance-sheet adjustment, with households

 now adopting a more cautious approach towards the accumulation of additional

 debt. Household credit growth in the last two years has slowed down from a

 rate of over 20 per cent to be now running at a an annual rate of around 12

 per cent. This adjustment has brought household credit growth back towards

 the lower end of its historical range, though still quite high in absolute

 terms. It means that households are still increasing their levels of debt,

 and their ratio of debt to income, but they are doing so at a slower pace than

 they were a couple of years ago.
Graph 9
Another factor in the slowing of household spending has been the downturn in the

 housing construction cycle, which peaked in early 2004. Having said that, however,

 I should note that the current downturn in this sector is an unusually mild

 one compared with previous cycles (Graph 10). The overall level of housing

 construction activity, expressed as a proportion of GDP, is still only slightly

 below its recent peak, and higher than at most other times for which historical

 data exist.
Graph 10
Drawing all this together, what we have been seeing is a change in the composition

 of growth, with businesses rather than households now the main drivers of growth

 in domestic spending. This compositional shift in spending is also being reflected

 in borrowing patterns (Graph 11). Businesses until recently had been much

 more cautious than households in their borrowing behaviour, and this has put

 them in a strong position now to borrow more to fund investment growth. The

 overall change in the composition of spending should be beneficial to prospects

 for sustainable expansion. A pattern of growth that was heavily skewed towards

 household spending was not going to be able to continue indefinitely, and the

 balance-sheet adjustment now occurring in the household sector should reduce

 the risk of a sharper adjustment later. The increase in business investment

 now underway will in due course add to the economy's productive capacity. It

 also offers the prospect of a pick-up in export volumes, particularly in the

 resources sector.
Graph 11
I should conclude, as I often do, by saying that my comments today are not intended

 to modify the views from the Bank's recent official statements. The net effect

 of the forces that I have described is that growth of domestic spending has

 remained solid recently, with overall GDP in the latest six-month period growing

 at an annual rate of around 3 per cent. The Bank's recently-published

 assessment is that growth is likely to continue at a similar or higher pace

 in the period ahead. I hope you will agree that this amounts to a favourable

 environment for businesses, particularly against the background of an economic

 expansion now in its fifteenth year.
