BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Monetary Policy Decision
DATE: 10/12/2024
SPEAKER: Michele Bullock
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2024/mc-gov-2024-12-10.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

More on the December 2024 monetary policy decision
Media Conference
Monetary Policy Decision
Michele Bullock
Governor
Sydney
–
10 December 2024
Audio
34.3MB
Watch video: Media Conference – Monetary Policy Decision, Sydney
Transcript
Michele Bullock
Good afternoon, everyone. So as you know, today the Board decided to leave the cash rate unchanged at

 4.35%. It’s been at that level since November last year. But because monetary policy operates

 with a lag we think we need to be careful - think carefully about where we’re going. With

 inflation coming down and employment growing we think we remain on the narrow path. The Board’s

 been trying to bring inflation back to target in a reasonable timeframe while preserving the gains in

 the labour market. But underlying inflation currently remains too high and for some time now

 we’ve pointed out the risks on both sides. Because persistent inflation is so bad for the

 economy we’ve been alert to the upside risks on inflation but we’ve also been conscious of

 the downside risks. Economic data had been mixed and some indicators softening in line with our

 forecasts. That said on balance, some data are a little softer than expected. This had given the

 Board some confidence that inflationary pressures are declining but risks remain. The Board judges

 that monetary policy remains restrictive and is working as anticipated. We discussed today that

 perhaps some of those up side risks to inflation appear to have eased but they haven’t gone

 away. The Board still assesses that the level of aggregate demand is above the economy supply

 capacity even though that gap is closing. The Board will be looking to the data over the next month

 or so to see if the economy and inflation continue to evolve as expected. The Board needs to be

 confident that inflation is moving sustainably towards the target, and for this to occur we need to

 see more progress on underlying inflation coming down. Today, the Board discussed where we think the

 economy is going in 2025, what’s next and how to keep inflation coming down and employment

 growing. We discussed whether there’s something we might be missing or misunderstanding and the

 risks to our forecasts on both sides. What might we see in the coming months? Could unemployment

 start to climb sharply? We’re not anticipating that but it’s something we need to be alert

 to. How will consumption respond now that real disposable incomes are starting to rise again? And how

 will that impact underlying inflation? Could we see a smaller than expected outcome for underlying

 inflation in December quarter or might we get a surprise in the other direction? None of these things

 by themselves would necessarily lead us to the conclusion we need to change monetary policy settings

 but they may tell us something about the level of demand and supply in the economy, and where

 inflation and employment might be headed and how we might need to respond. The truth is that some

 inflation pressures remain and cost of living pressures remain a burden on all Australians. It is

 also important to note that prices are not going back to where they were before this high inflation.

 The high inflation over the past couple of years has permanently increased the price level. In fact,

 prices in September quarter ‘24 were 16% higher than they were three years earlier.

 That’s the extent of the inflation. And that’s hurt everyone, but particularly those on

 lower incomes and the more vulnerable. We haven’t had a sustained period of high inflation in

 Australia for more than 30 years. It’s not familiar to people. But it’s one of the key

 reasons why people are doing it tough and finding it harder to make ends meet. The RBA’s job,

 our mandate is to keep inflation between 2 and 3%, and to aim at the midpoint, 2.5%. And we use

 the cash rate which influences interest rates that households and businesses face, to achieve this by

 curbing the growth of demand across the economy. That’s because inflation is the result of

 demand for goods and services being higher than the ability of the economy to supply those goods and

 services. And we want to bring inflation down in a way that doesn’t cause a spike in

 unemployment. That’s the balancing act we are trying to get right, and it is a challenge. So

 thank you and I’m happy to take your questions.
David Chau
David Chau from ABC News. Some of Australia’s leading economists have said the RBA should

 already have started cutting interest rates given the weakness in our economy. Do you think there is

 the risk the RBA might repeat mistakes of the past by moving too slowly?
Michele Bullock
So if we really thought we had things wrong we would have moved, David, I think is the answer to

 that. There’s difference of opinions on how to weight various signals that are coming from the

 economy. It’s true that some of the economic data has been a bit softer. And it is also true

 that some of the nominal side, in particular inflation, is remaining quite elevated. So you’ve

 got two sets of data which are telling you possibly different things. What I would suggest is that -

 and I’ve said this before - there is a difference between the rate of growth of the economy -

 and we all know it’s slowing, and the private sector in particular is slowing - and the level of

 demand. And we’ve been making this point for some time that growth exploded so strongly coming

 out of the pandemic that it got to very strong and very high level and the economy couldn’t

 supply the goods and services that people were demanding coming out of the pandemic. We’re still

 experiencing that. So we have to have a period of slower growth. But our forecast suggests that

 growth will start to pick up as real disposable incomes start to pick up over the coming year and

 that inflation will continue to come down. So we still think we’re on that path.
David Chau
Thanks, Governor.
Glenda Korporaal
It’s been noted that - that the word vigilant has been removed and there is no statement about

 you are not ruling anything in, not ruling anything out. So some people are saying maybe the

 statement is a bit more dovish. Will we see the words in the minutes or is this quite a deliberate

 change in the comments and rhetoric that you’ve made.
Michele Bullock
Thanks, Glenda. It is deliberate and we wanted - the Board wanted to give the message that they have

 not - they have noticed some of the data that is a bit softer. Some of it is not. It is a bit mixed

 but some of it is on balance a bit softer than we had expected. So the Board wanted to convey that

 their opinion is and their views are evolving and they’re evolving as the data evolves. I think

 that’s what everyone would expect us to do. We’re not saying what we might do, but we are

 acknowledging that there is some softening and our forecasts do see inflation coming back down

 gradually over the next year. As each quarter goes by and our forecasts look like they’re

 basically - we’re in line with our forecasts, then that gives us a little bit more

 confidence in the future. So we’re not saying that we’ve won the battle against inflation

 yet but we’re saying we’ve got a little bit more confidence that things are evolving as we

 think in our forecasts. We’ve got to be aware things might move in either direction but I think

 that’s what people would expect of us.
Glenda Korporaal
The bank has misread perhaps the weakness in the economy that perhaps your model saw or the business

 liaison has let you know.
Michele Bullock
I think inflation has broadly come in as we expected. I don’t think we’ve missed that

 dramatically. There has been a sense in which consumption has recovered a little bit more slowly than

 we might have expected but the numbers we’re talking about here are relatively small. I think we

 basically feel that at the moment we’re pretty much in line with our forecasts. As I say, things

 could move either direction but at the moment we look pretty much in line.
Cecile Lefort
Governor. Cecile Lefort, The Financial Review. In the minutes of the last month you mentioned that

 you wanted more than one quarter of good inflation print. Does it mean then that February - a move or

 easing in February is not on the table?
Michele Bullock
Well, I’m not going to give forward guidance, as you would expect me to say. I think in

 interpreting that statement about we need more than one quarterly, that didn’t mean we

 necessarily needed two or three quarterly inflation prints. It meant we needed more information about

 the economy than simply one inflation print. I think I clarified that at a speech at CEDA. But there

 is other information that is relevant as well to inflation, not just the quarterly inflation prints.

 I don’t want to give the impression we react to one number and one number only. Between now and

 February there is going to be a quarterly inflation print but there will also be another monthly one.

 They’re very volatile. There is going to be a couple of labour market indicators as well, some

 consumption indicators. So all these sorts of things are going to be important in thinking about how

 the economy is going towards the end of this year and, of course, our liaison going into early next

 year.
Cecile Lefort
Thank you.
Edward Boyd
Governor, Edward Boyd at Sky News. Just a couple of weeks ago the new legislation around the Reserve

 Bank passed through Parliament. When do you expect to start introducing the new two separate Boards

 at the RBA? And have you started recruiting roles?
Michele Bullock
So my understanding is the legislation comes in on the 1st of March, I think. So the new Boards will

 be set up at that point. The matter of who to appoint to those boards is in the hands of the

 Treasurer and the government and they will, I’m guessing, make announcements in due course on

 that.
Peter Hannam
Governor, Peter Hannam from The Guardian.
Michele Bullock
Hi Peter.
Peter Hannam
Just to be clear did the RBA Board consider a case for lowering interest rates during this recent

 meeting or is it still only one main case you were looking at? And secondly, with next week the

 government’s mid-year economic and fiscal outlook landing possibly the last budget adjustment in

 the current term of the government, do you still think government spending is "not the main game" as

 I think you said in August or is now the time for spending straight if there is to be an interest

 rate cut early in 2025.
Michele Bullock
So the first question the answer is no we did not explicitly consider an interest rate cut or the

 reverse I should add. Similar to last meeting, actually, we looked at what we have found out since

 the previous meeting and asked the question whether or not we felt that the current stance of policy

 was appropriate. Like the previous meeting the Board spent time talking about what are the sorts of

 things that would make the move one direction or the other. So those are the sorts of things we

 talked about at the previous press conference and in the minutes. It’s to do with the real

 economy side of things that might give us a feel for demand, it’s about inflation itself.

 So that’s really where the Board discussion went. On your - I have forgotten your second

 question now?
Peter Hannam
About whether public spending - - -
Michele Bullock
Public spending. That’s right. That’s right. What’s happening at the moment - and I

 think everyone knows this - is the private sector is very weak and the public sector is filling a bit

 of a gap there. With that configuration, we see, our forecasts see inflation coming back down. So

 there is a sense in which just looking at public expenditure by itself doesn’t really tell you

 the full story of what’s going on in the Australian economy. You’ve got to look at

 what’s going on with particularly consumption which is a very large part of the economy, and it,

 as we know, is not growing particularly well. It’s subdued. We are expecting it to pick up and

 there are some signs in October/November that it has picked up a little bit. So that’s really, I

 think, where the action is. I think the public sector is there and public consumption is actually

 doing very good things at the moment. I mean, it is contributing to services that Australians

 consume, things like health and aged care and those sorts of things. So it’s serving a very good

 purpose. But where I think the action’s going to be is what happens in the private sector.
Deb Knight
Governor, Deb Knight from 9 Radio. I am wondering are you confident the government is on the

 same page as the Reserve Bank in tackling inflation as the key priority because we had the Treasurer

 hold his press conference after the statement coming through, and he flagged more government spending

 in the mid-year economic review to cover the cost of natural disasters. And we’ve also got a

 close election coming up, with no doubt more government spending. Do you think the government is on

 the same page as the Reserve Bank?
Michele Bullock
I think they are. And when I speak to the Treasurer, I believe him when he tells me that he is

 absolutely on the same page because he understands, like I do, and I think like all of you do, that

 inflation is really what’s causing so many troubles for Australian people at the moment. As I

 said earlier, last three years prices have gone up as reflected in the CPI by 16%. That’s a

 massive increase in people’s out goings. I think he really does understand that. And obviously,

 I can’t speak for the government, I don’t want to tell the government what to do, but I

 have said in the past - and I do believe this - that governments have a tough job. They have got a

 lot of balls to balance, a lot of things to do, a lot of services to provide. And they’ve got to

 find ways of doing that because that’s what the public expects government to provide them with

 services. So I think the government - but having said that, I do think they are conscious of the

 inflation implications and I think that’s why they have tried to approach things like rebates in

 the way they’ve done.
Juliette Saly
Governor, Juliette Saly, ausbiz. When we last spoke Americans were still heading to the polls and we

 didn’t know that there was going to be a President Trump 2.0. You said you hadn’t done

 modelling on what that would mean for the economy. Have you now given there is likely to be further

 inflationary pressures in the US and potential US/China trade tensions.
Michele Bullock
Modelling is a strong word, I would say. I don’t think you can just - I’ve said this before

 as well - repeating myself - you just can’t plonk a whole lot of assumptions into a model and

 get out what you think these things might mean. I think - we have done some scenario analysis looking

 at it. I think there’s - it depends very much on whether he does what he says he will do, and

 that actually is a bit of an unknown. And then it depends on how other countries react to that sort

 of thing. So I think if there is some tariffs imposed and there’s some government expenditure -

 yes, it might be a bit inflationary in the United States. It may not impact us greatly. I think where

 our scenarios suggest it may impact us more is if there’s some big impacts on China. If there is

 some moves that really impact growth in China, and obviously if growth in China is affected that

 impacts the demand for exports from us, and that impacts our economy. So I think the scenarios that

 we’re playing with sort of fall into what if it is - he just do a few little things around

 tariffs and spending; what if he takes much more broad action, particularly against China, then

 there’s some quite different impacts on us depending on what he does. But having said that, I

 think we’re still in wait-and-see mode.
Stella Cho
Hi, Governor. Stella Cho, Reuters. Given it was just two weeks ago you said underlying inflation was

 too high for cuts in the mid-term. Would you say the same today what you know now and what is your

 term exactly.
Michele Bullock
Another question for guidance. What I would say - and I think this has been clear and I think people

 have taken the message from the Board’s statement - is that yes, underlying inflation is still

 too high. But some of the data on the real economy are a little softer and so that might indicate

 that inflationary pressures might start to come off broadly in line with our forecasts because our

 forecasts do see inflation continuing to come down slowly. And if that eventuates then there’s

 going to come a point where we’re going to be confident enough that inflation is back in the

 band to start easing interest rates. When that will be, I don’t know. But the point, I think, of

 the statement today was to just let people know that we have noticed this, as have everyone else,

 another questioner mentioned it as well, and we do need to take a little bit of signal from that.

 Having said that, we do need to be alert to risks and what we’ll be doing is looking at the data

 that comes in the next month or so before our February meeting, and assessing what that means for

 inflation and whether or not we’re going to meet our forecasts.
Swati Pandey
Governor, from Bloomberg News. I have two questions if I may, please. There are a few reporters

 covering this. The first one is the market reaction to GDP report and after today’s statement as

 well so now there are expectations for two rate cuts by May. You had previously tried to guide the

 market, like to push back, push out the interest rate cuts from November of this year. Do you think

 the current reaction is an overreaction to GDP data and your statement, or do you kind of like are

 comfortable with how market is reacting? And the second question is with legislation on the two

 Boards, what changes can we expect from the RBA? Would you publish unattributed votes from next year?

 Will there be more speeches or public appearance from Board members, or is there anything else

 that’s kind of in the chain as far as changes are concerned?
Michele Bullock
I will answer that one first. That will be something that the new Board itself will have to consider

 when it’s put together. So the new Board, monetary policy Board will have to consider the

 current Board can’t commit a new Board to that, so that would be the answer to that question. On

 the market reaction, the markets do move around and they move around in response to things we say,

 because it’s giving them information about how we might react. And they also react to data, as

 you point out, because they look at the data and they think, "Well, how will the Reserve Bank react

 to those data?" So they do move around and in the past they’ve reacted in ways that perhaps they

 were misreading the way we were thinking about things, or - I would like to think that we are being

 clearer about our reaction function and the way we’re thinking about things. I don’t want

 to endorse a particular market path or anything like that, but am I surprised that the market has

 reacted? No, I’m not because that is what they’re going to do. They’re going to look

 at the data, they’re going to look at things we say and they’re going to try and figure out

 what they think we might do but I’m not going to endorse any sort of path.
Nick Fildes
Nick from the Financial Times. The statement makes a reference to pronounced geopolitical

 uncertainty. I just wondered if you could spell out what those risks are, obviously the tone today is

 about consumption as well as sort of increased confidence on various data. But how do things like a

 slowing Chinese economy and potential tariffs and Middle East conflicts impact on your thinking

 heading into 2025?
Michele Bullock
So it’s a difficult question because we can’t react to things that we think might happen

 but haven’t happened and may not happen. So it is challenging. But the sorts of things

 we’re thinking about are the sorts of challenges around the trade tensions. Australia is a small

 open economy that’s done very well out of an open trading system. So I think it’s really

 not in our interests, ultimately, if the world economy starts becoming quite protectionist and inward

 looking. So there is that. There is obviously a lot of tensions and wars going on. These can

 sometimes cause supply shocks. The most obvious one is fuel prices. When we get supply shocks we

 typically get inflation. Then how do we react to that? So these are the sorts of things that I think

 we’ve got in mind but it’s very difficult to know. And for the moment, at least, I think

 the best we can do is focus on what we have got in our domestic economy, what we’re seeing in

 our domestic economy, and trying to focus on that, and that’s inflation. So what do we do to

 bring inflation down? And if there are shocks, we’ll have to react at the time.
Michael Read
Mike from the Australian Financial Review. Governor, have the existing RBA Board members been told

 which of the two new Boards they will serve on? And relatedly, how many fresh faces on the monetary

 policy Board do you view as desirable from an organisational continuity perspective?
Michele Bullock
I have no numbers. The only thing I’ve said - and I stick by it - that I would like continuity

 on both - some continuity on both Boards. That’s the only comment I’ve made. And I

 haven’t suggested numbers. The matter about who and the appointments, that’s a matter for

 the Treasurer. Obviously I’ve been speaking to the Treasurer over the past year because the

 legislation’s been on foot for all that time. But ultimately, the appointees will be matters for

 the Treasurer.
Sophia Rodriguez
Sophia Rodriguez from Central Bank. 6 weeks ago you talked about remaining vigilant on upside of

 inflation. Can you elaborate on what in the last 6 weeks have given you confidence that the

 inflationary pressures are declining in line with the recent forecast? Question number 2 if

 I’m allowed please, can you describe how you would cut the cash rate in February?
Michele Bullock
The second answer no. I couldn’t describe such a scenario. I don’t actually know because

 there is many configurations of data that might potentially lead us in that direction. But I honestly

 don’t know if we’re going to be cutting in February. We’re going to be looking at the

 data and be data driven. The sorts of things that we’re looking at, the national accounts

 obviously was quite important. Momentum there wasn’t quite as strong as we thought it could have

 been. We have observed that the WPI came a little bit lower than we thought it might be. Our

 forecasts for inflation broadly are coming in in line with our forecasts. And I think I’ve said

 this before, that we have these central forecasts they have big bands around them. But as you move

 closer and if you sort of broadly - if you hit one of your forecasts, then you think, okay, well, how

 am I looking now for my next one? So as you get closer and closer you do get a little bit more

 confident in your forecasts. I think what we’re observing, at least on the wages and the

 activities side of things, because remember the point about we’ve been making for some time is

 that aggregate demand has to grow more slowly because we’ve got to close the output gap. So we

 are observing that it is happening. We are observing that it’s not only slowing as we thought it

 might but it’s slowing maybe a little bit more, and that’s positive for inflationary

 pressures. Now, will that play out? We’re just going to have to wait and see. But those are the

 sorts of things we are looking at that are giving us a little more confidence that we’re

 coming in on our forecast path, the narrow path.
Amelia Brace
Thank you so much for your time. Amelia Brace from 7 News. No Christmas joy for mortgage holders

 but will it be a happy new year, we have Valentine’s day in February, mother’s day in May.

 The gift of a rate cut. Will we get one next year at all?
Michele Bullock
I wouldn’t like to forecast when. All I’ll say is we are watching the data, we think things

 so far are moving in line with our forecasts, and if they continue to move in line with our

 forecasts, then at some point inflation - we are going to be convinced inflation is coming back to

 the band and we will be in a position to consider that. I couldn’t give timing on it. But

 that’s the way we would typically think about. Now, having said that, if things don’t work

 out as planned and inflation does not continue to decline, then we’ve got another problem

 because, as I said earlier, if we don’t get inflation down ultimately that is bad for everyone.

 It’s not just bad for mortgage holders - it’s bad for them but it’s bad for everyone.
Michael Janda
Thanks, Governor. Michael Janda from the ABC. If I could indulge in two related questions, which is

 what can be done to increase productivity given there is so much talk about how important it is? The

 other one is from me, your former assistant Governor economics Lucy Ellis pointed to weakness in

 productivity and strength in employment both being due to growth in the government sector. What

 happens when that growth inevitably stops? Might the RBA as she wants suddenly find out it’s

 left rates too high for too long?
Michele Bullock
On productivity, people ask me about productivity. I’m not a pre expert. We have a whole

 productivity commission headed up by Danielle Wood who have lots of ideas on what to do about

 productivity. Education and training is probably part of it. I think technology is going to be a part

 of it. But I don’t have any specific suggestions for what we need to do. All I know is that

 productivity growth is important for growing the economic welfare of the people. It’s the way we

 get real wages, it’s the way we grow the pie and people get more well off. That’s how we

 get it, through productivity. Yes, we are well aware that the growth in employment has been coming

 through the non-market sector. So it is not all government; often it’s private sector firms as

 well which are associated with things like health, aged care, child care, those sorts of things. So

 they’re private but they’re sort of driven by that non-cyclical sort of. So it is possible

 that as growth in that slows, then we will start to see employment growth slow and if the private

 sector doesn’t pick up the slack then that’s what will happen. At the same time, though, we

 are expecting, as real incomes are rising again, that consumption will start to rise again. So that

 will give a bit more of a boost to the private sector. So how that plays out, I don’t know. What

 I do want to make extremely clear, though, is that in talking about the market and the non-market

 sector, I get the impression that some commentators are trying to make it sound like growth in

 non-market employment is not valuable. It’s very valuable. The jobs that these people are doing

 are very valuable jobs. So I don’t want the debate about market and non-market employment to end

 up in a sort of a debate about whether or not these are worthy jobs or not. They are worthy jobs,

 they’re important jobs. And if growth in that slows, then yes, that won’t be great for

 employment, but there’s other things on the other side that might lift private employment in the

 year ahead as well, and that will balance things out. So we will wait and see.
Jonathan Shapiro
Governor, Jonathan Shapiro from the Financial Review. There seems to be a lot of interest in how a

 February interest rate cut might be. My question is along those lines. Is there anything in the

 quality of the GDP banker or anything the bank has gathered in its liaison or recent survey data that

 might negate or reduce the need to see two quarterly inflation prints to pave the way for a rate cut?
Michele Bullock
Well, I mean, we do use the survey data and I think the NAB data came out just before - it might have

 come out just before our announcement, I suspect. It showed, I think, very similar things. Weak

 private sector activity. But the comment from NAB was capacity utilisation is still high so growth

 isn’t strong but the level of activity is holding up. And that’s the story we’ve been

 telling, which is that everyone’s focusing on the fact that the economy is not growing very

 quickly, hardly growing at all but the level of activity is still quite elevated because when we came

 out of COVID the level of activity just shot right up and that was partly the cause of the inflation,

 was that there was so much demand coming out of the COVID lockdowns and so on that the economy

 couldn’t supply everything that was being demanded. So we’re still feeling the effects of

 that particular wild ride we had during COVID. So I think what we are seeing in the - ultimately the

 test is whether or not it impacts inflation. And we think that there are some signs that economic

 activity is softening in a way that’s in line with our forecasts and that’s going to help

 bring down those inflationary pressures. But we’ve got to get a bit more confident before

 we’re willing to declare victory over inflation.
Michael Stutchbury
Governor, Michael Stutchbury, Financial Review. … that the RBA and the government through

 the Treasury work on better coordination on monetary and fiscal policy. Since then the big

 forecasting surprise of 2024 has been the strength of public demand. A bit unclear whether you think

 that’s a good or helpful or unhelpful thing. But does, for example, the strength of public

 demand unexpected show that there needs to be more institutional work done on coordination of fiscal

 and monetary policy, and have any steps actually been taken towards that?
Michele Bullock
So it’s challenging because yes, you want to make sure you’re pulling in the same

 direction. At the same time, the government is responsible for fiscal policy. I don’t want to

 tell the government what their fiscal priorities should be and, likewise, I’m Chair of the Board

 which sets monetary policy and we are independent from government and we don’t really want the

 government telling us what we should be doing with interest rates. So the concept of coordination in

 that context is a little challenging. Having said that, once the new Board is in place and we’ve

 completed our organisational restructure to devote some more time to some of these issues, we will be

 looking at ways that we can perhaps engage with the private sector. I think that was one of the

 recommendations, that we look to engage with the private sector on this. So independent think tanks.

 So no work has been done yet but that is something that we are thinking about how we might work with

 Treasury, perhaps, to forward some thinking in this. But I have to say, Michael, I think it is a

 challenging issue. Yeah.
Michael Heath
Hi Governor. Michael Heath from Bloomberg News. I have got two, if that’s okay.
Michele Bullock
It seems to be the new one.
Michael Heath
There is fewer people here. Two is the new one. Just a quick one on the RBA reforms. When the new

 Board comes - sorry, two parts to that - do you and the Treasurer coordinate between yourselves and

 new Board members or will it be exclusively his decision? Also once you’ve got your new Board in

 place will you be advocating for an unattributed vote and for them to do speeches? What’s your

 view there?
Michele Bullock
On the first one, myself, Stephen Kennedy - so you will recall that one of the recommendations of the

 review was we had a skills matrix of the sorts of people we needed on the Board, and then that there

 would be a group, myself, Stephen Kennedy and an independent member who would think about ideas,

 sorts of options that might go on those, and then recommend those to the Treasurer. That has

 basically been done but, ultimately, it is up to the Treasurer to decide how he wants to configure

 that. So that’s up to him, and I’m sure he’s thinking about it. I think he is thinking

 about it. So that’s that. On the unattributed votes and the publishing Board papers and public

 appearances, I don’t have particularly firm views on those things. I think it’s important

 that the Board - the new Board talk about them. But I, myself, don’t - I know that’s what

 the review recommended but I don’t have particularly firm views. I would want to take the

 counsel of the rest of the Board members and have a good conversation about that to see where people

 come out on that.
Michael Heath
Sorry, I forgot my second question which is given the weakness in GDP which means presumably in my

 limited understanding of economics there is not the same fuel inflation going forward when economy

 weakens. Does that exclude the labour market from what we’re looking at so long as it

 doesn’t tighten remarkably, it is more the private sector we’re keeping an eye on?
Michele Bullock
When we talk about demand being above supply, some of that is reflected in the labour market. So the

 example I’ve given before is the construction industry, the skills shortages in the

 construction. That’s an example of where you’re seeing demand above supply reflected in

 labour market shortages. So they are related. It’s easier to observe the labour market.

 It’s very difficult to observe - well, you can’t observe demand and supply separately. All

 you can observe is the outcome. And so, really, the key thing that is telling us that there is still

 this imbalance there is the inflation numbers. So that’s why the inflation numbers -

 they’re obviously our target, they’re important - but they are also telling us something

 about the supply/demand balance. Yeah.
- Thank you, Governor.
Michele Bullock
Thank you, all. And thanks for your interest in this this year. It’s been a bit of a wild ride

 for me but thank you again for your interest and making it successful. Thank you.
- You too.
