BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Fireside Chat at the Women in Payments Symposium
DATE: 21/11/2024
SPEAKER: Michele Bullock
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2024/sp-gov-2024-11-21.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Fireside chat at the Women in Payments Symposium
Michele Bullock
Governor
Women in Payments Symposium
Sydney
–
21 November 2024
Audio
25.7MB
Watch video: Fireside chat with Michele Bullock, Governor, at the Women in Payments Symposium, Sydney
Transcript
Julia
Adrian, thank you very much indeed. I have an enormous - please another round of applause for Michele

 as she comes to the stage if you wouldn’t. Have the huge honour of interviewing you - may I give

 you that and check it’s switched on before we begin.
Governor Bullock
I was just going to say Adrian has the most phenomenal memory.
Julia
I was going to ask you when you hear that sort of recollection of the journey and then also you

 joining all those years ago, what does that evoke as you listen to that story come to mind?
Governor Bullock
It actually evokes some very fond memories because we were embarking - Adrian was embarking on his

 knowledge of payments, so was I. I came into it in 1998 and I didn’t know anything about

 payments when I came into this. I’d come out of the international department of the Reserve Bank

 so I knew lots about exchange rates, but nothing about interchange rates. So we were learning

 together in many ways. But it was a journey that we were the first in the world to actually look in

 great detail at interchange and as some of you will know we ended up in court over it. That was a

 challenging experience as well. But when I was listening to Adrian talk I was actually smiling. I was

 just remembering that even though we were working with the industry and we were making changes they

 wouldn’t necessarily like, I look - and even some people in this room, we made life-long

 colleagues out of it. We all sort of just moved on and we got on with the reforms and, you know,

 I’ve known Adrian ever since then and I think we’ve made some really good professional

 relationships.
Julia
And we’ve been talking a lot today about the importance of the network and the ecosystem and how

 you compete with respect but also then you collaborate with great intention. I wonder if we could go

 back to when you sort of came into the world of payments, and can you just shed some light on what

 were some of the biggest challenges then and what was front of your mind as you were beginning to

 navigate this weird and wonderful world?
Governor Bullock
The first thing I’d say is that payments at the time was really - it was the plumbing - it still

 is the plumbing - but it was completely unacknowledged. People didn’t really talk about it.

 There was a group of people who were au fait with cheques and direct entry and high value payments.

 At the time we’d just introduced RTGS. RTGS came in in 1998, and so it was - but it was a group

 of people who were payments nerds in some sense and maybe we’re all payments nerds, but it was

 quite under the radar. People didn’t really think about it very much. I actually - I brought

 this, this isn’t really notes, it’s - in 1998 when I first moved into payments I wrote a

 Reserve Bank Bulletin article and we had a summary of payments system features in 1998 and I just

 thought I’d like to read it to you. This isn’t all of them, this is just a few of them. It

 says, "Cash remains an important payment instrument in the Australian economy." It accounted for, I

 don’t know, I suspect around about 80 to 90% of transactions. "On average non-cash payments

 to the payment of 150 billion are undertaken in Australia every day." That’s probably more

 like well over 300 billion. This one I love, "The cheque is still the most important non-cash

 payment instrument in Australia, although the volume of cheques has stabilised over recent years."

 And then to something Adrian said, "Growth in non-cash payments in recent years has been driven

 mainly by growth in EFTPOS transactions." As he said, that was the bilateral PIN-based system as

 opposed to signature-based systems in the cards. When I look back and I look back what I wrote back

 then, and I think about it now, I think mainly the main challenge, I think, at the time was

 recognising that the payments system was moving on and we had a mandate for efficient and competitive

 payment systems and how do we as a regulator encourage that while not stifling innovation? I think

 that was the challenge, and the continuity change reforms which were very, very hard fought and as I

 said we ended up in court over them, they were a really important part of bringing what we would

 regard as competition and price signals to the payments systems. So I think that was the biggest

 challenge we were facing at the time.
Julia
Do you mind me asking how you got into this because your background is an economist if I’ve

 understood correctly. What were you particularly attracted to the world of the plumbing, as you

 describe it, or did it sort of happen by accident where you said I’d like to take my career and

 zig-zag and try different things?
Governor Bullock
It’s actually a little more mundane than that. I was on maternity leave and I was looking for a

 job to come back to and at the time Adrian referred to the Wallace Inquiry and we created a new

 department in the Reserve Bank called payments policy department and I had a phone call from the new

 head of the department, John Veale, who said would you consider coming back as the deputy head of

 this department and I’d never even considered it. I didn’t know anything about it so he

 gave me a little bit of reading material and I interviewed for it and I got the job. So it was - but

 I’d have to say that that has sort of been my philosophy in my career most of my life, which is

 opportunities present themselves, you come to a fork in the road, you can continue doing what

 you’re doing or you can try something new, sideways move, and I’ve always thought why not

 take the sideways move and see how it is. As it turned out it was the best thing I ever did. It was

 fun, it was educational, it was challenging intellectually, and it really set me up, I think, for the

 rest of my career.
Julia
I think this is a fascinating sort of point to just spend a moment on, actually, which is the whole

 thing about taking risk in career, because we sort of go through a journey where we go, well, I think

 I’ve figured out my pathway, I think I know where I’d like to go or not. Taking risks is

 something that we must all do to advance our careers, but that’s not necessarily a comfortable

 state of mind. Can you just share - do you have frameworks that you - or do you just jump in with

 both feet and go it will be what it will be.
Governor Bullock
No, no, I do have a little bit of a framework. That was the first time I - no, probably it was the

 second time I’d sort of taken a leap sideways to something that I wasn’t familiar with. The

 second time was in 2010 when I’d been in payments for 12 years, I was a - you know, I was

 recognised international expert in payments and Australian expert in payments and the Governor at the

 time, Glenn Stevens, called me up and he said, "Would you consider moving into bank notes", currency,

 printing bank notes, those sorts of things. I was quite taken aback and I thought I’ve got all

 this expertise, I’m a recognised expert, why would I go and do something I know nothing about,

 and then I thought about it and I mulled over it and I felt that, again, opportunities present

 themselves, I probably need to take that opportunity and just see how it goes. As it turned out it

 was a fabulous job. We launched the new generation bank note while I was there and ultimately I ended

 up also looking after the areas that run the high value payments system, the RTGS system, and the

 government banking in the bank. So I got this grounding in the business side of the bank that had I

 not taken that chance I wouldn’t have ever had that.
Julia
And as you describe that I sort of think the words that buzz in my mind is that feels very kind of

 operations almost in terms of it’s literally the production of notes and coins in so many ways.

 Was it like that? Shine some light.
Governor Bullock
Yes, it was very business-like and at the time I was also chair of the note-printing factory.

 I’d never been a director - -
Julia
Can you say that one more time? I love that.
Governor Bullock
I was chair of the board of the note-printing factory, and I knew nothing about note printing

 obviously and I knew nothing about operations generally. One thing I learnt, actually, which I think

 was really valuable for my future career as well, was that I didn’t know - when I was in

 payments I basically could pretty much do anyone’s job in payments. I knew everything and now I

 knew nothing. All of a sudden I had to figure out who to ask, I had to figure out the sorts of

 questions I needed to ask to probe properly, I had to figure out who I could trust, who the experts

 were. So it was a really different modus operandi for me because I couldn’t just say, "I know

 the answer to that." I felt that that was a really good training for me going forward because

 I’ve been able to carry that forward in a lot of other things I’ve done.
Julia
And we talk a lot about leadership and stakeholder analysis, really understanding who you should talk

 to, who has influence, who has most interest and it’s fascinating to hear you talk about that. I

 think that’s got to be my favourite job title ever by the way, but I am really curious because

 this came up earlier today on this very stage about, you know, we live in fast-changing times and I

 could linger on that for a long time but I think we all know what we’re talking about in terms

 of the world of payments, but there’s one topic that still keeps coming up which is cheques and

 I’d be really keen to hear from you as you look at the world today - we’ve talked about

 some of the things that have changed - there’s some certain things in play that you say actually

 haven’t changed and has that surprised you in any way?
Governor Bullock
Well, I don’t think - well, cheques - I actually don’t think that cheques - well, we know

 we’re going to close the cheque system, but interestingly back in 1998 people were saying the

 death of the cheque is exaggerated. You’ll never see the death of the cheque. Just as people - I

 was reminded, actually, by a colleague just - my Reserve Bank colleagues over there, the table over

 there, I was reminded that a fellow I worked with once said that payment cards, physical cards, will

 go before cash does and everyone said no, rubbish. Physical cards do look like they will go before

 cash does. So I’m not quite answering your question about what hasn’t changed. I guess why

 I’m bringing these things up is at the time some of the things you think are not going to change

 and are reasonably intractable, they might be the things that do actually move the quickest, and

 cheques moved very quickly once it started to move, and I think the thing - this is the intriguing

 thing about payments is it’s a network and the thing about networks is that you can chug along,

 but when something gets traction then all of a sudden it takes off. I remember when I think it was

 Commonwealth Bank was doing a trial of tab and go, I think it was in the shire, just down there, just

 with some terminals, and it didn’t look like it was going to take off. People just weren’t

 interested in it, and then, again, it was the network effect. The big supermarkets took it up and

 once the big supermarkets took it up and there was enough acceptance of tap and go it shot off. So I

 think this is the fascinating thing about payments for me, that the network effect can mean that

 something doesn’t seem to move for ages and then all of a sudden it shoots off.
Julia
And when we think about the world of payments obviously the wholesale side of things then

 there’s obviously the retail side, but in the middle of that you’ve got the corporates as

 well, and I wonder whether in this world we tend to talk about the corporates less, but they have

 such an important role from what you were suggesting there.
Governor Bullock
They do have a very important role and government also has a very important role. So the issue of

 cheques, for example, there’s certain legislation that still has cheque payment in it and some

 of that is down to government. What people are able to pay their bills with becomes really important,

 I think, to guiding the sorts of payment instruments that people will use, and once they could pay

 with cards then that became a very important payment instrument. But I remember going into the post

 office and paying with a cheque my electricity bill. That was the sort of thing we did.
Julia
It’s fascinating to listen to you talk about the dynamics at play and what’s changed, what

 hasn’t changed. I’m very curious, you are the first female ever Governor. Do you mind if I

 asked you about your journey to that seat? But you also touched on something already which feels a

 bit like sponsorship. You had people looking out for you, and this comes up a lot in terms of

 coaching, mentorship, sponsorship. I’d love to give your thoughts about what advice would you

 give this room of amazing women about taking senior seats.
Governor Bullock
Sure. I never had any formal mentoring or sponsorship, but when I look back there was a number of key

 men - I was always the most senior woman at the bank working my way up, but when I look back, and I

 did recognise it at the time, there were some men who were informally, in effect, mentoring me and

 sponsoring me through, and I’m still in contact with them. One or two of them ended up being

 Governors, John Veale who I spoke about earlier and John Laker who was also mentioned by Adrian. They

 encouraged me, they gave me delegation to do things that I wanted to do. So the initial work on

 interchange, I carried that, a lot of that myself. That was given to me by my boss and he said you

 carry that forward. Keep me engaged but you carry it forward. So my advice, I guess, would be that

 even if you don’t have a formal mentor, see if you can identify some people that you are

 comfortable with, that you think will even take on a sort of an informal sort of champion role for

 you, because they’re out there. You may not realise, but there will be people out there that

 will do that for you, and I was very fortunate that I had some really great male bosses who really

 helped me to grow in my leadership journey and also backed myself. It was - sometimes when I’d

 think oh, you know, maybe I can’t do that, they would give me the encouragement to try.
Julia
And it’s always very interesting listening to people, very senior people, talk about - your

 words exactly, sort of backing yourself in your entire career journey and hearing you talk about the

 decisions, the steps you’ve taken, those who have drawn you into positions as well and that have

 been both strategic and operational is really fascinating. As you come to this wonderful community of

 women in payments, and actually I don’t know whether you’re aware, you opened the session

 this morning because we had a video because it’s the 10th anniversary and you were interviewed

 for that.
Governor Bullock
I remember doing that, yes.
Julia
You remember doing the video. You came across very well you’d like to know. I am very, very

 curious to know as you look at this community that continues to grow, and particularly one thing that

 struck me today is the deep sense of pride of Australia that comes from every single person in this

 room, and you’re smiling even as I say that. I think everybody else is feeling it too. Could you

 share some thoughts about when you travel the world as a very senior woman in payments who is

 Australian and representing Australia, what that feels like and what particularly makes you proud?
Governor Bullock
I think Adrian sort of alluded to this. I think Australia does in any ways punch above its weight and

 people are always interested to learn about - because our journey in payments I mentioned earlier we

 were the first jurisdiction in the world to do interchange regulation. Many other jurisdictions now

 have done that as well, but we were the first, and it was a hard slog because we had the might of -

 and I’m sure there’s Visa and Mastercard sitting here somewhere, but we did have the might

 of Visa and Mastercard opposing us, but others have done so now. I think when I travel the world,

 specifically in the payments space, I used to get lots of invitations from people to come and speak

 about our experience, our analysis, I think we were well-regarded for the way we had approached

 things in an evidentiary base. So even now while I travel the world I think I do get the feeling that

 people are interested in Australian perspectives because we’ve done a lot. Our NPP, there were

 fast payments before ours, but I think we get - always get lots of questions about how we set up the

 NPP, its capabilities. So people are interested in what’s going on in Australia in payments.
Julia
And do you still travel extensively today? Are you still getting invitations, I imagine, to travel

 the world?
Governor Bullock
I do travel quite a lot. It’s not - it’s more than I’d like, probably, and it’s

 not just for payments now, but it’s more - I speak a lot more about the economy. People seem to

 be more interested in interest rates.
Julia
It’s one of these things where you go I wish everybody wasn’t quite so obsessed with

 interest rates, but it seems to be. I wonder if I could bring it back to your world in this

 community, and I suppose is there a call to action that you would throw out to this wonderful group

 of people that says - about the role of the RBA and how you want to interact with the industry and

 what you really see as being the great potential for engagement.
Governor Bullock
We actually had a payments system Board meeting today so I’m fresh off all things payments. The

 thing that came out of it for me was, and I reflect on this through my time in payments, is that what

 we’ve achieved we couldn’t actually have achieved without the engagement of the industry.

 So Adrian alluded earlier to the NPP. The genesis of the NPP came out of a thing called the strategic

 review of payments - of innovation in payments that the bank did, and we identified a number of

 things. We worked with the industry and the industry took the bit between its teeth and it ran with

 it, and my experience, apart from the interchange regulation, mostly the way we have achieved

 payments reform in Australia is by cooperation, by talking to the industry, by presenting the

 evidence, by convincing the industry to work with us on things, and that’s the sort of

 environment I would like to continue. We’re not always going to agree, and in fact some of you

 aren’t necessarily going to agree with one another, but I think we do have a very innovative

 payments space in Australia and we want to keep it that way, but we also want to make sure that

 it’s competitive and that it’s a level playing field. So I think if we can bring the

 industry with us - we don’t want to regulate, we’d rather just develop a consensus and move

 the industry forward together. That’s our preferred modus operandi.
Julia
And that forum of healthy debate, healthy challenge will always drive better outcomes as well. I

 wonder if I could twist the question back a slightly different way, which is - because we’re

 always really curious as we think about perhaps future symposia, what we should be talking about. Is

 there anything you think we might be at risk of overlooking? I know it’s quite a big question,

 but I’m very curious about what might we be missing?
Governor Bullock
I can’t - well, if I knew what we were missing I’d probably be leaving the Reserve Bank and

 setting up a business. I can’t really think of what we’re missing, but I do think that we

 do need to watch what’s going on overseas and I think we need to - there’s certain things

 that are going on which - I don’t think we want to be at the forefront of, but I think we need

 to be prepared to be a fast follower. I’m thinking of things like interlinking of fast payment

 systems, I’m thinking - I’m not - I don’t see big stable coin things going on, but I

 think we need to keep an eye on it. I think we need to be - might need to be a fast follower. I guess

 my feeling is we just need to be outward looking, looking at what’s happening overseas, looking

 at whether or not there’s anything in Australia which might be impediments to that, and we

 don’t need to be at the bleeding edge, but we need in many cases, I think, to be prepared to

 follow fast if we need to.
Julia
It’s wonderful to hear you say that because the thing that comes to mind as you say that is, of

 course - and it’s an obvious thing to say, but I will say it, which is of course Women in

 Payments is a global organisation, so when we think about the insight and the intelligence that we

 can gather as a community globally is really important. I wonder if I could ask you for some final

 thoughts as we close out the discussion. Are there any final pieces of advice that you would give

 this audience?
Governor Bullock
I spoke at this symposium back in 2016 and I actually went back and read what I spoke about, and

 interestingly I wouldn’t change what I said then, I think, and the things that I think - the

 things I said then were back yourself, so a little bit like - even if you’re nervous, sometimes

 you’ve just got to back yourself in, and the thing that I’ve learnt is that sometimes

 others see things in me that I can’t quite see in myself. So taking advice from the people

 around you and gathering strength from the fact that if they think you can do it you probably can do

 it. A few other things I would say, I think that the way that you make connections is really

 important. I think that’s really important in payments. I think even, as I said, if you

 don’t necessarily agree with one another, having connections and having relationships that you

 can speak to people, that you can ring people up, that you can have a cup of coffee with in a

 respectful way, even if you don’t agree, that is so important because payments is a networks

 business, and yes we need competition and innovation and all those sorts of things, but payments is

 all about getting things from one bank to another bank or one person to another person. So we do need

 to continue talking to one another. That would be my other piece of advice, I think. That’s why

 things like this are fabulous because you’re all from different organisations, you might be

 competing in the corporate world, but in this sort of environment I think there’s a lot to learn

 and there’s also a lot to building the relationships so that if you do need to you can pick up

 the phone and ring someone and say, you know, "I want to talk about this issue. I know you don’t

 necessarily agree with me, but let’s have a conversation." I think building these sorts of

 relationships in the payments business is really, really important.
Julia
I have to say this has been one of the most joyful conversations because not only have we covered

 your career journey, your view on payments and where you started, what you reflect on has changed and

 has not changed, your thoughts about what we might be at risk of overlooking and to look up and to

 look out, your clear sense of pride of the work that you and your - the RBA have been doing, your

 connection with the industry, and particularly when you’re out on a global stage as well, but

 also some of the real insights into your personal career journey and what makes you tick, and

 particularly thinking about taking risks, backing yourself, build your connections. Ladies and

 gentlemen, I hope you’ve enjoyed it as much as I have. Please join me in thanking Governor

 Michele Bullock.
Governor Bullock
Thank you. All the best to the nominees and have a great awards ceremony. Thank you.
Julia
Thank you very much indeed. Thank you.
