BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Strangers in Paradise
DATE: 27/06/2024
SPEAKER: Andrew Hauser
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2024/sp-dg-2024-06-27.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Strangers in Paradise
Andrew Hauser
[
*
]
Deputy Governor
Speech at the Opening Dinner for the Citi A50 Australian Economic Forum 2024
Sydney
–
27 June 2024
Audio
38MB
Q&A Transcript
Download
835KB
Watch video: 'Strangers in Paradise', Speech by Andrew Hauser, Deputy Governor, at the Citi A50 Australian Economic Forum
Introduction
Picture if you can a thriving trading hub on the Australian coast. It uses imported capital equipment and
 processes, and temporary migrant labour, to extract and process an abundant natural resource for on-sale
 to China. The business brings wealth and prosperity to the local community. Over time, public debate
 emerges about whether rewards are being fairly divided between locals and foreigners, and how to manage
 ecological degradation.
A mine or refinery in present day Western Australia or Queensland? Could be. But what I have actually just
 described are the arrangements for trading in trepang – or sea cucumbers, a Chinese delicacy
 – that began around 1700 between the Yolŋu people of Arnhem Land and itinerant fishermen from
 Makassar on Sulawesi, part of modern-day Indonesia. By the mid-19th century, the Makassar fleet was
 supplying an amazing 900 tons of trepang to China every year.
[1]
The existence of such a striking historical echo of today’s debates is less surprising when one
 remembers that Australia is home to the oldest continuing culture on earth. For more than
 65,000 years this continent has been cultivated by First Nations peoples. In that context, I want to
 acknowledge the Gadigal people of the Eora Nation as the traditional owners and custodians of the land on
 which we are meeting this evening and pay my respects to Elders, past and present.
I also want to welcome all of you to the A50 forum, an event initiated in 2016 to highlight the
 benefits of investing in Australia. There are many important issues to discuss in the current climate,
 and the organisers have put together a fantastic program tomorrow, involving government leaders, the
 regulatory community and the corporate and financial sectors, to do just that. With such a rich main
 course to come, I have no intention of competing. Instead, I offer merely a light starter to put
 tomorrow’s discussions in context – reviewing the historical sources of economic growth in
 Australia, and the role played by foreign investment.
When economic conditions are as challenging as they are today, it can be easy to forget just how
 prosperous modern Australia is. Measures of relative affluence, such as GDP or wealth per head, regularly
 place the country in the top echelon globally.
[2]
Of course, the distribution of that prosperity is far
 from uniform – so it would be brave for a new and infatuated stranger to declare Australia an
 earthly paradise.
[3]
But coming as I do from a country whose GDP per head
 has been more or less static since the global financial crisis and lies between one-quarter and one-third
 lower than Australia’s, I can tell you that cross-country gap feels very real.
How Australia got here is long-debated; this evening I want to discuss three important drivers:
[4]
Its unusually diverse range of resource endowments – below ground, above ground, and beyond the
 seas.
Its strong but adaptable pro-growth institutions – supporting political, legal, macro and
 microeconomic and financial stability.
Its longstanding welcoming environment for foreign investment.
Australia’s unusually diverse resource endowments
Many countries have resource endowments of some kind. What is different about Australia is it seems to
 have the full set! That diversity can be seen in the evolving shape of its exports over the past
 200 years (Graph 1).
[5]
But it also applies to its as-yet untapped potential.
To see that more clearly, let’s divide Australia’s endowments into three.
Graph 1
Below ground
It is sometimes said that Australia has long relied on ‘old world’ mining exports. But while
 it’s true that more than half of today’s goods exports consist of iron ore, gas and coal, that
 is not a longstanding feature of the economy. The only significant mining export in the 19th century was
 gold – and for much of the 20th century, mining played only a modest part in Australia’s trade
 (Graph 1).
More importantly for the future, Australia has large shares of global reserves of many of the minerals
 critical to ‘new world’ technology and energy transition industries, with significant headroom
 to expand current production (Graph 2), given the right investment and demand conditions.
Graph 2
Above ground
For over 150 years, agriculture – particularly wool – dominated Australia’s goods
 exports (Graph 1). While that dominance has now pivoted to mining, other ‘above ground’
 resources have grown significantly. In particular, Australia’s
human
capital ranks
 highly globally, bucking the trend of countries with significant commodity dependencies (Graph 3)
 and positioning the country well to take advantage of developments in the services and technology
 sectors. Indeed, nearly one-fifth of Australia’s total exports consist of services –
 principally inbound tourism and education.
Graph 3
But one of Australia’s most significant above ground resource endowments has no physical form at all:
 sunlight. Multiplying the intensity of the Australian sun (using the World Bank’s Global Horizontal
 Irradiation metric) by its enormous landmass, Australia has the largest assessed theoretical potential
 solar capacity in the world – many thousands of times the country’s domestic energy needs.
[6]
Estimates of realisable capacity, after allowing for the many practical constraints of real-world power
 generation, lie well below this theoretical maximum. But they still suggest there is very substantial
 further headroom available, compared to today’s output.
Beyond the sea
Australia’s geographical position, lying as it does a long way from some of its closest partners, is
 sometimes said to confer an economic disadvantage – the ‘tyranny of distance’. But as Ian
 McLean pointed out, this is too simplistic. During the 19th and a good part of the 20th centuries, a
 combination of comparative advantage, rapidly improving transport technologies and ‘colonial
 preference’ meant that economic growth was supported by advantageous trading arrangements with the
 United Kingdom, despite it being as far away as it is possible to get! In recent decades, the focus of
 trade relations has pivoted decisively towards Asia. But Australia has also maintained a broader and
 deeper network of political and economic relationships, within and beyond the Asia-Pacific region, with
 which to navigate the shifting tides of economic opportunity.
Australia’s strong but adaptable pro-growth institutions
Strong resources alone are rarely sufficient to guarantee prosperity – indeed, the reverse is more
 often true, a phenomenon sometimes termed the ‘resource curse’. Donald Horne’s 1964
 polemic
The Lucky Country
predicted Australia would eventually be cursed too.
[7]
But
 60 years on, real GDP per head has more than tripled.
[8]
That’s not just luck.
Endowments bring opportunity. But harnessing them for a country’s greater good takes something more
 – and Australia’s real secret sauce has been its strong but adaptable pro-growth
 institutions.
[9]
Among Australia’s greatest assets have been its
political institutions, its legal system and
 its civil service
. Australians may debate the merits of its political arrangements from time
 to time. But the country regularly scores in the top deciles of objective global measures of liberal
 democracy.
[10]
Through history, Australia has regularly had to make
 tough national economic decisions – on squatters’ rights in the 19th century, on the
 appropriate balance between agriculture, extraction and manufacturing in the mid-20th century, or on the
 appropriate pace of de-regulation in the 1980s and 1990s. In each case, the debate may have been noisy,
 drawn out and non-linear – but assisted by Australia’s top-flight legal and civil service, the
 outcomes have much more often been right than wrong.
Australia’s
macroeconomic framework
has also been a clear strength over the past
 40 years. Resource-rich countries can suffer significant economic volatility when the prices for
 their key outputs adjust – and Australia has certainly had its fair share of this over its longer
 history. But today it has powerful shock-absorbers in place to reduce that buffeting. First, unlike most
 commodity-exporters,
[11]
Australia has a fully flexible exchange rate.
 Second, the RBA has independent authority for setting monetary policy to achieve a flexible inflation
 target that gives appropriate weight to employment outcomes – similar to that in the United States.
 And third, gross public debt lies well below that of many other developed countries – not least, it
 has to be said, my own country of origin (Graph 4)!
Graph 4
On the
microeconomic
side, the reforms of recent decades
[12]
have
 left Australia with internationally open and transparent product markets,
[13]
low
 tariffs (Graph 5) and a relatively open capital account.
Graph 5
And finally,
financial stability
is overseen by a comprehensive set of regulators. The
 major banks are liquid and strongly capitalised, there is a well-developed capital markets infrastructure
 and domestic non-banks are increasingly interested in coming in alongside overseas investors in onshore
 projects as part of joint ventures.
Australia’s welcoming environment for foreign investment
When Walter Wriston, Citibank’s CEO from 1967 to 1984, said ‘capital goes where it is welcome,
 and it stays where it is well treated’, he could have been describing Australia. And that matters
 – because other than a brief period around the turn of the 20th century, and another around the
 Second World War, Australia has run a persistent current account deficit (i.e. drawn on overseas
 financing to help fund onshore investment) for most of the past 160 years (Graph 6).
Graph 6
In the early days, that financing sometimes came from rather unconventional sources.
Just north of where we are sitting tonight lies the cove originally known as Melia-Wool, but later renamed
 after the businessman Robert Campbell. Campbell built the warehouses you can still see through the
 window, to hold the wares of 19th century trade: from sugar and wool to whale oil, sealskins – and
 Peruvian guano.
[14]
He also ran the Sydney branch of the New South Wales
 Savings Bank, known colloquially as ‘Campbell’s Bank’. Newly arrived convicts were first
 encouraged, and then from 1822 compelled, to deposit any assets they brought with them in the Savings
 Bank until ‘their condition was improved by their good behaviour’.
[15]
Though many of these deposits were pitifully small, some amounted to real money.
[16]
For
 example, one Thomas Bolton deposited 42 pounds, 18 shillings and 4 pence – roughly
 the annual salary of a well-to-do London builder of the time. This money was used to fund local
 development. A Savings Bank document from 1824 shows a 100-acre parcel of land near present-day Petersham
 passing hands for £100. Today – 200 years on – that land would be worth at least $2
billion
: a striking illustration of the scale of change in the Australian economy over that
 period.
[17]
Persistent current account deficits can sometimes drive a sense of national angst that you are living
 beyond your means, risking a sudden drying up in credit or an unaffordable rise in funding costs.
 Australia found itself in a particularly challenging situation between the World Wars, when a combination
 of weak growth, over-borrowing in sterling, and the British determination to stick to the Gold Standard
 caused the public debt burden to balloon dangerously. In August 1930, Sir Otto Niemeyer – a Bank of
 England official, I regret to say – delivered a pretty obnoxious speech to the Melbourne Conference
 of Commonwealth and State Leaders in which he warned Australia that ‘cold facts must be faced’,
 and that it had two years ‘to get its house in order’ before key debt tranches matured.
[18]
His
 intervention was so profound it caused a split in the Labor Party.
[19]
Over the decades that followed, however, governments around the world came increasingly to the view that
 persistent overseas borrowing
could
in fact be sustained so long as it reflected the funding
 of profitable onshore investment, or so-called ‘consumption smoothing’ (e.g. by young
 households, expecting their lifetime incomes to rise). That view – dubbed the ‘Pitchford
 thesis’ in Australia in the 1980s – shaped a raft of policy reforms, including floating the
 exchange rate and reducing or eliminating a wide range of capital controls.
[20]
External financing switched increasingly from the public to the private sector.
Of course, questions about external sustainability can still arise. After the 2016 Brexit referendum, for
 example, the then Bank of England Governor Mark Carney described the United Kingdom’s current
 account deficit as relying on the ‘kindness of strangers’ – Blanche DuBois’
 memorable last line in ‘A Streetcar Named Desire’.
[21]
Australia’s experience in recent decades has been more positive, for at least three reasons. First,
 Australia has generated substantial onshore investment opportunities, particularly during the
 ‘mining boom’ of the noughties. Second, borrowing has been structured in ways that make it
 relatively resilient to shocks, being denominated predominantly in (or hedged back to) local currency
 (reducing exposure to exchange rate adjustments), and issued at increasingly longer maturities (reducing
 rollover risk).
[22]
But, third, Australia has been through an unusual
 period since 2019 of running current account surpluses –
exporting
rather than
 importing capital in net terms, helping to halve the country’s net overseas liabilities
 (Graph 7).
Graph 7
These surpluses reflected a number of underlying causes. Part of it was a classic excess of national
 saving over investment – with savings boosted by the sharp rise in the terms of trade, the
 structural increase in super fund balances and precautionary accumulation during Covid; and investment
 growth normalising somewhat after the highs of the mining boom. Australia’s net investment income
 also rose for a period as a result of changes in relative asset prices. And capital flows were affected
 by mergers and acquisitions.
[23]
It is unclear whether such surpluses will persist. The most recent data suggest they may not.
[24]
But
 even if they do, that does not mean Australia’s need for inward foreign investment is a thing of the
 past. And that is because a substantial slice of national savings is placed in overseas assets, in order
 to diversify risk and return (Graph 8, left hand panel). The super funds alone hold nearly half
 their portfolio offshore.
[25]
Graph 8
Inward and Outward Investment
With a substantial pipeline of investment projects waiting to be financed, that leaves many opportunities
 for inward investment. Consistent with that, public and private Australian debt remains in strong demand
 right around the world (Graph 8, right hand panel). And Australia remains one of the top recipients
 of inward foreign direct investment (FDI) globally, when expressed as a share of GDP (Graph 9).
Graph 9
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
No one has yet identified a single golden source of national prosperity. But Australia has come pretty
 close. Three key things have helped it navigate massive changes in the global economic and financial
 system, generating wealth for its people and ensuring it remains an attractive location for investment in
 equal measure:
Its unusually diverse range of resource endowments – below ground, in both ‘old
 world’ and ‘new world’ minerals; above ground, in human capital, agriculture and solar
 capacity; and beyond the seas, in its geographical position.
Its strong but adaptable pro-growth institutions – political, legal, macro and microeconomic,
 and financial stability.
Its longstanding welcoming environment for foreign investment.
Of course, these things are not sufficient to guarantee prosperity in the future: as a small open economy,
 Australia relies on the continued functioning of global institutions. And it relies on making the right
 policy calls. Tomorrow’s sessions are all about how to do that in the current climate. I wish you
 well in those discussions.
Endnotes
I am grateful to Michele Bullock, Natasha
 Cassidy, Iris Chan, Jon Cheshire, Stephen Cupper, Anthony Dickman, Paula Drew, Jacqui Dwyer,
 Sarah Gallagher, Nick Harvey, Sarah Hunter, Claire Johnson, Brad Jones, Christopher Kent, Marion
 Kohler, Jeremy Lawson, Virginia MacDonald, John Murphy, Anna Park, Shivali Raj, Tom Rosewall,
 Carl Schwartz, Callum Shaw, Penny Smith, Harry Stinson, Katie Sun, Beth Tasker, Tom Williams and
 Jess Young from the RBA, and a range of others outside the Bank, for their assistance with, or
 comments on, these remarks.
[*]
National Museum of Australia (2022), ‘Trade
 with the Makasar’. Parke E (2021), ‘New Study Reveals History of Aboriginal Trade with
 Foreign Visitors before British Settlement’,
ABC News
, 18 July, describes
 a similar discovery further to the west, and includes a tremendous description of the overseas
 fishermen as ‘sail-in, sail-out’ (SISO) workers, by Alistair Paterson, Chair of
 Archaeology at the University of Western Australia. After 1901, the newly formed Australian
 Government banned Makassar trepangers, with the aim of protecting Australia’s territorial
 integrity and encourage a local trepang industry.
[1]
See, for instance, WorldBank Data (2024),
 ‘GDP per capita (current US$)’; IMF (2024), ‘World Economic Outlook
 Database’, April; UBS (2023), ‘Global Wealth Report 2023’.
[2]
We can be confident that William Morris was not
 explicitly describing Australia in his epic poem ‘The Earthly Paradise.’ But it does
 bear at least a family resemblance: a land ‘across the western sea’ but ‘a little
 to the southward steer’, where gardens are ‘ever blossoming’, ‘no Greenland
 winter waits’, no ‘year-long night’, ‘but spice-trees set waving by the
 western wind, and gentle folk who know no guile at least, and many a bright-winged bird and
 soft-skinned beast’.
[3]
This entire speech, and most of whatever
 understanding I have on this topic draws heavily from McLean IW (2012),
Why Australia
 Prospered: The Shifting Sources of Economic Growth
, Princeton University Press. I
 wholeheartedly recommend this book to anyone seeking insight into either the history of
 Australia’s economy, or its future.
[4]
I am grateful to Ashley Owen of Owen Analytics
 for this chart. Somewhat similar analysis is also presented in Gillitzer C and J Kearns (2005),
 ‘
Long-term Patterns in Australia’s Terms
 of Trade
’, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2005-01.
[5]
See ESMAP (2020),
Global Photovoltaic Power
 Potential by Country
, Washington, DC: World Bank; Australian Government,
 ‘Australian Energy Statistics’. Available at
 <https://www.energy.gov.au/energy-data/australian-energy-statistics>. The World Bank study
 only covers solar radiation between 60°N and 45°S parallels – so it is theoretically
 possible (if unlikely) that countries with large landmasses outside this region (such as Russia)
 have a higher capacity.
[6]
Horne D (2008),
The Lucky Country
,
 Penguin eBooks.
[7]
Our World in Data, ‘GDP per capita, 1820 to
 2022’. Available at
 <https://ourworldindata.org/grapher/gdp-per-capita-maddison?tab=chart&country=~AUS>.
[8]
The importance of institutions in breaking the
 resource curse is explored in Mehlum H, K Moene and R Torvik (2006), ‘Institutions and the
 Resource Curse’,
The Economic Journal
, 116(508), pp 1–20.
[9]
Australia for example is in the top
 10 per cent of countries as measured by the V-Dem Institute’s Liberal Democracy
 Index (the UK is in the next decile down). See V-Dem Institute (2024), ‘Democracy Report
 2024: Democracy Winning and Losing at the Ballot’.
[10]
See, for instance, Al-Sadiq AJ, P Bejar and I
 Ötker (2021), ‘Commodity Shocks and Exchange Rate Regimes: Implications for the Caribbean
 Commodity Exporters’, IMF Working Paper No
2021/104
.
[11]
Kent C and J Simon (2007), ‘
Productivity Growth: The Effect of Market
 Regulations
’, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2007-04.
[12]
See, for instance, OECD, ‘Indicators of
 Product Market Regulation’. Available at
 <https://www.oecd.org/economy/reform/indicators-of-product-market-regulation/>.
[13]
Austral Archaeology Pty Ltd (2015),
 ‘Campbell’s Stores, Campbell’s Cove Sydney, New South Wales: Aboriginal and
 Historical Archaeological Assessment, Statement of Heritage Impact and Research Design’,
 Report prepared for Altus Page Kirkland.
[14]
RBA Museum, ‘
Hidden History of
 Banking
’.
[15]
RBA Unreserved, ‘
Series Guide: Savings Bank of New South
 Wales
’.
[16]
The records of the New South Wales Savings Bank
 found their way into the RBA’s archives through a series of mergers – with the Savings
 Bank of New South Wales in 1832, the Government Savings Bank of New South Wales in 1914, and the
 original government-owned Commonwealth Bank in 1931 – from which the RBA emerged as a
 separate institution.
[17]
RBA Unreserved, ‘
Research Guide: Sir Otto Niemeyer, GBE,
 KCB
’; Dwyer J and V MacDonald (2021), ‘
From the
 Archives: The London Letters
’, RBA
Bulletin
, March 2021; Millmow A
 (2004), ‘Niemeyer, Scullin and the Australian Economists’,
Australian Economic
 History Review
, 44(2), pp 142–160.
[18]
Labor History (undated), ‘The Scullin
 Years – The Lang Plan and the Party Split,
1931–1931
’. Available at
 <https://laborhistory.org.au/category/the-scullin-years/the-lang-plan-and-the-party-split/>.
[19]
For a comprehensive overview of thinking in
 this area, see Belkar R, L Cockerell and C Kent (2007), ‘
Current Account Deficits: The Australian
 Debate
’, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2007-02; Debelle G (2011), ‘
In Defence of Current Account Deficits
’,
 Address at ADBI/UniSA Workshop on Growth and Integration in Asia, Adelaide, 8 July. The
 thesis itself is set out in Pitchford JD (1989), ‘A Sceptical View of Australia’s
 Current Account and Debt Problem’,
Australian Economic Review
, 22(2),
 pp 5–14.
[20]
Mark Carney (2017), ‘A Fine Balance’,
 Speech at Mansion House Bankers and Merchants Breakfast, London, 20 June.
[21]
These trends are covered in detail in Debelle G
 (2019), ‘
A Balance of Payments
’,
 Address to the Economic Society of Australia, Canberra, 27 August. The latest data from the
 periodic Survey of Foreign Currency Exposure are described in Atkin T and J Harris (2023),
 ‘
Foreign
 Currency Exposure and Hedging in Australia
’, RBA
Bulletin
, March.
[22]
For a comprehensive discussion of these
 developments, see Smith P, ‘
The Extraordinary
 Decline in Australia’s Net Foreign Liabilities
’, Speech to CFA Societies 2023
 Australian Investment Conference, Sydney, 18 October.
[23]
Australian Bureau of Statistics (2024),
 ‘Balance of Payments and International Investment Position, Australia, March 2024’.
[24]
See, for instance, NAB (2023), ‘Super
 Funds Continue to Increase Allocation to International Assets: NAB Report’, NAB News,
 27 November.
[25]
