BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Shedding Light on Uncertainty: Using Scenarios in Forecasting and Policy
DATE: 13/12/2024
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2024/sp-ag-2024-12-13.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Shedding Light on Uncertainty: Using Scenarios in Forecasting and Policy
Sarah Hunter
[
*
]
Assistant Governor (Economic)
University of Adelaide South Australian Centre for Economics Studies (SACES) Lunch
Adelaide
–
13 December 2024
Audio
46MB
Q&A Transcript
Download
503KB
Watch
 video: Shedding Light on Uncertainty: Using Scenarios in Forecasting and Policy - Speech
 delivered by Sarah Hunter, Assistant Governor (Economic), University of Adelaide South
 Australian Centre for Economics Studies (SACES) Lunch, Adelaide
I would first like to pay respect to the traditional and original owners of this land, the Kaurna people,
 to pay respect to those who have passed before us and to acknowledge today’s custodians of this
 land. I also extend that respect to any First Nations people joining us.
Today I am going to talk about how the RBA uses scenarios – that is, alternative possible pathways
 for the economy to help us think through the outlook for the economy and set monetary policy.
Our baseline forecast of how the economy may evolve is a key input to the monetary policy decision. It
 represents what we think is the most likely single path for the economy. But it’s only one path, and
 the chance of that precise path being the one that happens is approximately zero. So, acknowledging the
 uncertainty inherent in our forecasts is core to making good policy decisions.
The systematic use of scenario analysis is common in many professions where decisions are made under
 uncertainty – economists are not alone in not knowing exactly how things will play out. For
 example, scenario analysis is a fundamental part of financial stress testing exercises that are conducted
 on a regular basis by prudential regulators. Many central banks use scenarios internally to inform their
 policy decisions, and some publish them. The value of scenarios has been re-emphasised by the recent
 Bernanke Review of the Bank of England and our own RBA Review, which recommended greater use of scenarios
 to inform policy.
[1]
So, why are scenarios useful?
As forecasters, they can help us think through and communicate risks around our baseline. For example, by
 identifying which risks the forecast might be particularly sensitive to, and the balance of risks around
 the central case. They can also help us keep an open mind about alternative explanations for how the
 economy is evolving.
For policymakers, scenarios can provide a tangible link between risks and policy strategy. They allow
 policymakers to explore how a given policy option performs depending on how risks play out, or to compare
 alternatives. They also have the potential to help policymakers communicate how monetary policy may
 respond as conditions evolve – in economists’ parlance, to better communicate their reaction
 function.
I’ll develop these points in the rest of my remarks, and along the way talk through some examples of
 recent scenarios we have used. But before I get into scenarios, I want to briefly set the scene by
 outlining the baseline forecast process, and why the forecasts almost always turn out to be wrong in some
 way.
Forecasts are an important input to monetary policy …
The baseline forecast represents our central view of how the economy will unfold, conditional on a series
 of assumptions including the exchange rate and the market-implied path for the cash rate. The forecasts
 also embed a set of judgements about how the economy may evolve. We typically call out the judgements we
 think are most important in the
Statement on Monetary Policy
(SMP), alongside the
 forecasts. Recently the key judgements have included assessments of the supply capacity of the economy,
 the trajectory of the labour market, and the extent to which households will spend their income.
The judgements and forecasts are built on a wide range of analysis of the data, models that embody
 relationships and linkages across the economy, and our assessment of how these relationships may evolve
 differently to what we’ve seen in the past. As well as resulting in quantitative forecasts, this
 process helps to refine the staff’s narrative for the economy. Constructing a narrative in parallel
 with detailed outcomes can help test the forecasts and it helps us to communicate our view of the
 economy.
But we know the future is uncertain, and the forecasts will usually be wrong in various ways. Given the
 uncertainty in forecasts, why spend so much time and effort on them? The answer is that monetary policy
 operates with a lag, which means the Board needs to think ahead when setting the cash rate target today.
Given the importance of looking ahead in the monetary policy decision and the fact that we know forecasts
 often do not come to pass, there is significant value in thinking through the ways in which actual
 outcomes might deviate from the forecast. As we will see, scenarios help us do that.
… but all forecasts turn out to be at least partially wrong
But first, why do forecasts turn out to be wrong? There are some things about the future we can be
 relatively confident about. For example, we know people typically spend more money in the last quarter of
 the year in the lead up to the holiday season. Observations like this are so normal that we always look
 through them and focus on the underlying picture.
[2]
That said, even the seasonal pattern of household
 spending is shifting, with the ongoing growth in Australia of Black Friday sales in November displacing
 some spending from December. That is just the tip of the uncertainty iceberg – there are many
 reasons why actual outcomes depart from the forecasts:
Most obviously, unpredictable events that will have a meaningful impact on the macroeconomy can
 happen. Think of the pandemic, an unexpected change in domestic or foreign government policy and
 one-off weather events that affect prices or economic activity.
Relationships between variables can turn out differently than expected – for example,
 households might save more (or less) of their income than they usually do. Or, our models and
 analytical frameworks designed to capture these relationships could be incorrect or incomplete.
Assessments of the current state of the economy could be wrong. That could be due to imprecise data
 – which are often subject to sizeable revisions – or imprecise assessments of economic
 concepts like spare capacity that we can only infer from the data. Any errors in the assessment of
 the current state of the world are likely to translate into forecast errors.
Undetected or uncertain structural changes in the economy can cause unforeseen outcomes. A change in
 the potential growth rate of the economy – maybe caused by the green energy transition, AI
 adoption or other technological changes – would have wide-ranging effects on variables we
 forecast.
These examples are specific cases where our baseline outlook for the economy may not come to pass. One way
 of quantifying and communicating general uncertainty in the forecasts is the ‘fan charts’ that
 the RBA shows in the SMP. These charts show the historical range of forecast errors around the current
 central forecasts, in this case inflation (Graph 1). The dark blue range shows that
 70 per cent of two-year ahead inflation forecasts have fallen within
 ± 1 percentage points of the central forecasts since 1993, and 90 per cent
 fall within ± 2 percentage points.
Graph 1
This picture highlights that we can’t be very confident that our central projections will come to
 pass!
Scenarios help us understand and communicate specific risks and judgements
While the fan charts illustrate the typical level of uncertainty around our forecasts, scenarios enable a
 richer discussion of specific ways in which our baseline forecasts may be wrong. This could be due to any
 of the sources of uncertainty I talked about earlier – the risk of unpredictable events, economic
 relationships turning out to be different to what we thought, and so on.
Constructing a scenario involves making alternative assumptions to the ones in our baseline forecast about
 how things we are uncertain about play out, and thinking through what that implies for the economic
 outlook. We often use economic models to explore how these alternative assumptions affect economic
 outcomes.
Part of the value of producing scenarios is that they help us build our own understanding of which risks
 are important, because the scenario makes clear how sensitive the outlook is to a given risk. That can
 help us decide which issues we need to dig into more to understand better.
Scenarios also provide a way for us to communicate the risks that we think are most important, and a
 tangible way of illustrating and quantifying them. By tracing through the impact of a risk onto both
 inflation and unemployment, they help us to understand how risks around those variables are connected in
 a way that fan charts cannot.
For us as forecasters, there is a further possible philosophical benefit to producing scenarios: I wonder
 if it might reduce the chance that we become too attached to our central forecast narrative. Constructing
 scenarios means thinking through alternative narratives, and that should help us keep an open mind when
 our central forecast turns out to be wrong. And as I said earlier, it almost certainly will be wrong in
 some way.
More concretely, scenarios can help us identify the indicators and outcomes that will tell us when we are
 deviating from our baseline view. This helps us to identify when things are playing out differently,
 allowing us to update our baseline forecast accordingly.
I’ll return in a minute to talk about the value of scenarios in informing the policy decision. But
 let me first give two recent examples of scenarios we have used.
Household income growth and consumption
A key uncertainty we’ve been considering recently is how household income growth will affect
 consumption in the coming years. Household real income is currently being lifted by the Stage Three tax
 cuts taking effect. But we cannot be certain how consumers will react to this lift in income. Running
 different scenarios allows us to see how the different responses might play out and how material this
 would be for the labour market and inflation. The alternative plausible paths for consumption
 (Graph 2) and the savings rate led to noticeably different paths for inflation and unemployment that
 would have consequences for policy setting (Graph 3).
[3]
Graph 2
Graph 3
We first published these scenarios in our August SMP.
[4]
As the charts show, the different cases have
 material implications for inflation and the labour market. With this in mind, RBA staff are closely
 monitoring actual outturns and assessing their implication for the outlook for the labour market and
 inflation. To relate this to the chart, we’re evolving our assessment of whether we’re on the
 orange, blue or green lines. And the answer to this question is critical to the Board, as a move to the
 scenarios depicted in green or orange may require a change in policy strategy – I’ll return to
 that point later.
Higher Chinese fiscal spending
External risks to the Australian economy can also be interrogated with scenarios. At any given time, there
 are many known external risks (as well as unknown unknowns). Deputy Governor Andrew Hauser discussed one
 of the key unknowns, the global trading environment, in his speech earlier this week.
[5]
Another
 current example of a material external risk is the path of future Chinese fiscal policy. China is a large
 economy and Australia’s largest export destination, which means its trajectory is important for
 Australian monetary policy setting. One way we have explored that is to consider the effects of Chinese
 fiscal spending being higher than expected. There are several ways this could affect the Australian
 economy:
[6]
Stronger demand in China increases prices for commodities that Australia exports as well as the price
 of Chinese exports to Australia. Higher commodity prices increase Australian corporate profits and
 government tax receipts, some of which could lead to increased spending.
Stronger Chinese demand also increases demand for other Australian exports. Services export volumes
 are more responsive to demand so there would likely be a direct activity channel for service exports.
 This could be offset to some extent, however, through adjustments via the exchange rate.
Similarly, stronger demand in China lifts activity in China’s other trading partners, many of
 which are important destinations for Australian exports.
Financial channels impact the Australian economy. While direct financial links with China are minimal
 compared with trade links, Chinese activity influences exchange rates and asset prices. A large
 Chinese stimulus package would likely be associated with an appreciation of the Australian dollar and
 potentially boost equity market sentiment.
The scenario we consider is a very large stimulus package, beyond what we have assumed in our current
 baseline forecast profile (Graph 4). It is not an outcome we think is likely to be announced in the
 near term. Looking at a large, if unlikely, stimulus gives a sense of what it might mean for the
 Australian economy and also illuminates the channels that would be at play for a smaller stimulus
 (Graph 5).
[7]
While here we look at the impact of a stimulus package
 in isolation, in practice a large stimulus would be most likely if growth prospects in China were to
 deteriorate for some reason. In that case, the impact on the Australian economy would differ from the
 scenario.
Graph 4
Graph 5
Scenarios and monetary policy
The goal of all this work is ultimately to help inform good monetary policymaking.
I’ve already explained how scenarios help us understand and communicate the importance of different
 risks to the outlook
[8]
and the economy’s sensitivity to different
 channels. For example, the China fiscal stimulus scenario shows how Australian outcomes might be affected
 by Chinese policy, and how transmission of the stimulus might be sensitive to movements in the exchange
 rate.
I will focus now on how scenarios can inform the policy decision itself. Clearly, central forecasts are
 important inputs to monetary policy decisions. But the extent of uncertainty means it’s equally
 important for policymakers to consider alternative scenarios, their likelihood and how their strategies
 might need to adapt.
The key point is that scenarios help to make the link between forecast risks and policy strategy. That
 helps the Board think through policy options and communicate their thinking. In particular:
Scenarios allow policymakers to consider how to make their strategy more robust to key risks
 materialising. That might mean choosing a policy strategy that performs well – in terms of
 inflation and employment outcomes – under a range of possible scenarios, rather than just in
 the most likely central forecast.
Scenarios can also help the Board communicate how policy settings might need to respond if the
 economic outlook unfolds differently to our baseline. As flagged earlier, in economist-speak they can
 help the Board to communicate its reaction function to financial market participants and the public,
 helping them understand what might happen to interest rates over time. For example, the November
 Board minutes show examples of the Board considering alternative risks to the outlook for household
 spending and the labour market, and mapping those through to the potential consequences for
 policy.
[9]
To make this more concrete, Graphs 6 and 7 provide an illustration of the sort of scenarios we
 might look at to map from risks to possible policy responses. I should emphasise that these are not
 actual scenarios the Board has considered – while some central banks publish the alternative policy
 paths that inform their decisions, the RBA has not yet done so. The graphs show hypothetical policy
 responses to illustrative scenarios where demand and therefore inflation are stronger or weaker than a
 base profile.
The Board has consistently communicated that it is aiming to return inflation to the midpoint of the
 target band (2.5 per cent) in a timely manner while retaining as many of the gains in the
 labour market as possible. The two cases considered here do not achieve these outcomes. That is, they
 would not bring the economy back into balance in the second half of 2026; in the strong-demand scenario,
 inflation would remain above 2.5 per cent, while in the weak-demand scenario it would drop
 below 2.5 per cent by the end of the forecast horizon (see solid black lines in right-hand
 panels of Graphs 6 and 7).
While the policy paths shown in these charts are not necessarily ones the Board would follow, the two
 scenarios are illustrative of how the strategy may need to be adapted as conditions unfold. In the upside
 scenario the Board may need to consider a tighter policy stance – this could be a rate hike or a
 longer period on hold. In the downside scenario, the Board may need to consider a looser stance –
 for example, by bringing forward rate cuts.
Graph 6
Graph 7
Conclusion
Where does all this leave us?
Each quarter, the RBA staff prepare a forecast for the economy, based on their careful assessment of the
 data, and past historical relationships, but acknowledging it relies on many judgments and assumptions.
 We select key judgments and risks to create scenarios that might differ from our central forecast. These
 scenarios help RBA staff understand the risks and they feed into the policy advice, though they only
 cover a fraction of the overall uncertainty.
The Board evaluates this information when setting policy, focusing on the strategy’s robustness amid
 inherent risks and the delayed effects of monetary policy on the economy. We hope the scenarios we
 publish help financial markets and the public better understand the forecasts and policy decisions,
 encouraging broader debate and discussion.
Endnotes
I would like to thank Tim Taylor, Thomas Cusbert
 and Nicholas West for their assistance in writing this speech and Andrew Hauser, Chris Kent, Brad
 Jones, Michael Plumb, Penny Smith, Dave Jacobs and Jeremy Lawson for their helpful comments.
[*]
See Bernanke BS (2024), ‘Forecasting for
 Monetary Policy Making and Communication at the Bank of England: A Review’, April;
 Australian Government (2023), ‘Review of the Reserve Bank of Australia’, Final Report,
 March. Although scenarios have only recently become a standard part of the policy process at the
 RBA, the need to consider uncertainty in forecasting and policymaking is well-tilled ground in
 speeches by RBA officials. For example, Stevens G (2011), ‘
On the Use of Forecasts
’, Address to the
 Australian Business Economists Annual Dinner, Sydney, 24 November; Debelle G (2017),
 ‘
Uncertainty
’, 7th Warren Hogan
 Memorial Lecture, Sydney, 26 October.
[1]
This particular observation is so typical that
 the ABS is able to take it into account in the data series it publishes. Seasonal adjustment is
 the process of removing the predictable fluctuations in economic data that the holidays and other
 regular calendar-based events create in order to more clearly reveal the underlying picture.
[2]
For this scenario taken from the August SMP we
 used the RBA’s semi-structural macroeconometric model MARTIN – it captures the main
 empirical relationships we see in the economy so is useful for this kind of scenario.
[3]
RBA (2024),
Statement on Monetary Policy
, August.
[4]
Hauser A (2024), ‘
The Ghost of Christmas Yet to Come
’,
 Address to the Australian Business Economists’ Annual Dinner, Sydney, 11 December.
[5]
See Guttman R, K Hickie, P Rickards and I Roberts
 (2019), ‘
Spillovers
 to Australia from the Chinese Economy
’, RBA
Bulletin
, June.
[6]
For this scenario, we again used MARTIN to
 consider the domestic implications. But because the focus of MARTIN is the Australian economy, we
 also leant on the Oxford Economics model of the global economy and literature on the effect of
 Chinese growth on commodity prices to calibrate some of the international transmission
 mechanisms.
[7]
Another dimension is the likelihood of any given
 scenario materalising. Defining objectively what the probability is of a given scenario
 materialising is generally not possible. Instead, staff and Board members must use their own
 subjective assessment.
[8]
See RBA (2024), ‘
Minutes of the Monetary Policy
 Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
’, Hybrid, 4 and 5 November.
[9]
