BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Monetary Policy Decision
DATE: 19/03/2024
SPEAKER: Michele Bullock
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2024/mc-gov-2024-03-19.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

More on the March 2024 monetary policy decision
Media Conference
Monetary Policy Decision
Michele Bullock
Governor
Sydney
–
19 March 2024
Audio
20.3MB
Watch video: Media Conference – Monetary Policy Decision, Sydney
Transcript
Michele Bullock
Thank you all for coming. As you will have seen the Board decided to hold its policy rate steady

 again at this meeting. A few points I would like to make up-front before I move to questions.
First of all, we’re making progress against our fight against inflation but it does

 remain high. As we’ve discussed before, in fact at this previous press conference, it really is the

 big challenge in front of us. It confronts borrowers, renters, savers, retirees. It hurts everyone

 – inflation – and that’s why it’s important we get inflation back into the target

 band of
2–3
per cent. Recent data suggests we’re on the

 right track but the interest rate path that best ensures we bring inflation back to target does remains

 uncertain.
We’re keeping a keen eye also on employment numbers because as I have said before,

 we want to hold on to as many gains in the labour market as we can.
What we need is greater confidence that inflation will return to the target band in a

 reasonable timeframe and will stay there.
So, domestic data over recent weeks has been largely as expected. The Board believes the

 risks to the outlook are finely balanced and that it’s too soon to rule anything in or out. The data

 showed a slowing in GDP growth in the December quarter, slightly higher unemployment rate, slightly

 higher wages growth and a further moderation in inflation.
We understand that households are still bearing the brunt of this inflation challenge. We

 see that in the weak consumption data. We know that there is a big cost-of-living squeeze on households.
Unemployment has also ticked up a bit. Employment is continuing to grow. But these are

 firmly on the Board’s radar and that’s why we’re being cautious. Wages growth picked up a

 little further and it’s expected to moderate but it may take some time.
There has been little new information on services inflation which is where the recent

 pressures have been. This strength has been because demand continues to exceed supply in the economy.

 Although there are signs this gap is closing and we’re moving towards a better balance in the

 economy, things remain uncertain. And the other thing I would add here is we have seen overseas it can be

 a bumpy ride on inflation.
So today, as I said, the Board decided to hold rates at current levels. To the future, we

 still have to get inflation down and the risks to achieving that remain finely balanced. The war

 isn’t yet won. So, we continue to be vigilant and we can’t rule anything in or out. With that

 I’m happy to take your questions.
Edward Boyd (SkyNews)
There’s a subtle change of language in the statement today. The phase of ‘further increase

 of interest rates cannot be ruled out’ has been replaced by the phase ‘the Board is not

 ruling anything in or out’. Has your hiking bias been removed? Are you taking rate rises off the

 table for now?
Michele Bullock
As the statement said, we’re neither ruling it in or out. We have changed the language,

 that’s true, but that was in response to some data which has demonstrated to us that we’re

 still broadly on the path we thought we were on. So, we’re not confident enough to say we can

 rule out further interest rate changes, but we do think we’re on the path to get ourselves back

 to inflation in target within our forecast period.
Michael Janda (ABC News)
The RBA’s latest forecasts have unemployment reaching 4.2 per cent by June and

 4.3 per cent by the end of this year. It already hit 4.1 per cent seasonally

 adjusted in January. What level does the unemployment need to reach to concern the Reserve Bank and

 have you considering interest rate cuts?
Michele Bullock
The unemployment rate does bounce around a little bit from month to month and as you know, it’s

 not the only thing we look at here. We look at a range of employment indicators, including things

 like hours work and including importantly the underutilisation rate. Now, these things are all

 ticking up as well. The judgement at the moment is the labour market is still slightly on the tight

 side and that’s on the basis that the unemployment rate is still much lower than it was

 pre-pandemic. It’s risen from its trough, but it was far too tight then. We hear from business

 liaison that business are finding it a little bit easier are to get workers but there is it still

 some tightness there, and vacancies and advertisements are still slightly elevated as well. So, there

 are signs the employment market as a whole rather than focusing just on the unemployment rate is

 coming back more into balance, but it’s maybe not quite there yet. I don’t want to put a

 figure on the unemployment rate we would like to see. I think the unemployment rate is something that

 is mechanically going to rise as the economy slows. So, if you’ll also see our forecasts, you

 will see employment continues to grow but it just doesn’t grow quite as fast as the supply of

 labour. So that’s mechanically why the unemployment rate rises. I think that we’re focusing

 on that and if we can achieve that, with a slight rise in the unemployment rate while continuing to

 keep employment growing, I think we will have achieved our goals.
Cecile Lefort (
Australian Financial Review
)
Joining a little bit on Ed’s question, analysts said that the Board has pivoted to a neutral

 bias. Do you agree?
Michele Bullock
Pivot – that word used to get used a lot in the pandemic; I haven’t heard it so much

 recently. I think what the Board is doing is as it said and it’s responding to data as the data

 come out. What the Board is saying is that there are risks on both sides of this and the risks are

 finely balanced. On the one hand on the upside, we still have inflation above target. And we know

 from overseas that it’s a bumpy ride and we also know that services inflation is still elevated

 and that’s proving difficult to get down. On the other hand, we’re conscious that

 consumption is slowing a lot, that the unemployment rate – there are signs, that as I said

 earlier, that some of the tightness in the labour market is easing. So, you have got that on the

 downside. What the Board is basically saying is that we’re uncertain, we don’t know, we

 can’t rule in or out either.
Tom Dusevic (
The Australian
)
Last week, we saw the Fair Work Commission grant a fairly hefty wage rise to aged care workers. Later

 in the year, we will see its decision in the minimum wage order. Given that’s such a key

 component of services inflation, what are your forecasts factoring in for the wage rises you’re

 expecting later in the year?
Michele Bullock
Our forecasts factor in wage rises that have been granted, not ones that are in prospect. The aged

 care piece, for example, would not be in our forecasts at the moment. But let me say right up-front

 that I don’t think anyone would begrudge aged care workers a rise. They have been historically

 underpaid for the work they do. It’s a very important job and there are shortages in those

 industries. So, I think it’s a very worthy pay rise. I don’t think personally, and I

 don’t think our forecasts – when we do put it into our forecasts – I don’t

 think it will make a measurable difference really to what we’re forecasting. We might want to

 watch to see if that are some spillovers, but I’m not expecting that it’s going to have a

 great impact.
Peter Hannam (
The Guardian
)
Just to clarify if you could, Governor, was a possible rate cut at all considered in this Board

 meeting? You did mention that you’re looking for greater confidence that inflation is coming

 down. Specifically, what would it take, if you like, to get a rate cut as part of your consideration

 if you didn’t do it today?
Michele Bullock
What we need to consider a rate cut is really to be much more confident inflation is coming back into

 the band in the future. And as you know, the central forecasts, have it not coming back into the band

 until 2025. So, if we were to see some acceleration and get some more confidence that we are

 overachieving there, then possible rate cuts might be something on the agenda. But at the moment,

 we’re not seeing that. We’re in a position where we’re cautious, we want to wait and

 see. As I said, there are risks on both sides and we need to be conscious of that.
Deb Knight (Nine Radio)
With the announcement today from the Energy Regulator that power bills are set to fall for the first

 time in two years by as much as 10 per cent on the eastern seaboard, is that going to help

 the case for cutting interest rates later in the year to help bring inflation down? Or could it have

 the opposite effect? Could we see people with more money to spend, potentially undermining your

 efforts to get on top of inflation?
Michele Bullock
I think ultimately it will assist. One of the things we have observed with inflation rising quite

 sharply, a large part has been things like energy. And that not only impacts consumers, it also

 impacts all the businesses that rely on energy and that means that puts pressure on cost bases and

 then potentially also on the prices they charge. So, I think an easing in energy prices, even if

 it’s just a stabilisation, it’s not increasing anymore, that’s a really positive for

 the inflation outlook. I think that is good news.
Chris Reason (Channel 7)
In July, we will obviously see a lot more money flow into the economy by the tax cuts from the

 Federal Government and also potentially from the May budget, we’re going to see a lot more

 handouts etc. come through to the community as well. How much does government policy actually prevent

 the RBA from being able to initiate a cut to rate hikes?
Michele Bullock
Firstly, on the Stage 3 tax cuts, they are actually factored into our forecasts. So that’s

 something that is already in there – we have already taken account of it in our settings on

 monetary policy. It’s true that monetary and fiscal policy need to work together in some sense,

 so you don’t want them working at cross-purposes. I would argue at the moment they are not

 working at cross-purposes. I think the Treasurer has said very clearly, publicly and he’s

 certainly said to me that he is very conscious they have to be careful that they don’t add to

 inflationary pressures. As we’ve talked about before, I think in this forum six weeks ago,

 ultimately what is hurting people at the moment is inflation. One response is to say let’s give

 people more money, but if it doesn’t address the inflation problem then it doesn’t address

 the underlying issue for people. So, I think basically at the moment that monetary policy and fiscal

 policy are pushing in the same direction. The only other thing I would add there is that governments

 have a difficult job. They have lots and lots of competing demands on their purse and on their

 policies. I don’t envy them their job.
Millie Muroi (
Sydney Morning Herald
)
We have had four quarters of slowing GDP growth. If GDP does turn negative, would the RBA have to

 consider a rate cut?
Michele Bullock
I guess the way I’d put it, Millie, is what we have been trying to do … we have a

 situation where aggregate demand has been above aggregate supply. The demand for goods and services

 in the economy has been above the ability of the economy to provide it and the big signal there has

 been services inflation has been one part of that. So, with demand slowing, it’s slowing and

 it’s bringing demand back more into line with where the economy can supply the goods and

 services. Ultimately that will be positive for inflation and when it is, then there are opportunities

 to consider whether or not policy can be slightly less restrictive.
David Taylor (ABC)
Governor, are you worried about the Australian economy?
Michele Bullock
I’m worried about inflation. I am watching very closely what is happening with growth in the

 economy. As I said earlier, though, I think it’s really important here to distinguish between

 levels and growth rates. As we came out of the pandemic, demand just exploded and it was well above

 the ability of the economy to supply the goods and services. So, the slowing is something that needed

 to happen so we could bring those two things back. If our forecasts come true – and I really

 hope we’re on that narrow path that Phil used to talk about – then we can slow the economy

 enough that it preserves a lot of the gains in employment and brings inflation down. And once we

 bring inflation down then, you will see in our forecast periods, what is happening then, is that real

 incomes start to grow again, consumption starts to improve again. So, if we can pull that off, then I

 think that will be great.
David Taylor (ABC)
Are you still firmly on a narrow path?
Michele Bullock
I still firmly believe we’re on the narrow path and that’s what the Board is focusing on.

 There are risks on either side. That’s why the Board is being cautious on rates at the moment.
John Rolfe (
The Daily Telegraph
)
Governor, in retrospect was the November rate increase unnecessary?
Michele Bullock
No, I don’t believe it was, John. I think it’s a bit sort of dangerous to think about

 increments of 0.25, when really what it is, there is a cumulative effect of interest rate increases

 and I think we have to think about it in those terms. Having said that, it’s also true our

 forecasts are predicated on an interest rate which is where it is now. And that’s where the

 Board thinks at the moment interest rates are best. As I said, with a caution to both risk on both

 sides. Under those circumstances we think at the moment we have got the right level.
Stella Qiu (Reuters)
We just have a simple question. Did you consider the case of a rate hike at today’s meeting?
Michele Bullock
There is never a simple question, is there? The Board basically considered what was best for this

 circumstance. Obviously, the Board considers a range of possibilities and the possibility a rate rise

 is something the Board may consider in terms of ‘well, are we at the right spot?’. I think

 where the Board came down today was, as I said, where we are now is where we need to be. But the

 Board always considers different alternatives.
Swati Pandey (Bloomberg)
You mentioned how demand is still exceeding supply in the economy and there was a previous question

 about GDP per capita recession. How much of the exceeding demand that we are seeing in the economy is

 due to that population growth, which is actually masking the real weakness in the economy? And is it

 something that the Board also discussed in today’s meeting, where on the face of it, it looks

 like the economy is doing all right, there a little bit of resilience, but if you take population

 growth out, people are going backwards?
Michele Bullock
The Board is really conscious that particularly per capita consumption is declining. We understand

 that. It’s declining because of inflation, interest rates and, to some extent, tax is part of it

 as well. Real disposable incomes are declining and that is really hurting the household sector. The

 Board is aware of that. The Board is not blind to that at all. So, as I said, if we can get inflation

 down that will go a long way to reversing these declines in real disposable income. That’s what

 is really hurting people’s incomes and that’s why they’re having to cut back on

 discretionary items, even to some extent some people are having to steel back on essentials. The

 Board is very alert to it.
Jonathan Shapiro (
Australian Financial Review
)
Governor, we know that market pricing has changed and maybe become more in line with what central

 banks are thinking in terms of maybe less rate cuts than central banks were thinking. But overall

 financial markets are quite buoyant, equity markets are at highs, speculative assets are running

 strong, credit spreads are probably near or at all-time heights. I wonder if yourself and other

 central banks are looking at this and wondering if it’s some sort of signal that financial

 conditions might be too loose? And also, one other question, if you had any perspective on Japan

 today ending their negative interest rate policy and what that might mean?
Michele Bullock
I will answer the first one. We actually have a
Financial Stability Review
coming out on

 Friday, which will talk a bit about this. It’s true that financial conditions, particularly to

 do with businesses and some of the higher risk areas, are actually easing a bit, notwithstanding

 central bank communications. So, there is a bit of that going on. I think the focus, really,

 internationally is what that might mean for financial stability and whether there are

 vulnerabilities. I commend to you Friday’s publication, which will talk a little bit about those

 issues.
Luca Ittimani (
The Guardian
)
Today’s decision assumes that labour productivity will return to the long run average, which is

 not quite what it has been doing for the last couple of years. Is the Board still expecting

 productivity will return to the long run average and if it doesn’t, will rate cuts be deferred

 accordingly?
Michele Bullock
We have talked a bit about productivity at the last press conference and I also talked about it at

 the parliamentary committee. What I would say is don’t get too caught up in the individual

 quarterly movements in productivity – it is a long run concept. Having said that, it’s

 encouraging that at least we have started to see the last couple of quarters that productivity has

 picked up. Productivity ultimately is something that is going to be based on businesses investing. We

 need it to grow the pie so we all have more income that we can share around amongst us all. So,

 it’s really important. The government has an important role to play here in terms of its work.

 The Productivity Commission has no shortage of suggestions on things like technology and education

 and so on. What can the Bank do? I wouldn’t say we can directly affect productivity but what I

 would say is that having low stable inflation, which businesses don’t have to worry about and

 it’s in the background, is much more conducive to investment and focusing on how they can

 improve their businesses than at the moment, when I’d say what they’re doing is,

 they’re worrying about costs and worrying how they get cost down in my business. For me, the

 most important thing we can do to encourage productive investment is to get inflation back down and

 let businesses get back into the business of deciding how to run their businesses best.
Rurika Imahashi (Nikkei Japanese Media)
Coincidentally today, Bank of Japan decided to raise interest rates for the first time in

 17 years and ending a negative interest rate finally. I’m curious about what is your take

 as a fellow Governor of a central bank?
Michele Bullock
I can’t possibly read the mind of what went on in the Bank of Japan. It’s true that they

 have had the opposite problem to the rest of us. They have been trying to get inflation up and we

 have been trying to get it down. My reading is they have obviously been encouraged enough by recent

 signs that inflation and wages are heading in the right direction. That allows them to come out of

 negative interest rates but I highlight they’re still zero.
Jassmyn Goh (Capital Brief)
Just wondering what you think the effect on property values might be when interest rates are cut, and

 whether high housing prices and higher household debt makes it more challenging when we go through a

 rapid rate rising cycle.
Michele Bullock
I wouldn’t like to predict housing prices, frankly. Every time we try to do that we seem to get

 it wrong. We were surprised when they started rising again, quite frankly, and I think everyone was.

 The bottom line with housing prices, though, is that it’s really about supply and demand. This

 goes for housing in general whether it’s rental accommodation or purchasing, it really comes

 down to supply and demand. And we know that governments are very focused on housing at the moment

 because at the moment we are suffering from a situation where demand for housing is higher than the

 supply of housing. There is some sense in which – and again I commend the
Financial

 Stability Review
to you on Friday where it will talk a little bit about bank lending

 standards, borrowing limits and so on – it’s true that as interest rates rise, borrowing

 ability of households declines. So, because your repayments go up, you can borrow less. It’s

 true that that effect is there. But ultimately, the bigger force in housing, I think comes down to

 supply and demand and that’s something that obviously governments can deal with in terms of

 development policies, in terms of land, well-located land, infrastructure to ensure that land has got

 good facilities around it and is well-located. These are the issues that really I think are more

 important for housing prices.
Poppy Johnston (AAP)
Analysts are suggesting you will want to wait until the Stage 3 tax cuts and the Federal Budget,

 anything in there to be worked through, before feeling fully comfortable with the inflation outlook

 and contemplating cuts. Is the plan to wait and see how these policies play out and if so, how long

 would it be reasonable to sit and watch and see what happens?
Michele Bullock
I won’t be giving forward guidance. That’s the first point. I think to your point, some of

 those things that are going to happen, they’re in our forecasts. But as I have said a number of

 times, our forecasts are inherently uncertain. As we get more data and more information, if it

 confirms our forecasts then that will be good for us and we will be able to say okay we’re on

 the right path. But if some of those things come to pass, and it doesn’t look like the data is

 moving in our direction, then we have to consider how to move. So, yes, it’s almost a truism

 that as time moves on and more data become available, and more things come to pass that we have got

 in our forecasts, then we will be more certain about whether or not we’re on the right

 trajectory. Those things are in our forecasts at the moment so if we continue and we continue on that

 trajectory, then that’s a positive.
Juliette Saly (Ausbiz TV)
In our statement you mentioned the economic concerns as well about overseas, particularly

 China’s economy. How much are you concerned about the implications of China as Australia’s

 biggest trading partner especially considering iron ore prices have fallen significantly since you

 last met?
Michele Bullock
It’s something we look at a lot because it’s really important for the national income of

 the country. Obviously, they’re our biggest trading partner; iron ore is our biggest export to

 them and the price of that obviously impacts the income of the resource sector and that’s

 important for the national income of the country. China is facing significant headwinds. They had set

 themselves a growth target next year of 5 per cent, which is the same as actually around

 5 per cent, which is the same as they set last year. It’s lower than it has been in

 the past but it’s still reasonably solid growth. The question is, I guess, whether or not they

 can meet that target, what sort of policies they will put in place to meet the target. But there are

 headwinds. One headwind obviously is the real estate sector, which traditionally has been a massive

 part of their economy. Can they – dare I use the word pivot – can they pivot to move more

 towards sort of consumption. But consumption is very soggy there at the moment as well. So, it is a

 concern. It’s something we’re watching very closely. But it is going to play into how the

 Australian economy evolves over the next little while. If it turns out to be significantly weaker,

 then that’s something we will have to figure out how that plays into our forecasts.
Michael Stutchbury (
Australian Financial Review
)
Just on your reluctance to give forward guidance, would it be right to say when you’re talking

 about the risks being finely balanced, not ruling anything in or out, would it be fair to

 characterise this that if we stay on the forecast narrow path for the economy and inflation, then the

 next move in interest rates by the RBA is likely to be a cut? That’s probably the base case

 scenario because otherwise you wouldn’t have forecasts; they must be the most likely outcome.

 But if the bumpiness you talk about keeps inflation elevated then you might have to increase the cash

 rate again and that’s probably a lesser likelihood but if things don’t go to plan

 that’s what the outcome would be?
Michele Bullock
The message I really want to get across is that, again, we’re not ruling anything in and

 we’re not ruling anything out. You’ll get sick of me saying that. The reason being, you

 have articulated it, Michael. The fact is that there are some downside risks but there are also some

 upside risks. We’re very conscious that we would love to get on the narrow path, but as we have

 said in the past, that does mean that inflation will have been outside of target for over four years.

 And if there look to be risks that that’s going to be extended, then I think we do need to be

 concerned about that. On the other hand, if a number of things conspire and we end up actually moving

 more quickly than the forecasts, then we might need to think about interest rate cuts. But at the

 moment, we’re in the position where I don’t want to say either way. It’s basically not

 ruling it in, not ruling it out.
Hans Lee (Livewire Markets)
Given the RBA has described household consumption and dwelling investment as weak. I’m curious,

 what is still holding inflation up above the
2–3
per cent target and how does that affect where the

 Bank thinks or sees neutral interest rates being at?
Michele Bullock
It comes back to the point I made earlier that growth is weak but the level is still high. It comes

 back a little bit to the point, I think Swati made, that aggregate demand, because of population

 growth, has been elevated. So, what we’re observing now is that that aggregate demand is slowing

 and coming back more into line with supply and that’s what we would expect with restrictive

 monetary policy. We think monetary policy is slightly restrictive. To your point, that means sort of

 by economic definition, if you like, it’s above a neutral rate but we think the signs are that

 it’s in slightly restricted territory. And then as we hopefully observe inflation coming down,

 that’s when we start to have conversations about what is restrictive and how do we remove the

 restrictiveness.
Michael Heath (Bloomberg News)
I’m just wondering, you have more than one element to your mandate, the other one being

 employment and I guess growth goes into that. If we were to see quite a good inflation print at the

 end of April, at what point does worries about rising unemployment, very weak growth start to take

 over from inflation? The Treasurer has already started talking about this with his budget coming up

 as well.
Michele Bullock
Look, it’s hard and I can’t give you a definite answer on that. What I can say is that it

 is part of our mandate. We do want to have employment at a sustainable level and that means a level

 that’s neither increasing inflationary pressures or decreasing inflationary pressures. Do we

 know what the level is? No, we don’t. We think it might be around sort of between 4 and

 4.5, but we don’t know where it is. So, all we can do is tread carefully and, back to the point

 I made earlier, be prepared to act if we see the risks moving in one direction or the other. If we

 see the risks, as I said I think in response to Michael’s question, we’ve got a baseline

 sort of scenario which is our forecast, and that sees inflation back in band by the end of ‘25,

 into the middle of the band by 2026. That’s still a way off and it’s quite uncertain. What

 we have to do is, we have to be cautious, we have to be prepared to watch the data, we have to be

 prepared to consider things like our business liaison and survey measures we’re getting as well;

 what is telling us where things are heading and is that changing our assessment of the risks.

 That’s what is going to drive potential changes.
Patrick Commins (
The Australian
)
I just want to change tack a little bit to the RBA’s review and the recommendations. You have

 talked before about having received reassurance from the Treasurer that there will be continuity on

 the new monetary policy board, presuming the legislation goes through. Can you give us a little

 bit more colour on what you mean by continuity? Is that if you get two of the six external members

 changed, is that continuity? Is there any more information you can give us on what you would like to

 see?
Michele Bullock
Thanks, Patrick. I guess my purpose of this press conference is really to focus on monetary policy

 and the monetary policy decision we announced today. The only point I would make, very briefly, is

 that continuity for me means that some continuity with respect to both Boards. I have no particular

 firm views on numbers. But that’s what it means to me.
John Kehoe (
Australian Financial Review
)
Just wondering, markets have one or two rate cuts priced in by the end of the year – do you

 think that’s a reasonable assumption?
Michele Bullock
Thanks, John. I’m not going to opine on whether or not markets have got it right. I know you

 will have all noticed that in our forecasts one of our assumptions is the market path for interest

 rates. So our central forecasts are conditioned on a market path, which sees some interest rate

 decreases later in the year. I wouldn’t like to opine on whether or not the markets have got it

 right, but I only would observe that the markets move around a lot. We have seen that overseas, as

 well. They jump in relation to various bits of news. They jump in relation to various bits of

 commentary. I suspect they will be jumping as I’m speaking today. So, I wouldn’t like to,

 as I say, suggest they’re inaccurate in any way but just to observe that market path is in fact

 in our forecasts.
Adrian Lowe (
The West Australian
)
The comment in the statement by the Board that inflation expectations remaining reasonably well

 anchored. I just wonder what your red flags or possible concerns are for inflation expectations as we

 do tread this difficult path ahead.
Michele Bullock
Number of things, I suppose. It’s a bit difficult to measure inflation expectations, Adrian, but

 we look at a number of things. We look at market-based measures. The market-based measures –

 these are the people putting money where their mouth is, they are betting on it – and the

 expectations there are that inflation is anchored around about 2½ per cent. So, we have

 other measures of inflation expectations, which more directly come from, sort of consumers and unions

 and also wage demands are to some extent a little bit of a gauge of what people are expecting

 inflation to do. All of those things suggest to us that, as expected, when inflation shot up quite a

 lot in 2023, that short-term inflation expectations also increased quite a lot. But we are observing

 that these are coming down, so people understood it was a temporary thing. It’s important,

 though, that they don’t come down and stick at around 3, 3.5 per cent. We want to see

 them continue to come down to around about
2–3
per cent,

 2.5 per cent. That would be ideal. What we’re observing so far is that there

 doesn’t seem to be any indication that they are de-anchoring at a higher level but we need to

 keep a very close eye on it.
Jack Quail (NCA Newswire)
We have seen in some recent data flows, particularly around retail sales and also labour force data

 has been thrown off because of issues with seasonal adjustment. I wonder if there is anything you are

 learning from the business liaison or other surveys, I guess, that is not reflected in the data you

 are receiving?
Michele Bullock
Only that it’s sort of reinforcing what we’re seeing, that things are slowing. As I said

 earlier, one of the things we used to hear from businesses quite a lot when things were quite tight

 was that they couldn’t find labour, they couldn’t find people to work. So, we’re

 seeing that ease off a bit. We’re also hearing from businesses that demand is easing in some

 discretionary sectors. We’re hearing that as well. That’s all consistent with what

 we’re seeing in the data, I think. We’re not seeing any red flags that tell us that

 we’re being led astray by that. So, I think that’s all consistent. But it is important to

 keep … our business liaison program, it is a very important part of our focus. It’s

 important for us to get a bit of a flavour for what is going on in the real world. I think we will

 continue to take notice of that. And I would say that so far – it’s a long history now,

 it’s about 21 years – and the business liaison program and the way it’s been set

 up, it has generally historically given us a pretty good steer as to what is going on in the

 economy. So, I think at the moment, it’s reinforcing what we’re seeing in the hard data.
