BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Fireside Chat at the Australia’s Economic Outlook
DATE: 07/06/2024
SPEAKER: Andrew Hauser
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2024/sp-dg-2024-06-07.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Fireside Chat at the Australia’s Economic Outlook
Andrew Hauser
Deputy Governor
Australia’s Economic Outlook
Sydney
–
7 June 2024
Audio
18.3MB
Watch video: Fireside Chat by Andrew Hauser, Deputy Governor, at the Australia’s Economic Outlook, Sydney
Transcript
Ross Greenwood (Sky News)
Andrew Hauser, many thanks for your time. The Prime Minister earlier said that he wouldn’t tell

 the Reserve Bank how to conduct monetary policy. Do you care to tell the Prime Minister and the

 government how they should conduct fiscal policy?
Andrew Hauser
I had a meeting with Ross before this interview and he said he wasn’t one for a

 ‘gotcha’ question.
Ross Greenwood
No, I wasn’t, no.
Andrew Hauser
And that’s not a ‘gotcha’ question.
Ross Greenwood
No, it’s not a ‘gotcha’ question at all.
Andrew Hauser
Well, I’ll tell you something, actually, about commentary on fiscal policy. I was brought up in

 a culture where it really wasn’t for central banks to provide a running commentary on the

 decisions that democratically elected government’s take. Those are difficult decisions;

 they’re ones that they’re accountable to their electorate for. And outside of financial

 crisis – and unfortunately we had to deal with one in the UK quite recently – I think

 it’s for democratically elected governments to make fiscal decisions, and it’s for central

 banks to do the job that they were given to do by the public, which is to bring inflation down to the

 target level and to keep it there.
Ross Greenwood
So you might have noticed overnight that the European Central Bank cut interest rates by a quarter of

 one per cent?
Andrew Hauser
Did they?
Ross Greenwood
Apparently they did. That’s what I heard. And you might have also heard that the Bank of Canada

 cut rates by quarter of one per cent the previous night. Now, given the fact that the Reserve

 Bank is not ruling anything in or out, and the next rate move may be up or down, is Australia out of

 sequence, as an economy, as its own monetary policy, with other economies around the world?
Andrew Hauser
I don’t think so. Let’s take those cases in turn because they’re interesting. In

 Canada, the case is fairly straightforward. Their interest rates were higher than ours, their

 inflation rate is lower than ours, and their unemployment rate has picked up quite a bit more

 substantially than ours. I think if you took those data out of Canada and you plug them into the

 Australian context, you might well see a different policy stance. Canada is in a different place in

 terms of the economic development, and they made the decisions that are right for them.
In Europe, which obviously I’ve been a bit closer to in recent years, there has been

 a very persistent lack of growth. Now, you might say Australia has lacked growth in the most recent

 period but, actually, if you compare the aggregate growth rate in Australia to the aggregate growth rate

 in continental Europe, Australia actually, as we’ve been hearing this afternoon, I guess, has had a

 pretty positive story to tell relative to continental Europe. You would much rather, I think, be living

 in Australia than you would in some parts of continental Europe at the moment. It’s interesting,

 though, actually, if you look at the European decision and if you looked at the detail – and I know

 you will have done – they actually revised up their inflation forecast for the medium term while

 they cut interest rates. That’s probably a bit of a communication challenge for them. And when I

 talk, as I do, to some of the people on the ECB Board, they’re not all sure where rates are going

 next. So they’ve been keen, I think, to start the rate cutting cycle to show that they’re

 independent of the US. But whether that goes a lot further and where it goes from here, I’m not so

 sure. And maybe to pre-empt your next question – but I shouldn’t do that, but I will, Ross

 – we all have the same fundamental challenge, which is that inflation has been sticky on the way

 down. In particular, services prices inflation – and I’m sure we’ll talk about this in

 the context of Australia – Canada and Europe, and many other countries, the UK, obviously where

 I’ve just come from, have the same challenge. Your colleague earlier said it was a tough time for

 central bankers. I don’t think people should feel too sorry for central bankers. We’re well

 paid, we have an interesting and important job to do. The people that are challenged and struggling are

 the people who are finding it difficult to make ends meet.
Ross Greenwood
Who are affected by your decisions.
Andrew Hauser
And who are affected by our decisions, but who are most importantly, Ross, affected by high

 inflation.
Ross Greenwood
Okay. So can I go back one step? The Bank of Canada, and also Christine Lagarde last night, made the

 observation that while in response to inflation, interest rates were raised very rapidly, you could

 not make the same presumption for rates coming down in the face of the now declining inflation. Do

 you think that is a reasonable prognosis?
Andrew Hauser
Sorry, for Europe or for?
Ross Greenwood
For Europe, for Canada, or for nations around the western world with what you describe as this sticky

 inflation?
Andrew Hauser
Well, I think you’re trying to do … your colleague was really going for it at the

 Prime Minister earlier – this is a mild version of that.
Ross Greenwood
But no, the reason I’m asking you this is, you know that interest rates are like buses coming

 past. You wait for a while and then not one, but two or three come past at the same time. That’s

 generally the way it is with interest rates. So you generally, when rates start to move either up or

 down, it’s a part of a cycle. Now, the question is once they begin to come down, it’s

 barely likely to be just one. A central bank has got to be convinced that there’s a reason to

 continue to move those rates down.
Andrew Hauser
Well, look, and this is where the uncertainty thing, I think, comes in, because if you think about

 where the market thought the Federal Reserve was going to be at the beginning of this year –

 seven rate cuts during the course of this year. What is it, one or two at most? And some people are

 even talking about a rate rise. So I’d be careful actually putting too much weight on these very

 knowledgeable forecasts at any moment in time. What we have to do is set interest rates to bring

 inflation down to the target. I’m sorry, we were having a conversation earlier with some of your

 colleagues from Amazon and Uber, and the big job there, of course, is to get the big new announcement

 out of the place. Success for a central banker is to be boring but predictable in these

 conversations, and I’m going to be boring and predictable about that fact – that our

 target is not a particular level of interest rates, it’s a particular level of inflation.
Ross Greenwood
Is it dangerous for a central banker to make predictions about interest rates and where they’ll

 be in the future?
Andrew Hauser
Yes.
Ross Greenwood
Is that because communication today is expected to be better by central bank Governors and by their

 staff?
Andrew Hauser
I really do believe, and I know this is a difficult thing to sell, that the most important

 communication we can give to, let’s be honest, the Australian people, who are the people who we

 all care about here, is that we can and will get inflation back to a stable and low level so that

 – and the Governor talked about this, I think, in her first press conference – inflation

 no longer needs to be part of their problem set.
There are a lot of challenges in running a business. I was just up in Townsville in North

 Queensland only yesterday hearing about some of the challenges up there, and I was in Perth two weeks ago

 to try and learn about this enormous and very different economy to the one I’m used to. And, you

 know, you need to recruit people, you need to invest, you need to be innovating, you need to be thinking

 about expansions or contractions. You don’t really want to be worrying about inflation. Inflation is

 the thing that our job is to take off the table. The same is true if you’re a household. You’ve

 got lots of challenges in educating your children, bringing your family up, providing for them. Having

 something called inflation that you can’t control and gets into every decision is incredibly toxic.
I actually think central banks, when inflation picked up a couple of years ago, forgot

 this for a little period of time. They forgot just how crucial inflation has played as a role in history.

 I mean, without wishing to be hyperbolic, it’s caused wars, it’s caused genuine breakdown in

 society, because it is the most unfair form of economic development that I think you can really think of

 as developing. If you’re on low incomes, if you’re on fixed incomes, if you’re struggling

 to make ends meet, inflation is a toxic thing you can’t do anything about. So it’s that, that I

 think we need to give people reassurance about, not that their interest rate will be at X, Y or Z.
Ross Greenwood
Okay. So bring it back to Australia. Here the monetary policy, the interest rate increases, were not

 as aggressive as other parts of the world as you’ve already observed. And now we’ve had the

 message that Australia will bear a higher rate of inflation over a longer period in order to try and

 maintain employment, because of the dual mandate now of the Reserve Bank to look after inflation and

 jobs. Now, those two things can run contrary to each other from time to time and maybe are now. So

 the question is: the glide path down for inflation, is that something that’s really been tried

 by many central banks before?
Andrew Hauser
Well, it’s interesting because when you think about where, for example, the Bank of England,

 which I know more about, thought inflation would get to when inflation first picked up, of course

 they thought it would rise very sharply and then fall very sharply. So ex-ante, as it were, ahead of

 the time, the central bank was pretty clear that that would be a blip. I think it was called

 transitory, project transitory, or some such …
Ross Greenwood
There were similar messages here as well.
Andrew Hauser
… online called about that. Clearly, that proved to be wrong, and not just in the UK but, as you

 say, here and elsewhere. And we’ve all had to live with the fact that inflation has been much

 stickier, not just in the last few months, but in the last few years. As your colleagues said at the

 beginning, we are living with inflation above target for years, not for months. The thing that

 central banks and all of us have to be particularly worried about in that context is clearly that

 people start to think: ‘Well, hang on, maybe these guys don’t mean it when they say they

 are going to target 2, 3, 2½ per cent, in our case, inflation; maybe they’re secretly

 targeting 3 or 4 or 5’ or ‘they’re not very competent and they’re not

 going to do it’. And at that point when expectations start to rise, if they do long term, they

 get built into wages, they get built into prices, and that becomes a very, very difficult situation.
Ross Greenwood
Then to get rid of it from there, what does the central bank have to do?
Andrew Hauser
Just to be clear, we’re not in that situation in Australia at the moment. We monitor inflation

 expectations and measures very closely, so do you, and so far they have been well anchored. So in

 terms of the strategy you describe, we have so far managed to get to the point where inflation

 expectations are well anchored despite the fact, as you say, we have very consciously been seeking to

 bring inflation back at a gradual rate to protect those employment gains. And without wishing to

 sound like a politician, and I have a little list of things that Australia does better than the UK,

 because I’m expecting this question, it’s not that little, actually, anymore. It has

 economic things on it, it has political stability as well. Three Prime Ministers in the last five

 years? Well, how about five.
Ross Greenwood
And none of them here yet have been likened to a lettuce. Let’s be honest about that, shall we?
Andrew Hauser
But on your question, we are trying something slightly different here, to some other countries …
Ross Greenwood
Okay. I just want to get to this point: so you believe what is being tried here in Australia right

 now is something different to what is conventional monetary policy theory by central banks in other

 parts of the world?
Andrew Hauser
Every country has its own objectives – to use the technical term, objective function or

 objective. So in the United Kingdom, our primary goal is – was/our/we/their, I’ll say

 ‘their’ – their primary goal is to bring inflation back to target and, subject to

 that, to support the government’s other goals for growth and for employment. So it’s a

 first priority, second priority issue. In Australia, it is a more balanced objective. That is

 obviously quite similar to the objective in the United States. So I don’t want to say I think

 that Australia is on its own. I think every central bank is seeking to bring inflation down in a way

 that minimises the losses to employment and to output. We have a particular weight on that strategy

 and, to be honest, so far that strategy has worked. It is a narrow path, but it has worked.
Ross Greenwood
Because I want to go to this narrow path, because traditional monetary policy from central banks

 would be go hard with interest rate rises, you can crunch your economy potentially into recession,

 unemployment rises, and eventually then the inflation comes out, you can cut interest rates.
Andrew Hauser
Well, I disagree with that, Ross. I don’t think that is … well, you may say

 ‘traditional’. Maybe that was true in the Volcker era, for example, in the US, but I think

 we’ve learnt since then. And most, if not all, central bank mandates include the idea that if

 you do the kind of thing you describe and really go macho on growth, you are going to bring inflation

 down, for sure, but you are going to keep bringing inflation down to zero, to negative. And we know

 that, actually, we talked about inflation being costly – there’s one thing more costly

 than inflation, and that’s sharp deflation. So your kind of strategy, if I may, the hypothetical

 strategy you describe, is not a sensible strategy for any central bank to do because you will bring

 inflation to target and then you’ll keep going. And I think that scenario, and there are other

 scenarios, and I see Warren Hogan is here and he has a particular view about rates, which I’m

 sure we could debate – he offered to come up here instead of me, actually.
Ross Greenwood
Yes, that’s right. He did.
Andrew Hauser
You didn’t take that offer. You can have different views about how aggressively you want to

 close the so-called output gap.
Ross Greenwood
So is what Australia is doing right now, the central bank, is it so different?
Andrew Hauser
No.
Ross Greenwood
You mentioned it was different, though. You mentioned it was on a different path?
Andrew Hauser
Well, I think, look, let me put it this way. The employment gains in Australia have been impressive;

 2.7 million jobs created in the last decade. That compares to 2.5 in the UK, an economy

 three times as large. It is probably fair to say that there is some secret sauce here that it is

 worth being particularly protective of. So I would say to that extent, from growth as well, the

 periods of negative growth in Australia have been one, two, three, in the UK I think 12 in the

 past 20 years, quarters of negative growth. Those are things worth celebrating, they are things

 worth protecting. But no, this is not some sort of radical strategy, off the mainstream, off the

 grid. This is core central banking, but respected well. So I will end on this point: the objective

 that the Australian people have given us, the Australian Parliament, the Government, the Treasurer,

 that is crucial because central banks are unelected officials. Hopefully we do our job reasonably

 well at least some of the time, at least technically we know what we’re doing, we’re good

 economists, but we only act under the egis of the public. If the public choose to give us that task,

 we must take it seriously. If they take it away, we must take it seriously as well. So I do think it

 is terrifically important. Setting your own goals and saying ‘we’re going to do this,

 we’re going to crush the economy’, to use your example or whatever, there’s no

 legitimacy there. And ultimately, central banks will not continue in their role if they set their own

 goals. Those goals are for politicians to set on behalf of the country. Here we have a clear goal

 which is inflation and to protect those employment gains.
Ross Greenwood
Would the job of the Reserve Bank in Australia be easier right now if productivity was going forwards

 and not backwards?
Andrew Hauser
Well, there you go. There’s another one, isn’t it? That’s a hidden ‘gotcha’

 question.
Ross Greenwood
No, there’s no hidden ‘gotcha’ questions. It’s just a ‘gotcha’

 question.
Andrew Hauser
Yeah, it is. Relatively weak productivity growth is true across the western world.
Ross Greenwood
Yes.
Andrew Hauser
Even in the United States, which is an interesting counter example at the moment. Actually,

 productivity growth has only been strong for a quarter or two. If you look at the average growth rate

 over the most recent few years, it’s materially below what was –
Ross Greenwood
But wasn’t all this technology supposed to improve our productivity, make us wonderfully

 more … our output to be significant per person? What happened there?
Andrew Hauser
You mean AI or?
Ross Greenwood
All of that. It’s all coming. Everything that we’ve had so far.
Andrew Hauser
It’s interesting. There’s a fascinating paper that looks at when did the productivity

 growth really kick in when we switched from horsepower to internal combustion engines. I’m going

 back a little bit.
Ross Greenwood
A little bit.
Andrew Hauser
A little bit. And the truth is that what happened, first of all, was that people took engines and

 they just replaced the horses and factories. So when the horse used to go around and pull a bar, they

 put an engine in pulling around a bar. Turns out it’s not the best way to use an engine, and it

 actually took a generation to learn how to use that new technology effectively and get it into the

 productivity data. My personal view is that that was the same for these modern technologies as well,

 the diffusion takes longer than you think when you really have to integrate it into businesses. And

 so I think, look, that is a big challenge, and maybe the US has started to see that pick up, or maybe

 they just got lucky.
I think also we’ve had some really interesting interactions with immigration, which

 is obviously not just true in Australia, it’s true in the US, in the UK, in continental Europe. And

 we had some interesting questions about the hangover from COVID, and working from home, and we could go

 on for hours about those various trends, couldn’t we? It’s true, isn’t it, that for

 economies to be on a long-term sustainable trend, we need productivity to improve. And it’s true,

 too, that if that’s part of the mix, it might help at the margin for wage growth to be higher

 without posing inflationary challenges. But those aren’t things, I think, that the central bank can

 directly influence. They’re things we need to understand. They are things we need to model,

 they’re things we need to work with government on to analyse. But productivity growth is for the

 economy and for governments to drive rather than the central bank.
Ross Greenwood
Of course. My final question really to you is – and this would have been almost the first

 question normally, take the mickey out of the Englishman who comes to Australia, and how wonderful is

 it, and how about the sport and all that type of thing .. No, that wasn’t it. I was just simply

 going to ask you –
Andrew Hauser
Didn’t you just do that?
Ross Greenwood
No, I didn’t. I was going to ask you about just one thing. Being here now in Australia, seeing

 the economy as it is versus the UK, just the settings there, where is it better to live right now, in

 terms of a citizen, in terms of a business? You’ve been in both, you’ve spoken to a lot of

 people in both places. And just why?
Andrew Hauser
Unfortunately, I think Sky runs in the UK, doesn’t it, so I’m probably in trouble here.

 I’m in the right place. The UK economy is in a very challenging position at the moment. I know

 that there has been a debate here about the debt stark, and the sustainability of the fiscal

 position. Go and look at the UK. Go and look at the US, for that matter, as well. There has been

 little or no growth in the UK since COVID. When you do the charts of the level of growth and the

 recovery post-COVID, and the big V, the UK is just tickling along at the top level it got to before

 COVID. Australia has surged forward on that. In terms of employment growth, as I say, jobs created

 here have been significantly larger. I’ve made the right trade. I’m only here for five

 years but I’m hugely glad to be here. And I think some of the positive stories about the medium

 term – I like your arrows going up. I’m not quite sure, where are they going? Which part

 of the world are they going?
Ross Greenwood
It just keeps going. That’s it.
Andrew Hauser
It’s like China, isn’t it?
Ross Greenwood
It’s like Elon Musk. Don’t worry, it just keeps going up.
Andrew Hauser
You might want to get the graphic designers to look at that. The opportunity here was one of the many

 things that attracted me to the job and as I say, we haven’t talked much about what I learned

 when I was out and about in the last few weeks, but it’s been really eye-opening. Some of those

 stories about the growth future of Australia, I don’t know if they will come about, but

 they’re exciting and interesting, and I’m glad to be here to learn about them.
Ross Greenwood
Well, a part of the new mandate for the Reserve Bank is that it communicate better with the public

 and with business. And in Andrew Hauser, I think you’ve just experienced that new era of

 communication at our central bank. Andrew Hauser, many thanks for your time.
