BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Notes for a Talk to CEDA/Promina Economic and Political Overview – Sydney
DATE: 05/02/2025
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2005/sp-ag-250205.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Notes for a Talk to CEDA/Promina Economic and Political Overview
Malcolm Edey
Assistant Governor (Economic)
Notes for a Talk to CEDA/Promina Economic and Political Overview
Sydney
–
25 February 2005
Good morning and thank you to CEDA for the invitation to speak today.
The last two weeks has been a period when there's been a good deal of Reserve Bank

 commentary made available to the public – first in our quarterly
Statement on Monetary Policy
, and then in the Governor's parliamentary

 testimony last week. That material is still very fresh and it's not my intention

 to add anything new to it today. What I plan to do instead is to make some

 observations that draw on the statements already made. In doing that, I'll

 start with a brief overview of the international scene, and then move on to

 the situation in Australia.
My first observation is that the international environment in which Australia finds

 itself at the moment is quite a favourable one (Graph 1). Growth of the

 world economy last year was 4.9 per cent, which is around the strongest figure

 for the last 30 years. Most expectations at this stage are that 2005 will

 be another strong year. For example, the latest Consensus forecasts, taken

 as at February, imply global growth this year of 4¼ per cent. If that

 forecast is realised, it would be the third successive year of above average

 growth, albeit a bit slower than last year's result.
Graph 1
Read description
I won't have time to go into the global situation country by country, but it's worth

 taking a separate look at the US business cycle, which is still such a big

 influence on the world economy as a whole (Graph 2). The US is now in

 its fourth year of expansion after the recession at the start of the decade.

 The recovery initially got off to a fairly slow start. But the early concerns

 about lack of recovery in the business sector, and in employment, have now

 faded. Last year the US economy grew by just under 4 per cent, with the latest

 indicators generally pointing to further momentum coming into the early part

 of this year. So overall, the US recovery is looking well entrenched.
Graph 2
Read description
The other important driver of global growth at the moment is China (Graph 3).

 In the last couple of years the Chinese economy has been growing at rates not

 much below 10 per cent, and directly accounting for about a quarter of the

 overall growth in the world economy and in global trade. The main concern of

 the Chinese authorities last year was that the economy was overheating, and

 they have taken various measures since late 2003 to try to rein this in through

 credit controls and the like. These now seem to be having some effect, although

 any slowing to date seems quite mild.
Graph 3
Read description
The recent performance and outlook in other parts of the world is more mixed (Table 1).
Recent GDP outcomes for the euro area and Japan have been disappointing;
But growth in most of the smaller east Asian economies remains quite strong, even

 if it has slowed a bit since last year.
Table 1: World GDP Growth
This table shows GDP growth in 2004 and the Consensus forecast for growth in 2005 for the US, euro area, Japan, China, other east Asia and World.
2004
2005 Consensus Forecast
United States
4.4
3.5
Euro Area
2.0
1.7
Japan
2.6
1.1
China
9.5
8.4
Other east Asia
5.8
4.4
World
4.9
4.3
Obviously all these forecasts are going to be subject to revision as the year progresses.

 But overall, as I indicated at the outset, growth of the global economy at

 this stage is looking quite strong. One important consequence of this has been

 upward pressure on commodity prices. Internationally, the most widely publicised

 aspect of that was the run-up in oil prices, which peaked in October last year.

 More directly relevant to Australia has been the sharp rise in a range of other

 resource prices. World prices of Australia's base metals exports are now up

 by more than 40 per cent over the past two years. For iron ore and coal, substantial

 increases in contract prices are set to take effect this year, after the sharp

 rises already negotiated in 2004.
A useful summary statistic for these effects is the movement in Australia's terms

 of trade (the ratio of export to import prices, Graph 4). Essentially

 this summarises the purchasing power generated by a given volume of exports.

 This ratio has already increased by 11 per cent over the past year. Some rough

 figuring suggests that the price increases for coal and iron ore over coming

 months will boost our overall index of commodity prices by over 20 per cent,

 and our terms of trade by a further 10 per cent. This represents a significant

 stimulus to national income and spending.
Graph 4
Read description
So the international background is one of above-average economic growth, and rising

 prices of the products that Australia exports.
Given this background, how has Australia been performing? The last national accounts

 showed that output growth slowed during 2004 from the fast pace of the previous

 year (Graph 5). Growth was 3 per cent in the year to the September quarter,

 and the numbers out next week for the December quarter are likely to show annual

 growth to have slowed further. Domestic demand has also slowed down, but is

 still growing quite a bit faster than output.
Graph 5
Read description
In its recent statements, the Bank has made two observations about this recent performance.

 The first is that the slowing in growth seems at odds with general perceptions

 that the economy is growing strongly. Measures of business and consumer sentiment,

 for example, are at levels that would normally be associated with well-above-average

 growth. In the NAB survey of the non-farm business sector, businesses reported

 that conditions at the end of last year were close to their best since the

 survey began in 1989 (Graph 6). They did show a drop in January, but that

 seems to have been mainly seasonal. Other indicators, like the growth of business

 borrowing, profits and the rising share market, also bear out that the business

 sector in aggregate is enjoying strong conditions.
Graph 6
Read description
For the household sector, the Westpac-Melbourne Institute survey similarly reports

 sentiment at close to record levels (Graph 7). In fact this strengthened

 towards the end of last year and into the early part of 2005.
Graph 7
Read description
Another area of notably strong economic data has been the labour market (Graph 8).

 In the year to January, employment grew by 3.2 per cent, which is well above

 the trend growth in the labour force. Unemployment fell to 5.1 per cent, its

 lowest level since the 1970s. Other indicators such as job vacancies and hiring

 intentions are also pointing to strong labour demand.
Graph 8
Read description
Obviously, it will never be the case that all economic data point in the same direction

 at a given time. One weaker indicator attracting comment recently has been

 retail sales, though it seems likely that this overstates any weakness in overall

 consumption spending. But overall, the sense we get from the general run of

 economic data is that confidence is high, and that demand conditions are providing

 plenty of encouragement to growth.
The second main observation that the Bank has made in its recent statements concerns

 the balance of supply and demand in the economy. Taking the GDP figures at

 face value, what they indicate is that growth of output slowed down even though

 domestic demand over recent years has been running at a pace well above its

 longer-run trend. So during that period we have had a combination of strong

 domestic demand and better-than-average growth in the world economy, as well

 as a boost to national income from rising commodity prices. This combination

 of circumstances makes it hard to argue that the overall demand conditions

 facing the Australian economy have been deficient. Rather, what the Bank has

 argued is that it's becoming more likely growth is being constrained on the

 supply side.
The clearest indication of emerging pressures on supply capacity has been in the

 disappointing performance of exports over the past year or two (Graph 9).

 Despite the more favourable international situation, total exports as at the

 September quarter were not much changed from their level of four years ago.

 The weakness was spread across all the main categories of exports. However,

 some of the weakest results were in resource exports, which in late 2004 were

 actually below the level reached in 2000. This is a series that in the 1990s

 grew at an average rate of more than 6 per cent.
Graph 9
Read description
The performance of resource exports is something that has gained a lot of attention

 recently, and we devoted a special chapter to it in our recent quarterly statement.

 Our assessment was that the reason for the lack of volume growth to date is

 a combination of constraints, in extraction capacity and in transport infrastructure.

 The situation is quite a complex one, but the good news is that there are some

 significant capacity expansions now underway. So the prospects are that resource

 exports should start to pick up soon, even though some of the capacity issues

 might still take a while to be resolved.
At a more general level, the proposition that supply considerations are becoming

 more important should not strike people as all that surprising. The economy

 is now in its 14
th
year of expansion, and during that time substantial surplus capacity

 has been absorbed. The NAB survey, for example, reported that businesses' capacity

 utilisation at the end of last year was as high as at any time over the 15

 years of the survey (although again, there was a fall in January which appears

 to have been mainly seasonal). It's also clear the economy has been eating

 into surplus labour capacity, with unemployment down from a peak of almost

 11 per cent to just over 5 per cent now. Reports of labour shortages are becoming

 widespread. This point is picked up in some of the business surveys which report

 the difficulty of finding suitable labour now is as high as it's been in the

 last two decades (Graph 10). The surveys also provide evidence that, for

 many businesses, shortages of labour have become a bigger constraint than traditional

 concerns about demand and sales.
Graph 10
Read description
Before I sum up, I should reiterate that my comments today are not meant to convey

 anything different from the statements already made by the Bank in the last

 couple of weeks.
To summarise the main points. The world economic situation to date has been a favourable

 one for Australia. Current expectations for the world economy are for a third

 year of above-average growth. In Australia, the evidence is that there has

 been no shortage of demand over recent years, and that businesses are becoming

 more concerned about constraints on supply capacity. With a favourable world

 environment, rising commodity prices, and high levels of confidence domestically,

 the prospects are that demand conditions will continue to encourage growth

 in the period ahead.
Thank you very much, and I wish you every success in the coming year.
