BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Why Productivity Matters
DATE: 27/02/2025
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2025/sp-so-2025-02-27.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Why Productivity Matters
Michael Plumb
[
*
]
Head of Economic Analysis Department
Australian Business Economists Annual Forecasting Conference
Sydney
–
27 February 2025
Audio
29.6MB
Q&A Transcript
Watch video: Why Productivity matters
Introduction
Thank you for the opportunity to speak here today at the Australian Business Economists’ Annual

 Forecasting Conference. There has been lots of discussion about productivity in recent years. In some

 economies this discussion has been about subdued growth in overall productivity, including in Australia

 since just before the pandemic. There has also been discussion about the outlook for productivity. For

 example, the extent to which artificial intelligence, quantum computing and other technologies will

 support future productivity growth. These are important issues that I expect will come up in discussions

 today.
In my remarks I’m going to focus on a different question: why does productivity matter? At the

 central bank we’re not experts in how to improve productivity. But trends in productivity are very

 important for the macroeconomy. In the context of the Australian economy, I will discuss how stronger

 productivity growth can support growth in aggregate supply, incomes and aggregate demand. I will then

 spend some time discussing recent productivity outcomes in Australia and how we’ve been thinking

 about those in our assessment of economic conditions.
But first, what is productivity? When we talk about productivity, we’re talking about how much output

 we get relative to what we put in. At an individual level, I increase my own productivity by making a

 shopping list before I buy groceries, so I don’t forget anything and avoid multiple trips to the

 supermarket. At the firm level, productivity might be improved by implementing customer relationship

 management software to streamline communication with clients and automate routine tasks. At the

 economy-wide level – which is what matters for the central bank and our dual mandate of full

 employment and low and stable inflation – productivity reflects a multitude of decisions like

 these. Ultimately it’s about how efficiently capital and labour are employed across the economy to

 produce goods and services.
How do we measure productivity? Economists typically focus on two measures: labour productivity, which

 measures how much output is produced for every hour worked; and multifactor productivity (MFP), which

 reflects how efficiently all inputs to production – such as labour, capital, energy and raw

 materials – are combined to produce output.
In a simple production function framework where a firm produces output using two inputs – labour and

 capital – labour productivity depends on two things. The first is how much capital each person has

 to work with. Providing workers with more or better capital – like machines or faster computers

 – can increase the amount of output each worker produces. This is referred to as ‘capital

 deepening’. The second is MFP. Improving MFP involves finding new ways to combine labour and capital

 to produce more output. For example, by reorganising a production line or using GPS technology to

 precisely guide machinery for planting, fertilising and harvesting. In this respect, labour productivity

 is not just about labour efficiency; it depends on firms’ decisions about how much capital to employ

 and how efficiently labour and capital work together to produce output.
In thinking about the relationship between productivity and aggregate supply, incomes and demand, I will

 focus mainly on labour productivity. This is because labour productivity most closely aligns with

 measures of economic living standards. It’s also easier to measure than MFP.
As you might sense, productivity is not about working harder, but working smarter. Many of the biggest

 productivity improvements have come from things that have made our lives easier, like computers, robots,

 the internet and smartphones – though personally I’m still questioning whether smartphones are

 productivity enhancing or a productivity sapping distraction.
Economists talk about productivity a lot. So I’ll now turn to the question of why productivity

 matters.
Productivity and supply
If productivity increases, the economy can produce more goods and services from all the available economic

 inputs. As such, productivity is a key driver of growth in the supply capacity of the economy, or

 potential output.
Productivity in Australia has been volatile in recent years but, looking through the volatility, is around

 the same level as in the few years before the pandemic. Productivity growth has also been consistently

 below the RBA’s projections for some time now (Graph 1). This has generated internal

 discussions about what trend labour productivity growth might look like in the period ahead, and what

 that means for estimates of potential output growth over the forecast period. The current assumption is

 that annual labour productivity growth will pick up to around one per cent in the medium term, which

 is close to its longer run average. This could be consistent with, for example, the rapid adoption of

 technology across many industries leading to higher productivity outcomes. However, the projected pick-up

 in productivity growth has not materialised in recent years and staff are currently assessing whether

 weak productivity outcomes are likely to persist.
Graph 1
Weak productivity growth in recent years has contributed to slower growth in the supply capacity, or

 potential output, of the economy than otherwise. Graph 2 shows one of our estimates of potential

 output, which is based on actual productivity outcomes observed in the data. The graph also shows a

 counterfactual path where productivity growth in recent years was higher, at its average rate in the two

 decades prior to the pandemic. This suggests that the size of the economy is a lot smaller than it would

 have been, had productivity growth been more like in the past (all else equal).
It’s important to keep in mind that, in this counterfactual world where supply capacity was much

 higher, incomes and demand would also have been higher too. Let me turn to that now.
Graph 2
Productivity, incomes and wages
While productivity growth contributes to growth in the supply capacity of the economy, it also contributes

 to growth in incomes and demand.
At times, labour productivity (output per hour worked) and real income per hour track one another closely

 (Graph 3). Looking through the volatility, both are currently around similar levels as in the period

 prior to the pandemic.
Graph 3
Other factors besides productivity can affect growth in incomes per hour. For example, higher prices for

 Australian exports can generate higher incomes domestically. So the terms of trade – the prices we

 receive for our exports relative to the prices we pay for our imports – can also be an important

 driver of incomes in the domestic economy. We can see this in the decade from the early 2000s: despite

 the slowing in productivity growth, real incomes per hour continued to increase, partly owing to

 substantial increases in the prices received for Australian exports like iron ore and coal. The surge in

 demand for our exports, particularly from China, supported profits in the mining industry and related

 parts of the Australian economy, as well as demand for labour and wages growth.
Over the longer run, labour productivity and real wages – as measured by average earnings from the

 national accounts – also tend to move together (Graph 4).
[1]
Over the inflation targeting

 period, labour productivity has grown at an average annual rate of 1.1 per cent and real labour

 earnings have grown at 0.9 per cent.
[2]
So, higher productivity not only benefits firms, it

 also benefits workers by increasing their purchasing power. The Productivity Commission has previously

 pointed to the productivity of bakers as a reason we can consume more bread or spend that extra money

 elsewhere – in 1901 it took 18 minutes of the average worker’s time to afford a loaf of

 bread, while today it’s just 4 minutes.
[3]
There must be a joke in there somewhere about how we

 spend our dough.
In the short run, however, growth in real wages and labour productivity can and do diverge as the economy

 adjusts to economic shocks. For example, and as noted previously, increases in the prices received for

 Australian exports can have an impact on domestic profits and wages (and without an increase in labour

 productivity). Ultimately, however, it is very hard for an economy to support real wages growth in the

 longer run without productivity growth.
Graph 4
Productivity and consumption
Productivity growth also tends to support consumption growth. When productivity and incomes are growing

 more strongly, people are able to spend more and consumption grows more quickly. Weak growth in

 consumption per capita over recent years has coincided with weak growth in productivity, real incomes and

 real wages (Graph 5).
[4]
Graph 5
Similar patterns have been evident in other economies, where subdued productivity growth has been

 associated with slower growth in household incomes and consumption (Graph 6). The exception is the

 United States, where growth in both productivity and consumption has been relatively strong.
Graph 6
Recent trends in productivity
So far I’ve focused on the importance of productivity growth for aggregate supply, incomes and demand

 over the longer run. I’ll now turn to recent trends in productivity growth in Australia and some

 potential implications for the near-term economic outlook.
Discerning recent trends in productivity is difficult because of volatility in the data associated with

 the pandemic and other supply disruptions. Looking through the volatility, labour productivity growth has

 been low, averaging 0.2 per cent per year between
2017/18
and
2023/24
(Graph 7).
Graph 7
Reverting to the simple production function framework that I noted earlier, the slow growth in labour

 productivity over recent years has reflected slow growth in both MFP and the amount of capital available

 to each worker.
MFP growth averaged 0.2 per cent per year between
2017/18
and
2023/24
, which was well below its historical average. Some have argued that

 slower MFP growth could reflect temporary factors. For example, tight labour market conditions over

 recent years have been associated with large numbers of individuals entering the workforce or changing

 jobs; this may have weighed on productivity as some individuals were trained or retrained and some firms

 adapted production processes to accommodate strong employment growth. If this was the case, MFP growth

 could pick up as the economy adjusts. However, work by some RBA staff finds that temporary factors like

 these have not been the primary cause of slow MFP growth, suggesting that structural factors could be

 weighing on productivity growth.
[5]
Slow growth in the amount of capital available for each worker in the Australian economy – or a lack

 of ‘capital deepening’ – has also contributed to slow growth in labour productivity

 (Graph 8). Capital per worker was broadly unchanged for around five years leading up to the pandemic

 and – looking through the volatility in the data during the pandemic – is currently a bit

 below those levels. In other words, overall investment has not kept pace with the strong growth in

 employment recently.
Graph 8
To help understand the recent slow growth in productivity, I’ll look at productivity outcomes in

 various parts of the economy.
I’ll start with the non-market sector – which includes the health care, education and public

 administration industries – where employment growth has been very strong over recent years. The

 level of
measured
productivity in some parts of the non-market sector is low relative to the

 aggregate economy. So, as the non-market sector has become a larger share of the economy in recent years,

 this has weighed on overall productivity growth in the economy. Our estimates suggest that the rising

 share of non-market employment lowered the economy-wide measure of labour productivity growth by around

 0.3 percentage points per year on average from
2017/18
to
2023/24
, as shown by the yellow bars in Graph 9.
[6]
This

 compares with around 0.15 percentage points per year over the previous decade, and so the recent

 effects have been a bit larger than in the past.
But there is more to the story about productivity and the non-market sector. I have emphasised
measured
productivity because it is very difficult to measure output – and therefore

 productivity – in parts of the non-market sector. The central measurement problem is a lack of

 meaningful prices for some non-market output, such as public hospital services provided to public

 patients.
[7]
This makes it very difficult to accurately identify

 quantities of output, which are needed to measure productivity. For example, research by the Productivity

 Commission suggests that productivity in the health care industry is higher than official estimates.
[8]
As such,

 the drag on productivity from the non-market sector may be overstated.
Graph 9
Noting the challenges of measuring productivity in the non-market sector, what’s been going on in the

 rest of the economy? Labour productivity growth in the market sector averaged around

 0.6 per cent per year from
2017/18
to
2023/24
– below its average of 1.6 per cent over the previous

 two decades – though it picked up in
2023/24
.
Table 1: Growth in Labour Productivity
Average annual growth rates

 (per cent)
(a)
Sector
1998/99
to
2017/18
2017/18
to
2023/24
All industries
1.3
0.2
Non-farm
1.1
0.1
Market sector
1.6
0.6
Market sector ex mining
1.4
1.0
(a) Average growth rates calculated between financial years.
Sources: ABS; RBA.
While the
level
of productivity in the mining industry in Australia is higher than in other

 industries, productivity
growth
in that industry has declined over recent years. Excluding

 mining, productivity growth in the market sector since
2017/18
has

 averaged 1 per cent per year, though this is still lower than its average over the preceding

 two decades and well below the rates recorded during the high productivity growth period in the

 1990s.
[9]
More generally, a range of explanations have been provided for the slowing in productivity growth globally

 since the 1990s. A well-documented one for Australia is declining ‘economic dynamism’ –

 it now takes longer for inputs to production to move to higher productivity firms, and it also takes

 longer for firms to catch up to the global frontier of performance and technology.
[10]
Evidence suggests that at least part of the decline in economic dynamism relates to declining competition

 in the economy.
[11]
Regulatory barriers also appear to have played a

 role in Australia, notably in the construction industry.
[12]
Other explanations include slowing human

 capital accumulation, declining trade integration, and mismeasurement.
[13]
What does the recent subdued growth in productivity mean for our assessment of economic conditions? While

 productivity growth is associated with growth in incomes and wages over the longer run, in the short run

 there can be material divergences between these variables.
[14]
Over the past year or so, real average

 hourly earnings in the economy have grown faster than labour productivity. This exerts upward pressure on

 firms’ unit labour costs and is consistent with our assessment that labour market conditions are

 still tight, notwithstanding some easing in those conditions over the past couple of years.
What will happen from here? Our latest forecasts in the
Statement on Monetary Policy
incorporate a pick-up in productivity growth over the next couple of years, which would add to the

 economy’s supply capacity and help alleviate cost pressures. But there is considerable uncertainty

 around this projection. If productivity growth remains weak, the near-term outlook will depend critically

 on how the economy adjusts. If growth in demand is also weaker and wages adjust quickly to this slower

 growth in the supply capacity of the economy, there might not be a material impact on cost pressures. But

 if demand picks up as expected or wages adjust slowly to continued weak productivity outcomes, cost

 pressures could be higher than we expect. We will continue to monitor these developments carefully,

 alongside the full range of indicators we use to assess current economic conditions.
Concluding remarks
To conclude, productivity matters because it is a key driver of economic living standards. Over the longer

 run, higher productivity growth expands the supply capacity of the economy and supports growth in

 incomes, wages and aggregate demand. In the short run, however, there can be meaningful divergences in

 the growth rates of these important macroeconomic variables. Recent weak growth in productivity has

 constrained growth in aggregate supply. Whether productivity growth improves from here and how the

 economy adjusts are important questions for the economic outlook.
Thank you for your time today. I look forward to your questions.
Endnotes
I would like to thank Angelina Bruno, Jonathan

 Hambur and Kevin Lane for their help preparing this speech, and also Sarah Hunter, Natasha

 Cassidy, Leon Berkelmans, Tim Taylor, Thomas Williams, Oscar Douglas, Martin McCarthy, Michelle

 Bergmann, Stephanie Parsons, Gordana Peresin, Christopher Schwartz, David Bold, Hamish Sullivan,

 Georgia Face and Kieran MacGibbon for their comments and contributions.
[*]
The measure of ‘wages’ used for these

 comparisons is average hourly earnings from the national accounts. It captures various forms of

 labour compensation (such as base salaries and wages, bonuses and overtime), as well as

 compositional change in the economy (such as workers moving from lower paying jobs to higher

 paying jobs).
[1]
These averages exclude the farm sector, owing to

 challenges around measuring labour income in that sector.
[2]
Productivity Commission (2024), ‘
Higher

 Education and Productivity
’, Speech by Danielle Wood, Chair, at the National Conference on

 University Governance, 23 October 2024, Canberra.
[3]
In terms of the productivity cycles in

 Graph 5, the Australian Bureau of Statistics (ABS) determines productivity cycle peaks by

 comparing the annual MFP estimates with their corresponding long-term trend estimates. The peak

 deviation between these two series are the primary indicators of a growth cycle peak, although

 economic conditions at the time are also considered.
[4]
See Bruno A, J Hambur and L Wang (2024), ‘
Measuring

 Labour Quality in (Closer to) Real Time Using Emerging Microdata Sources
’, Paper for

 Joint ABS-RBA Conference on Human Capital, June; Wiley G and L Wang (2024), ‘
Skills

 Match Quality Following the
COVID-19
Pandemic
’, RBA
Bulletin
, July.
[5]
These calculations include housing services as

 part of the market sector.
[6]
See Luo Q (2020), ‘
Hospital Output Measures

 in the Australian National Accounts: Experimental Estimates, 2004-05 to 2017-18
’, ABS

 Paper, Canberra; Annabel J (2020), ‘
Non-market Output Measures in the Australian National

 Accounts: Conceptual Framework Enhancements
’, ABS Paper, Canberra.
[7]
See Productivity Commission (2024),

 ‘
Advances in Measuring Healthcare Productivity
’, Research Paper, Canberra.
[8]
The market sector excluding mining accounted for

 a little over two-thirds of total employment in 2024 and around two-thirds of gross value added

 in the Australian economy. See Australian Bureau of Statistics (2024), ‘Labour Account

 Australia, September 2024’, Canberra and Australian Bureau of Statistics (2024),

 ‘National Income, Expenditure and Product, September 2024’, Canberra.
[9]
On reallocation, see Hambur J and D Andrews

 (2023), ‘
Doing Less, with Less: Capital

 Misallocation, Investment and the Productivity Slowdown in Australia
’, RBA Research

 Discussion Paper No 2023-03; Andrews D and D Hansell (2021), ‘Productivity-Enhancing Labour

 Reallocation in Australia’,
Economic Record
, 97(317), pp 157–169. On

 convergence, see Andrews D, C Criscuolo and P Gal (2016), ‘The Best versus the Rest: The

 Global Productivity Slowdown, Divergence across Firms and the Role of Public Policy’, OECD

 Productivity Working Paper No 5; Andrews D, J Hambur, D Hansell and A Wheeler (2022),

 ‘Reaching for the Stars: Australian Firms and the Global Productivity Frontier’,

 Treasury Working Paper No 2022-01.
[10]
Hambur J (2023), ‘
Product Market

 Competition and its Implications for the Australian Economy
’,
Economic Record
,

 99(324), pp 32-57.
[11]
On the construction sector, see Productivity

 Commission (2025), ‘
Housing construction productivity: Can we fix it?
’, Commission research paper, Canberra. On occupational entry regulations, see Bowman J, J Hambur and M Markovski (2024),

 ‘
Examining the Macroeconomic Costs of Occupational Entry Regulations
’,

 RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2024-06.
[12]
On slowing human capital accumulation, see OECD

 (2024), ‘
From decline to revival: Policies to unlock human capital and productivity
’, OECD Economics Department Working Paper No 1827. On trade, see Goldin I, P Koutroumpis, F Lafond and J

 Winkler (2024), ‘Why is Productivity Slowing Down?’,
Journal of Economic

 Literature
, 62(1), pp 196–268. Note that it has been argued that

 mismeasurement is unlikely to account for the slowdown globally and in Australia. See Syverson C

 (2017), ‘Challenges to Mismeasurement Explanations for the US Productivity Slowdown’,
Journal of Economic Perspectives
, 31(2), pp 165–186; Burnell D and M

 Elsnari (2020), ‘
Does Measurement of Digital Activities Explain Productivity Slowdown? The Case for Australia
’,

 Institut National de la Statistique et des Etudes Economiques (INSEE), issue 517-518-5, pages 123-137. For a broader discussion

 of the slowdown and its causes, see Duretto M, O Majeed and J Hambur (2022), ‘
Overview: Understanding productivity in Australia and the global slowdown
’, Treasury Working Paper No 2022-05.
[13]
A caveat to this shorter run analysis is that

 data on productivity and average hourly earnings can be volatile, which is why we tend to look at

 productivity over ‘cycles’ that span a number of years. So we need to be cautious when

 comparing growth rates over short periods.
[14]
