BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Summary
DATE: 14/03/2025
SPEAKER: Philip Lowe
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2014/sp-dg-250314-summary.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech Summary
Opportunities and Challenges for Market-based Financing
Philip Lowe
Deputy Governor
Speech to the ASIC Annual Forum 2014
Sydney
–
25 March 2014
View the speech
Audio
11.65
MB
Q&A Transcript
The speech discusses recent developments in the Australian non-financial corporate

 bond market. It highlights that bank-based financing remains the dominant form

 of corporate funds in Australia, contrary to what was expected.
The role that superannuation funds play in intermediating between borrowers and savers

 is then examined. The speech assesses the role of superannuation funds in providing

 market-based finance and looks at the reasons behind the sector's relatively

 limited holdings of corporate bonds. This is compared with the large volume

 of bonds purchased by superannuation funds which are issued overseas and by

 authorised deposit-taking institutions in Australia. The speech suggests that

 rather than financing the corporate sector directly, superannuation funds have

 helped finance the banks (which in turn has financed the corporate sector).

 This is described as a ‘lengthening of the chain of financial intermediation’

 – from savers to superannuation funds to banks to borrowers. As a result of

 this, the development of a deep and liquid corporate bond market is described

 as a ‘work in progress’.
Consideration is then given to the significance of the corporate bond market for

 the wider economy. From a stability perspective, the speech explains that the

 market can act as a ‘spare tyre’ if the banking system faces difficulties,

 and thus allow the economy to continue to operate relatively normally. It goes

 on to highlight the importance of providing financial infrastructure for the

 corporate bond market to fulfil this ‘insurance role’ and act when

 most needed. The speech also explores how the market can ensure that a lack

 of competition in the banking sector does not lead to excessively high prices

 for financial intermediation.
View the speech
