BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Monetary Policy Decision
DATE: 20/05/2025
SPEAKER: Michele Bullock
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2025/mc-gov-2025-05-20.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

More on the May 2025 monetary policy decision
Media Conference
Monetary Policy Decision
Michele Bullock
Governor
Sydney
–
20 May 2025
Audio
45.7MB
Watch video: Media Conference – Monetary Policy Decision, Sydney
Transcript
Michele Bullock
Good afternoon. Thank you all for coming, again. So as you know, today the Board decided to cut the

 cash rate by 25 basis points and that takes the official rate to 3.85 per cent. Now,

 we’ve done this because the most recent quarterly CPI confirmed that both headline and

 underlying inflation are now under 3 per cent, and if you ignore the more volatile items in

 the headline CPI our forecasts see the underlying pulse of inflation around the midpoint of the

 2 to 3 per cent range over the next year or so. So price increases have slowed and

 it’s fairly broadly based, and this is very good news.
The Board’s strategy over quite some time has been to bring inflation down while

 avoiding a sharp rise in unemployment. This is consistent with our dual mandate of price stability and

 full employment. I know this period of relatively high interest rates has been, and continues to be,

 challenging for many households and businesses, but it was essential we brought inflation down because

 inflation hurts everyone. The strategy that we took to achieve this was different to that of some other

 central banks who took rates much higher than we did. The Board accepted the trade-off that leaving the

 cash rate where it was would bring inflation down more gradually, but without a big increase in

 unemployment.
A sharp rise in unemployment would have been very costly for families and for the

 Australian economy. Anyone who has experienced unemployment knows the profound impact that it has on your

 life and those that depend on you. Anyone who has experienced - when the unemployment rate is elevated

 for an extended period that’s not only debilitating for individuals and their families, but it also

 has significant negative impacts on the economy. When inflation is low and stable and people can get jobs

 it’s good for households, it’s good for communities and it’s good for the broader

 Australian economy. So the cautious approach we have taken has got us to this point, where inflation is

 now below 3 per cent and employment is holding up. But now we’ve got inflation down, we

 must keep it there, while trying to maintain a healthy jobs market. So there’s now a new set of

 challenges facing the economy, but with inflation declining and the unemployment rate relatively low,

 we’re well positioned to deal with them. The Board remains prepared to take further action if that

 is required.
Now, since our last meeting global economic and policy uncertainty has increased

 substantially following tariff announcements by the US administration, the response of its trading

 partners and subsequent changes to the policies, including various bilateral agreements and deals.

 It’s been a complete rollercoaster I’d have to say. How the tariffs are going to affect the

 global economy are going to depend on a few things: where tariffs will settle following negotiations between the United States and its major trading

 partners, how the other trading partners respond, the extent to which global supply chains are

 disrupted by the increased barriers to trade, the degree to which trade can be diverted and the

 impact of uncertainty on business investment and household spending.
Our baseline forecasts that we released today for the global economy reflect the

 potential economic impacts of high tariffs and impacts on consumption and investment of policy

 uncertainty. We see growth in our major trading partners slowing over the remainder of this year and next

 year. In terms of the forecast for the domestic economy, we see growth in demand picking up, but a little

 more slowly than previously. This sees inflation declining a little more than previously forecast and the

 unemployment rate a little higher. Some of this reflects the downgrade to world growth, but some of this

 also reflects the effect of uncertainty on domestic demand. If the trade outcomes are much worse for the

 global economy though, we could be facing a much larger downturn in Australia, with implications for

 inflation and unemployment.
One thing to keep in mind we have made the judgment that global trade developments will

 overall be disinflationary for Australia, however there is a risk to inflation on the other side. The

 trade policies could lead to supply chain issues which could raise prices for some imports, much as we

 saw during the pandemic, and so we’ll also need to be alert to such upside risks.
So thank you and happy to take your questions.
Chris Kohler
Afternoon, Governor, Chris Kohler from 9News. Everyone here, and I’m sure many beyond, are

 analysing and interpreting the
Statement
with the aim of trying to get some more meaning

 out of it. If I could just ask, is this a confident cut or is this a cautious cut, and should people

 at home, should they have confidence that this is now the direction of monetary policy in Australia?
Michele Bullock
I think it’s a confident cut, Chris, in the sense that we think this is the right decision at

 this point in time. Where this leads us in the future is a little more uncertain, I’d have to

 say, probably a lot more uncertain given everything that’s going on. You will see that in the
Statement
we actually put some scenarios into the
Statement on Monetary

 Policy
which talked about extreme downside scenario and back to trade peace sort of

 scenario. So depending on where we end up on that spectrum it’s possible that there might be

 more interest rate adjustments. The Board is alert to that, but at the moment it’s a confident

 cut in the sense that this, we think, is the right cut for now.
Matthew Cranston
Governor, Matthew Cranston from
The Australian
. Obviously you look at underlying inflation to look

 through or ignore volatile items, but if you look at some of the business costs, energy prices, for

 example, up 47 per cent this year without rebates, wage growth still a little bit higher

 than what you thought it would peak at from your last forecast, and this one, and also business, the

 labour unit costs also pretty high, partly because of lower productivity. So the question is, what is

 the risk that business actually can’t sustain those higher prices that aren’t included in

 your underlying inflation, and might that restoke inflation later this year when business might have

 to increase their prices?
Michele Bullock
I guess the first point I’d make is that this has been going on for some time, of course, high

 unit labour costs, high energy costs and so on for businesses, and we’re still seeing inflation

 come down. So the outcomes are suggesting that inflation is still declining despite those costs that

 you’re referring to. The second point I’d make is that businesses can put up their costs

 only if they’re not going to impact the demand for their goods and services. So in a context of

 very strong demand, which arguably we saw coming out of COVID when everyone was out there trying to

 spend, then businesses have the ability, I think, to pass on costs. What we’re hearing from our

 liaison is that businesses are finding that their margins are being impacted so they are having to

 absorb some of the cost increases. So is there a risk that some of these cost increases could feed

 back into inflation as the economy starts to recover? Yes, there is. But we’re judging that the

 signs so far and the evidence so far is that that’s not happening, but we’ll remain alert

 to it.
David Taylor
Governor, David Taylor from
ABC News
. On April 7 the financial markets went into a complete

 tailspin and since then the bond market, the share markets have done backflips and cartwheels,

 rollercoaster ride, as you said. I’m just wondering, because you mentioned severe downside risks

 in the
Statement
. When you say severe downside risks, is there the potential - I’m

 not saying high potential necessarily, but is there potential for an Australian recession - I’ve

 asked you that question before and I’m asking it again - over the next two years, and is the

 Reserve Bank on the lookout for another - and I’m at risk of hyperbole just like anyone else -

 cataclysmic event on global financial markets, are you on the lookout for that?
Michele Bullock
Yes, David, we are on the alert for that, and we’re paid to worry about that sort of thing and

 we have been watching that very closely, as have other central banks all around the world. You

 rightly point out that the financial markets have recovered. I would say that we are still not sure

 that the financial markets will remain nice and steady. The key point about the situation we’re

 in is it’s not just uncertain, it’s actually unpredictable. So I think in terms of our

 focus, part of the reason in the
Statement
that - on monetary policy that we put those

 scenarios in was to demonstrate that the range of outcomes here could be quite wide. I’m not

 putting a strong possibility on a really, really bad outcome, but I think we have to be alert that

 there might be.
David Taylor
You’re not getting away without a response to the recession. Is there the potential, an

 increased risk of a recession in Australia over the next two years?
Michele Bullock
If you look at our scenario analysis it does suggest that in a really bad outcome there would - there

 could possibly be a recession, yes, but that’s in the very extreme circumstance, and again it

 was to try and give ourselves some sort of spectrum of outcomes that we might be looking at. At the

 moment we’re not looking at that, but we need to be alert.
David Taylor
Thanks, Governor.
Jacob Shteyman
Thanks Governor, Jacob Shteyman from
AAP
. Was this a unanimous decision by the Board and how much

 discussion was there of a 50 basis point cut or, conversely, a hold?
Michele Bullock
Okay. First of all it was a consensus decision. What the Board discussed was two options, hold or

 lower. There was a bit of a discussion about hold and that was sort of put aside pretty quickly. The

 discussion then was about a cut and how big, and there was a discussion about 50 and 25. The

 Board was of the view that 25 was the right number on this occasion. I think the way I would

 think about it, describe it, is that if you put the international things to the side for one moment

 and just ask the question if we were just looking at where the domestic economy was at the moment,

 would we be looking at lowering rates or not, and as I said earlier with inflation in the band and

 also employment doing pretty well, we think there is a bit of scope to lower interest rates, and then

 if you add the international uncertainty, that sort of gives you a little bit of confidence that,

 yes. So I think we said in the
Statement
that the risks have actually balanced up a bit

 with a bit more on the downside coming into play now. So yes there was a discussion of that, but on

 balance I think the Board was of the view that - well, I know the Board was of the view that

 25 basis points was the right thing for now. Doesn’t rule out that we might need to take

 action in the future, to David’s earlier questions, but for now we felt that was the right

 number.
Shane Wright
Shane Wright from
Nine Newspapers
. I just want to pick up on something you told Chris, that this was

 a confident cut. The monetary policy
Statement
uses the word uncertain 134 times,

 and I have lost track of how many times you’ve used the word uncertain in just talking to us.

 How confident can you be in a world when there’s so much uncertainty?
Michele Bullock
Using my own words against me. Thank you very much, Shane. I mean confident cut in the sense that we

 were confident that it was the right thing to do in the circumstances. I think what we can say is

 directionally we’re confident that was the right thing to do. How confident are we that we know

 what’s going to come and what we might have to do in the future? That’s, I think, where the

 uncertainty comes in, and also as I said earlier the unpredictability. But it is hard to be

 confident. We do have to try and look into the future forecasts, figure out where we think things are

 going to go, but it’s difficult. It means we have to be agile, and it means we have to be alert

 to the risks and these days, and my central bank counterparts are the same, everyone is talking about

 we need to be thinking about how we’re using what we call the soft data. This is like surveys,

 liaison, things that might give us a bit of a handle on how businesses are thinking, how

 consumers are thinking. Overseas we’ve seen quite a lot of uncertainty finding its way into

 businesses and consumers, not so much here at the moment, I have to say. So these are the sorts of

 things we’ll need to be alert to. But yes, more uncertainty than usual, but I still think in

 those circumstances we can say we’re confident we did the right thing today.
Michael Read
Governor, Michael Read from the
AFR
. What’s the Board’s current thinking on whether or not

 to agree to those two outstanding recommendations from the RBA Review, one about publishing votes at

 the end of Board meetings and the other about making Board members do an annual engagement so we can

 hear from you even more?
Michele Bullock
Thanks, Mike. We discussed that again today in the context of a draft
Statement on the Conduct

 of Monetary Policy
from the Treasurer. The Board discussed that today. We’ll be going

 back to the Treasurer and you’ll be hearing in due course where that gets to.
Michael Read
So you’ve arrived at a decision, you’re just waiting for the all clear from - -
Michele Bullock
We’re waiting to go back to the Treasurer now, because it’s an agreement between the Board

 and the Treasurer, and once we’ve got that agreement you’ll know. Okay?
Deb Knight
Deb Knight from
9 Radio
. Productivity remains at a 60-year low. Did that factor into your

 decision-making today on rates and is productivity now a bigger concern than inflation is?
Michele Bullock
Well, I think the Treasurer listed it as one of his top ones, along with inflation, actually. I

 wouldn’t say it’s more of a concern than inflation. I mean, I think we’ve talked

 before about the fact that productivity matters because it’s what grows the pie for us all, so

 we can earn more real income. That’s why productivity matters. We at the bank, we have to take

 it more or less as given and set monetary policy appropriately for that. So am I worried as an

 Australian citizen that productivity is not growing? Yes, I am worried. I can’t do anything

 about it and the bank can’t do anything about it, but am I more worried about it than inflation?

 No, my mandate is definitely inflation and employment, so that’s my focus. But it does make it

 harder, as I said, if we want to see wages increasing over the medium term, it does make it harder

 for wage rises - for people to get good wage rises if productivity isn’t improving. It is really

 important and I’m very happy that the Treasurer has identified it as being one of the

 government’s priorities.
Edward Boyd
Governor, Edward Boyd at Sky News. Most of the banks have already passed on the cut in full or

 announced that they will later this month. Are you expecting to see a bit of a pick-up in household

 consumption over the rest of this year with a couple of rate cuts now coming through the economy?
Michele Bullock
Thanks for that question. In our forecasts we actually have rate cuts incorporated into our

 forecasts, so what we have in our forecasts is a pick-up in consumption and that’s a product of

 the fact that household disposable incomes, real household disposable incomes are rising and that

 reflects not only the fact that wages are now rising and inflation is much lower, but also the fact

 that interest rates are falling. So yes we would expect consumption to be picking up. It’s

 picking up a little bit slower than we thought. Households are being a little bit cautious. The

 outcome on that is, I think, not as - it’s not picking up as much as we thought it might given

 historical circumstances, but I think we will expect it to pick up.
Cecile Lefort
Governor, Cecile from
The Financial Review
. You have a dual mandate of price stability and full

 employment, and in case they get out of line, which one will take precedence? Inflation or jobs?
Michele Bullock
Well, I think I’ve said this before too, Cecile, you can’t, in an equilibrium sense, you

 can’t have full employment unless you’ve got inflation under control. So most of the time

 they go together. If it looks like inflation is getting out of control, then I think we do have to

 make sure that we’ve got that back under control, because that’s ultimately what will mean

 that we can keep the labour market in a good place. We can’t keep the labour market - can’t

 get full employment if we’ve got inflation running out of control. So I think it’s not that

 we’re prioritising inflation overall. What we’re saying is that in the normal course what

 you need for full employment is you need low and stable inflation. So that implies that if inflation

 really does get out of control we do have to make sure we get it back, but I’d have to say that

 what we’ve managed to achieve here is, so far, subject to what’s going on elsewhere in the

 world, so far we have managed to get inflation back at the same time as keeping the employment market

 on a relatively good footing. So I think that’s so far so good.
Stella Qiu
Hi Governor, Stella Qiu from
Reuters
. We have a question about how you conduct monetary policy

 meetings. Do you always make a formal recommendation on interest rates at the beginning of the

 meeting? And has there been times when the Board acted against your recommendation and then go the

 other way?
Michele Bullock
I can only really talk for the time I’ve been involved with the Board. What I can say is that

 typically the papers include a recommendation. There have been the odd occasions where they

 haven’t included a recommendation, and as to whether or not there’s ever been a vote

 against - I couldn’t answer that. I can say during my time, no.
Jack Quail
Jack Quail from
The Australian
. Your statement points extensively to the impact of the Trump

 administration’s tariffs and other exogenous factors on the Australian economy, but I just want

 to ask about the domestic factors. What is the biggest domestic risk to the economy that you see and

 is there a risk that you underestimate the impact of these home-grown factors on the Australian

 economy?
Michele Bullock
I think on the domestic side the thing that we are still grappling with is the labour market. There

 is - we characterise the labour market as still a bit tight and the indications that it is includes

 employment growth, the participation rate, vacancy rates, all these sorts of things are suggestive of

 the labour market still being quite tight. Our liaison tells us, for example, that some firms are

 still finding it hard to get the right labour, qualified labour. So there’s still something

 there. Now, not all people agree with us on this, but that’s our judgment at the moment, that

 it’s on the tight side. So it’s still possible that that’s indicating that supply and

 demand have not really come back into balance and if that’s the case then there will still be

 inflationary pressure. So there’s that risk. On the other side of the risk register, if you

 like, is the fact that consumption, as I said earlier in response to a previous question, consumption

 - we’ve been a little bit surprised that consumption hasn’t recovered as real incomes have

 started to recover. It’s just a bit softer than we thought it would be if you think about

 historical relationships. We thought it would have done better. So that’s the risk, that

 households for some reason are being much more cautious than they have been in the past and that that

 is a downside for the economy. So they’re the two things I think that if I was looking just

 purely at the domestic economy that I’d be weighing up.
David Chau
Governor, David Chau from
ABC News
. How concerned are you that inflation might get out of control

 again and as a result the Reserve Bank may not be able to deliver further rate relief that so many

 borrowers are desperate to see?
Michele Bullock
Well, not as concerned as we were, hence the cut in the interest rate today. It can’t be

 completely off our radar because, as I said earlier, inflation has been what’s really - interest

 rates, I know, have impacted people who have loans, really, really severely, and they’ve been

 under the pump, but inflation has been the rise in prices over the past two years has really hurt

 everyone, and that’s what people are feeling. So we can’t take our eye off that ball. We do

 need to make sure that we keep inflation low and stable. We’ve got it down, it’s not quite

 down as far as we’d like it yet, but it’s getting there, and we can’t let inflationary

 expectations, so peoples’ expectations of inflation rise. At the moment that’s consistent

 with what we think the inflation target is, but we need to make sure we keep it there. We can’t

 - as I said, we can’t take our eye off the ball, but we have got a little more comfortable, just

 a little more comfortable that things are going in the right direction so we can take the foot off

 the brake just a little bit more.
Jonathan Shapiro
Governor, Jonathan Shapiro from
The Financial Review
. The last time the RBA cut rates you struck a

 very different tone. I guess the market would call it a hawkish cut where you pushed back or you

 cautioned the market thinking that there’d be a series of rate cuts towards the end of the year.

 I think this time is very different, at least most economists sort of see this one as a very dovish

 cut, particularly what you said earlier about a potential for a 50 basis point rate cut. So in

 that context, my question is do you still feel that there is a big disconnect between where the RBA

 thinks the cash rate will settle, ultimately settle, and where the market has it?
Michele Bullock
I wouldn’t like to say there’s a disconnect. We look at the market path and we do look at

 what the market is. I think what the market path is reflecting is a possibility that there’s a

 really bad outcome and so on average they’ve got sort of a path that brings us a little bit

 lower than it was, I think, in February. I think the - although, of course, it’s been on a

 rollercoaster as well because immediately after April 2nd rate cut expectations dropped dramatically

 then they recovered. Everything is sort of all a bit waiting on what’s happening, every little

 bit of news that’s coming out, particularly on the international side. I think the difference

 from February is that things have changed. We’ve had April 2nd happen, we’ve had massive

 volatility in financial markets, massive uncertainty about not only about where might the eventual

 policies with respect to tariffs turn out, but also once we do have certainty on that, what impact

 that might have. So I think it is different than it was in February. Now, does that mean that we are

 headed into a long series of interest rate cuts? I don’t know at this point, and that’s why

 I think the cautious 25 basis point cut, with a recognition that if we need to move quickly we

 can, we’ve got space. I think that’s the most appropriate way to think about it.
Sophia Rodrigues
Sophia Rodrigues from Central Bank Intel. You’ve got three scenarios and a baseline, a trade

 peace scenario - I like that term "trade peace" - where monetary policy will be less accommodative,

 “trade war” where there will be possibly more easing depending upon what happens to the currency,

 protracted trade war where you’re not committing to anything, and then there is baseline where

 you’re endorsing market pricing, because based on that you’re still expecting inflation to

 be in the target band by end of next year. Does it mean, all things being equal, based on your

 baseline forecast, we would see 3.4 per cent cash rate by the end of this year?
Michele Bullock
That’s certainly the assumption. I wouldn’t say we endorse it. That’s the technical

 assumption we use. The baseline forecast generated out of that does take us around about middle of

 the band, which is a good thing. Having said that, and I’ve said this before as well, as you go

 further out the level of uncertainty around those forecasts widens. So I can’t tell you

 definitively that’s where the cash rate is going to end up because I can’t tell you

 definitively the baseline forecast is what we’re going to hit. In fact we made the point in the
Statement on Monetary Policy
that we’ve put a little less weight on the baseline

 forecast this time because of everything that’s going on in the world. So I would not read as

 this is endorsing that the rate cut path is what we’re going to get. I would say that in the

 baseline forecast, yes, it’s giving us some confidence that we can get back to a situation where

 we’re in the middle of the band for inflation and unemployment is still relatively low, but,

 again, as you go further out it gets more uncertain so we do have to remain data-driven.
Millie Muroi
Hi Governor, Millie Muroi from the
Sydney Morning Herald
and
The Age
. You’ve said the labour

 market is still pretty tight but there seems to be an increasing acknowledgement across the February

 and May
Statements
in particular that the RBA might be overestimating how much excess

 demand there is in the labour market and with inflation now seemingly quite formally within the

 target band alongside unemployment of 4.1 per cent, which is quite a bit lower than 4.5,

 would it be right to say you’re becoming a bit more sceptical of the bank’s existing

 estimate of full employment?
Michele Bullock
I wouldn’t say we’re sceptical. What I would say is that we are open to the idea that we

 may be overestimating, or underestimating full employment, and I think that’s a healthy thing

 for us. I think we do need to be challenged. I think that thinking about where we might be wrong is a

 really healthy thing. You point to the fact that one of the outcomes is that inflation is continuing

 to come down, and we’re thinking about what that implies for us. So all those things, I

 don’t think we’re sceptical of ourselves, just as we’re not sceptical of others,

 we’re interested and we’re open to having a debate about this. Ultimately the evidence will

 bear it out, and at the moment, it does seem that inflation is continuing to come down

 notwithstanding a bit of tightness in the labour market.
Swati Pandey
Governor, Swati Pandey from
Bloomberg News
. You said so far so good just now talking about inflation

 and employment, like your strategy. RBC’s Su-Lin Ong said that RBA is in policy “nirvana”,

 there’s another economist who said we are in a “Goldilocks” situation. Do you think you have

 created a playbook for the next crisis?
Michele Bullock
I think that would be - no, I don’t think so. As we’ve seen actually, things can come from

 all directions. I mean, we have to remain very focused on the potential risks to the outlook. Shane

 obviously counted the number of “uncertains”, but there’s a lot of them and that’s

 deliberate and we’re not the only ones. I think the Bank of England tripled the number of uses

 of the word “uncertainty” in their equivalent of our
Statement on Monetary Policy
. I

 wouldn’t like to suggest that somehow we’ve got the formula right for every circumstance in

 the world. Everything is going to be different. The GFC was different to the pandemic, this current

 shock is completely different as well. It’s coming from a completely different direction, so I

 don’t think there is a playbook for every circumstance. I think we just have to, as I said, we

 have to be alert. So far so good. We are in a good position, but there’s things coming down the

 pipeline and we don’t know what they are and how they’re going to impact us, so I

 don’t know if the playbook is going to have to change or not, but I think, again, what we have

 to do is we have to be focused on the data, we have to be focused on the risks, and we have to be

 prepared to act when we think it’s the right thing to do.
Tom Richardson
Hi Governor, Tom Richardson from Livewire Markets. Mortgage holders will be happy today as

 they’ve got more interest rate relief. I think in your own assumptions … more

 rate cuts ahead, the markets’ forecasts are for more rate cuts. In April I think we saw

 Australian house prices at a record high, gold prices near a record high, Bitcoin prices near a

 record high, I think the CBA share price hit a record high today, I think it’s up

 40 per cent over the past year. So if you’re wealthy you’re getting wealthier,

 right? What’s your message for younger people and renters who feel like housing is becoming

 unaffordable for them if they don’t own assets? Thanks.
Michele Bullock
I don’t have a message from the Reserve Bank. I guess my personal reflection is that

 there’s nothing the Reserve Bank can do about these affordability issues of housing. This is an

 issue of housing demand and housing supply, and increasingly this issue is finding its way into the

 governments, both state and federal governments, and that’s where the focus has to be. I think

 increasingly they are. There is a recognition that over many years - this didn’t just pop up

 overnight. This has been brewing for many years, so there’s nothing that I or the bank can do

 about this. We’ve got to focus on our inflation and our employment mandate which is actually a

 really good thing we can do for young people and renters, keep inflation low and make sure they have

 jobs. That’s really important. That’s what we can do. What governments can do is look at

 the supply/demand imbalance in housing, and I’m confident now that at least there is some focus

 in that direction.
Brandon How
Thanks, Governor, Brandon How from Capital Brief. I just wanted to ask a question on the

 government’s proposal to tax unrealised super gains, just wondering do you have any financial

 stability concerns regarding the policy at all?
Michele Bullock
We haven’t done any analysis of the financial stability implications of that. My initial

 reaction would be probably not great financial stability implications, but we haven’t done a

 great deal - any on that so I really couldn’t say.
Jonathan Barrett
Hi Governor, Jonathan Barrett at
Guardian Australia
. How strong was the argument for a 50 basis

 point cut in the room, in the boardroom, and did it almost win the day?
Michele Bullock
What I would say is that there was an argument and we did debate it, and you would expect us to

 debate it, quite frankly, but it wasn’t the strongest argument in the room and as I said, it was

 a consensus decision for 25 basis points, and I think that reflects the fact that the strength

 of the argument for 25 was much bigger.
Juliette Saly
Governor, hi, Juliette Saly from Ausbiz TV. I asked you last year before the outcome of the US

 presidential election whether the Board had done any scenario modelling on President Trump

 2.0 presidency and you said you hadn’t. Fast forward six months later and all the

 uncertainty that we have seen, how much of your time, of the Board’s time, is spent worrying

 about the geopolitical pressures caused by who is in the White House?
Michele Bullock
Certainly it’s fair to say that our economic team and our financial markets teams have spent a

 lot of time on these sorts of issues ever since it all exploded. Even before April 2nd we had done

 some work, some scenario analysis looking at the potential implications, but us, just like everyone

 else, was completely blown out of the water by the scale and the scope. So we really had to go back

 and have a much harder look. So there has been a lot of analysis done. Some of that is reported in

 the
Statement on Monetary Policy
, you will see, and the Board does have to consider and

 factor much more of this into their thinking than was the case back before this all happened. So I

 couldn’t give you percentages or anything, but suffice to say it’s a lot.
Michael Pascoe
Governor, Michael Pascoe, Michael West Media. Trimmed mean over the past two quarters is running

 annualised smack on your target, the forecast is for the financial year ending next month 2.6, so

 inflation is exactly where you want it. The bank says it’s forward-looking and data-driven,

 monetary policy runs with the lag, you’ve still got a mildly - or still a restrictive monetary

 policy. Was it a mistake not to cut in April given where inflation is and has been running at for

 eight months?
Michele Bullock
No, I don’t believe it was a mistake not to cut in April. I think we needed to see more

 evidence. We hadn’t had the CPI at that stage, you will remember, so I think, as I said earlier,

 we’ve still got this labour market issue and we need to make sure that we want to see the strong

 labour market but we don’t want that to result in inflationary pressures. So what we’ve got

 now, and this was the change from April, of course, was we’ve got all the international

 uncertainty, so that is a big change. I think it was right to stay put where we were and wait for

 more information in April. We’ve got more information, we’ve got more, and we’ve got

 actually much more uncertainty so we’ve got more information about risks on the downside, and in

 those circumstances I think it’s appropriate that we did it this time.
Michael Pascoe
So inflation is right on target, but you’re still trying to squeeze it lower.
Michele Bullock
No, inflation is right on target from a six-month annualised point of view. We get quarterly

 inflation rates in this. We don’t get monthly. We get the monthly indicator, which is very

 volatile. We get four readings on inflation a year. Other countries get them 12 times a year. So

 I think it’s much more challenging for us to judge the momentum of inflation when we only get

 four readings of it a year, and so what we’re looking for is some sort of reading, and we get

 some of that from liaison, we get some of it from the monthly numbers even though they’re very

 volatile, we’re wanting to make sure that we are continuing to see the progress in disinflation.

 It’s very easy to take a quarterly number and annualise it and say you’re there. It’s

 not quite as easy, I don’t think, as thinking about where the momentum might be. So I don’t

 ascribe to the view that you can simply take quarterly numbers or half-yearly numbers and just

 extrapolate them into annual and say there, you’re done. I think there’s more to it than

 that. I think there’s a story about, as I said, the underlying momentum and that’s a much

 harder read given the information we have. So that would be why I think we have to be just a little

 bit cautious.
Tom Dusevic
Governor, good afternoon, Tom Dusevic from
The Australian
newspaper. Looking at the forecasts, we see

 that public demand is still a big contributor to growth. We look at the business investment and the

 household consumption numbers, they’re a little bit weaker than they were the last time. The

 plan seems to be to shift the drivers of growth from the public sector to the private sector. Are you

 confident that we’re on track, that the private sector will be able to pick up and be the driver

 of growth?
Michele Bullock
Well, that’s the purpose of easing monetary policy a little bit is to try and get a bit of a

 pick up in, and as I said earlier the forecasts that have the interest rate declining, that will help

 to basically support some consumption, support some investment. Again, we’ve got this

 uncertainty hanging out here now with the international and how that’s going to impact that we

 don’t know, but that’s certainly the idea, and we are seeing that the private sector is

 picking up a bit, which is as we’d expect. Is it going to pick up enough? We’ll just have

 to wait and see. Enough given what else is going on in the world, and those are the circumstances we

 have to be alert to in setting monetary policy.
Michael Janda
Governor, Michael Janda from
ABC News
. The
Statement on Monetary Policy
noted that

 housing prices have yet to materially respond to easier borrowing conditions. Does that give the

 Reserve Bank Board a little more confidence that it can lower rates further without sparking another

 housing boom?
Michele Bullock
Look, I understand that people are really concerned about housing prices. As I said earlier, though,

 our focus has to be on inflation, and if the right thing to do in terms of employment and inflation

 is to lower interest rates, I think we have to accept what that might imply for housing prices

 because, as I said earlier, the issue for housing is supply/demand, and if we start thinking about,

 well, do we lower interest rates because of housing prices, we’re going to take our eye off the

 ball, which is inflation and employment, and I don’t think that would be the right thing to do.

 So I acknowledge that some people are worried that as interest rates come down housing prices will

 rise, but other policies have really got to step up here and address what is a housing shortage.
Michael Janda
Thanks, Governor.
Cameron Micallef
Governor, Cameron from NewsWire. You mention cost of living and weak household spending from cautious

 mortgage holders. What advice do you have to Australian households and is more help coming?
Michele Bullock
I wouldn’t give advice to households at all. What I would say is that I understand that

 they’ve been through a really rough few years, and I would say that bringing inflation down is,

 as I said earlier, the best thing we can do to help them, while keeping employment strong. That is

 the best thing we can do for them. At the moment we are on track to deliver that and so, as I said,

 my encouragement to them is I know you’re doing it tough, but conditions are improving,

 inflation is improving, and employment is holding up and that’s a positive thing.
John Kehoe
Hi Governor, John Kehoe from the
Australian Financial Review
. You seem to be communicating a sense of

 vindication that you’ve been able to trod the narrow path, get inflation down, keep unemployment

 relatively low. I know you’re not declaring complete victory, but do you feel like you’ve

 actually trod that narrow path successfully and what are the lessons you’ve learned over the

 last couple of years from that?
Michele Bullock
I think I’m going to retire the narrow path analogy now. I don’t want to sort of suggest

 that I’m 100 per cent confident that we’re there, but it is really encouraging

 that we do manage - we have got inflation down, and we still have employment holding up, but this is

 not a situation that is going to just be the equilibrium, I think. We’re always going to be

 thrown off course by things, as we’ve seen. So I don’t think it’s easy to just say,

 you know, this is - in answer to a previous question, that this is the way to do it in the future.

 The learnings I think I’ve had would be to be patient. When you know you’re a long way from

 where you need to be you need to get there quickly, but you also need to be a little bit cautious, so

 - but I think the next year is going to be a really interesting time. It’s not the same as

 earlier shocks. It’s a completely different shock, and it’s quite possible that the

 responses, the way we have to set monetary policy in this circumstance is quite different because the

 shock is quite different and we’re only going to learn as we go through this process.
Adrian Suljanovic
Thank you Governor, Adrian Suljanovic from Momentum Media. With rates being cut again will a

 potential increase in home loan market activity factor more into the Board’s decisions going

 forward, and is the Board at all worried about more borrowers taking on more debt seeing as the

 economic outlook is still uncertain?
Michele Bullock
I didn’t catch the first question. The second question on debt, that’s something that from

 a financial stability perspective we always are interested in. At the moment, actually, at an

 aggregate level households are pretty - in a pretty good position in an aggregate level. That’s

 not to say there’s not people out there who aren’t under stress, there are, but

 loan-to-valuation ratios aren’t too high, generally people are meeting their repayments, and in

 fact some people are more than meeting their repayments, they’re paying their loans off more

 quickly. So our judgment at the moment is that there’s not a financial stability risk associated

 with this, and with interest rates coming down, provided there’s not a lot more risky lending

 this actually will help households. It will actually reduce the extent to which households are under

 stress and that will be good for financial stability.
Luca Ittimani
Thanks Governor, Luca Ittimani from
The Guardian
. You’ve spoken a bit today about setting aside

 the international developments and looking at the domestic fundamentals. In your judgment, do you

 reckon a cut today would have been the right decision even if President Trump hadn’t walked out

 into the White House rose garden and held up that board of tariff rates?
Michele Bullock
I think the Board thinks it probably would have been, but the added international uncertainty added a

 bit of emphasis to, yes, maybe the downside is here and it’s prudent. As I said earlier, if

 you’d looked at what was happening domestically prior to this, inflation is now back at headline

 and trimmed mean are now between 2 and 3, which is good, the employment market is holding up,

 still a little bit tight, we are hearing that businesses are finding it difficult to pass on cost

 increases, margins are being compressed a bit. So all of these things, and the fact that inflation

 was coming down in line with what we had been thinking it would, I think gave the Board enough that

 absent the international evidence there was a case to cut. It might have been a bit more of a debate

 about leave or cut, but the added weight from the uncertainty associated with the international

 environment said, well look, yes, it’s actually a good decision to cut today.
Michael Stutchbury
Governor, Michael Stutchbury from
The Financial Review
. In the forecast you’ve downgraded the

 forecast for business investment going out at the same time you’ve forecast there will be quite

 a turnaround in productivity growth from going negatively to going quite significantly positive. In

 the PEFO, the treasury and finance department suggested if you didn’t get the turnaround in

 productivity growth then the wages forecast would have to be brought down from where they are. Would

 you share that qualification, and could you explain how do you see in your mind how the productivity

 numbers turn around when they haven’t in the past been forecast?
Michele Bullock
The productivity numbers, as you know, Michael, are assumptions, and we’re basically making an

 assumption that it returns back to more or less its trend level prior to the COVID, 2018. But I think

 there’s enough to think there’s a great deal of uncertainty about productivity. I

 can’t tell you what’s going to turn it around. I do know that we are not the only country.

 The only country in the world that’s experiencing productivity growth is the United States. Most

 other countries are in the same position as us, they don’t have productivity growth. So what is

 the answer? I don’t know. The Productivity Commission is, in fact, doing some work on this at

 the moment. The Treasurer has stuck it up the top of his list of things that he wants to work on and

 I think that’s where we need to focus. We have to take it as given and it is an assumption, but

 it is quite an uncertain assumption and to the extent that it doesn’t turn out to be right then

 that means we’ll have to adjust our forecasts.
Cara Wood
Hi, I’m Cara from 7. What would the RBA need to see in terms of inflation, consumer spending or

 global conditions to consider another rate cut or even a hike in the future?
Michele Bullock
Well, I think if we continue to observe inflation coming down and staying down sustainably, then to

 the extent that we think there’s still restrictiveness in monetary policy and we think there is

 a bit, then that would give us opportunities to lower the interest rate further. If it looks like

 things pick up much more quickly than we thought they would, so maybe consumption doesn’t stay

 subdued, maybe consumption with interest rate decline and real incomes rising, consumption picks up

 quite substantially. Then all the cost pressures that the businesses are saying, well, they might be

 able to pass them on. That might be the risk on the upside, and the question there would be for us

 are we still restrictive enough to keep that under control or do we need a bit more restrictiveness?

 These are all adjustments. We can’t be certain, but they’re the sorts of factors, I think,

 that would be important in that context.
