BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Opening Statement to the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics
DATE: 22/09/2025
SPEAKER: Michele Bullock
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2025/sp-gov-2025-09-22.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Opening Statement to the House of Representatives Standing Committee on Economics
Michele Bullock
Governor
Canberra
–
22 September 2025
Download
227KB
Hansard Transcript
Good morning, Chair and members of the Committee.
These hearings are an important part of the accountability process for the Reserve Bank and my colleagues

 and I are pleased to be here to answer your questions.
I’m pleased to see the new members of the Committee. As you would be aware, the RBA’s mission is

 to promote the economic prosperity and welfare of the Australian people, now and into the future. We do

 this by conducting monetary policy with the aim of maintaining low and stable inflation and full

 employment, and we also support the stability of the financial system. But our responsibilities go beyond

 this – we work to support a reliable, efficient and competitive payments system, deliver efficient

 and effective banking services to Australian government agencies and provide secure and reliable

 banknotes.
There have been some important changes at the RBA since we appeared before the previous incarnation of

 this Committee in February. From 1 March, the amended
Reserve Bank Act 1959
came into force,

 creating a new Monetary Policy Board and a separate Governance Board.
And since we last met with the Committee, the Monetary Policy Board has lowered the cash rate target

 – our key monetary policy tool – by a further 50 basis points to 3.6 per cent,

 following the 25 basis point cut decided by the previous Board in February.
I will start with some background to these monetary policy decisions and the outlook for the Australian

 economy. I will then make some remarks on the payments system and banknote distribution. I will finish

 off with an update on our progress towards achieving the objectives of the RBA Review.
Inflation and employment
As I noted, the Monetary Policy Board conducts monetary policy with the aim of maintaining low and stable

 inflation and full employment. The
Statement on the Conduct of Monetary Policy
– which

 was updated in July – sets out our agreement with the Government that an appropriate goal is

 consumer price inflation between 2 and 3 per cent. To achieve this, we set policy such

 that inflation is expected to return to the midpoint of the
2–3 per cent
target range. But there is flexibility around the

 timeframe in which we meet our inflation objective to balance this with meeting our full employment

 objective – achieving the maximum level of employment that is consistent with low and stable

 inflation in the medium term.
Consistent with this, the Board’s strategy to achieve our dual mandate over the past three years or

 so has been to bring inflation sustainably back to target within a reasonable timeframe while allowing

 the labour market to adjust gradually towards full employment.
On the first part of our mandate, inflation has fallen substantially since the peak of

 7.8 per cent in 2022 and is now within the
2–3 per cent
target range. The higher interest rates over that

 period helped to put downward pressure on inflation and to keep inflation expectations anchored.

 Underlying (trimmed mean) inflation – which removes the more volatile components of the index

 – fell to 2.7 per cent over the year to June 2025. Headline inflation, which has been

 affected by temporary cost of living relief measures, was 2.1 per cent over the year.
On the second part of our mandate, labour market conditions are close to full employment. The unemployment

 rate of 4.2 per cent in August remains low by historical standards and the share of the

 population with a job is close to a record high – this is good news! While labour market conditions

 have eased a little since we last met, with the unemployment rate rising a little, we assess that some

 tightness remains. Though there is always considerable uncertainty around this assessment.
Throughout this adjustment towards full employment, the economy has continued to expand – and growth

 in economic activity has also picked up since we last met, driven by the recovery in private demand. In

 terms of jobs, there are 1.1 million more Australians in employment than in mid-2022, which is

 clearly a welcome development for those individuals, their families and the wider Australian economy.
Recent monetary policy decisions and the economic outlook
Over the period since we last met with the Committee, the Board judged that it was appropriate to ease

 monetary policy to keep inflation close to target and the labour market at full employment. As I

 mentioned, we have lowered the cash rate by a total of 75 basis points since the start of the year

 to now be 3.6 per cent after being held steady for a time at 4.35 per cent since

 November 2023.
RBA forecasts from the August
Statement on Monetary Policy
suggested that underlying

 inflation will moderate a little further to around the midpoint of the
2–3 per cent
range. These forecasts were conditioned on the

 market-implied cash rate path at the time, which included some further modest easing of monetary policy.

 The recent interest rate cuts are expected to support spending by households and businesses, and growth

 in the Australian economy is expected to pick up a little further over the next year. The recovery in

 household consumption growth is forecast to be sustained as real incomes continue to grow. Since the

 August meeting, domestic data have been broadly in line with our expectations or if anything slightly

 stronger – the Board will discuss this and other developments at our meeting next week.
But forecasts are just that – forecasts. And the economic outlook continues to be clouded by

 uncertainty. This is especially so the further into the future we look. So we need to be alert to the

 risk that circumstances may change and be prepared to respond if necessary. The global environment is

 particularly uncertain and unpredictable, but monetary policy is well placed to respond if it seems

 international developments could have a material impact on Australia’s economy. There is also a risk

 that the recent pick-up in growth in domestic economic activity is not sustained, or, on the other hand,

 it could be materially stronger than we anticipate. Finally, there may be more excess demand in the

 economy and labour market outcomes may be stronger than expected. We are mindful that productivity growth

 has not picked up and growth in unit labour costs remains high.
The Board will remain attentive to the data and the evolving assessment of risks to guide its decisions.
We’ve made real progress in bringing inflation down. But our job is to make sure it stays within the

 target range in a way that’s sustainable – not just for now, but for the long term. Low and

 stable inflation is important because it means that households and businesses can plan, invest and create

 jobs without having to worry about inflation.
Before I move on to other parts of the RBA’s work, I want to acknowledge what many Australians have

 been through over the past few years.
We know that high inflation has pushed prices up across the board over the past few years. As my colleague

 Sarah Hunter explained in a fireside chat last week, while inflation has fallen materially, the price

 level isn’t coming back down. The higher price level has affected everyone—whether you’re

 paying a mortgage, renting, running a business, or just trying to make ends meet. It’s been

 especially tough on people with lower incomes and those in more vulnerable situations. This is why, as

 I’ve said, it’s so important that inflation remains low and stable.
Payments system
Another critical area of work for the RBA is our regulation and oversight of the payments system. We are

 conducting a review of surcharging and merchant card payment costs. We published a Consultation Paper in

 July, which outlined the Payment System Board’s preliminary views. The current framework has

 effectively been in place for around 25 years and it has served its original aims. But recent and

 likely future changes in the payments system mean that it is less fit for the future. We have received

 over 170 submissions in response to the consultation – we value this strong engagement and are

 now following-up with stakeholders to discuss submissions in further detail. It is fair to say that

 different stakeholders come at the issue from different perspectives, and we’ve seen this reflected

 in a wide range of views. The task now for our Payments System Board is to carefully consider all this

 feedback, so that we arrive at policy settings that best promote competition, efficiency and safety in

 the card payments system.
We also thank the Parliament for recently passing amendments to the
Payment Systems (Regulation) Act

 1998
. These amendments will modernise Australia’s payments regulatory framework so that a

 broader range of participants in the payments system – such as three-party schemes, mobile wallets

 and buy-now-pay-later providers – will be included in our regulatory oversight. We will soon

 consult to identify the priority areas that should be addressed under the expanded remit. We want to

 ensure that Australia’s payments system remains world class well into the future.
Banknote distribution
Another issue I would like to update the Committee on is recent developments in the cash distribution

 system. Cash remains a critical part of a resilient and inclusive payments system for all Australians.

 Although the use of cash for everyday payments has declined in recent decades, 1½ million Australians

 depend on it to participate in the economy, including more vulnerable groups and Australians in regional

 areas. Cash also continues to be used as a store of wealth, particularly during periods of economic

 uncertainty, and can be a useful backup for electronic methods of payment. As a result, cash in

 circulation is around $105 billion, which is a record high level. The RBA is committed to supporting

 the Australian Government’s policy objective to ensure cash remains a viable means of payment for as

 long as Australians want or need to use it.
As you are aware, the cash distribution system has faced significant challenges over recent years. Lower

 transactional use has made it more costly to store, process and distribute cash. These issues are most

 pressing for rural and regional areas where these services are most expensive. As you know, the logistics

 of moving cash to bank branches, ATMs and retailers is undertaken by cash-in-transit companies and the

 industry needs to work together towards a more sustainable distribution system. Linfox Armaguard, the

 main provider of these services, has faced financial strain and has been receiving industry funding for

 the past year.
The Council of Financial Regulators (CFR), which I chair, together with the ACCC, have met several times

 this year to discuss the challenges the industry is facing. In July, the CFR and ACCC jointly consulted

 on a proposed regulatory framework for cash distribution services. This would establish essential

 guardrails to support resilience and fair access to critical cash distribution services. The CFR and ACCC

 are currently reviewing feedback from the consultation, and expect to advise Government on options for

 the design of a regulatory framework in the near future.
As the issuer of Australian banknotes, the RBA also plays a key role in cash distribution. We provide

 banknotes to the major banks, who distribute these to the broader community. We provide incentives to

 support efficiency of distribution, encouraging banks to hold cash across the country, trade with each

 other and ensure notes of appropriate quality. We recognise that these arrangements need to adapt given

 changes in the industry, and so we are also reviewing the incentives we provide on wholesale banknotes to

 ensure they remain fit for purpose. We continue to work with industry participants to develop solutions

 that will best meet the needs of the community.
Progress towards achieving the objectives from the Review of the RBA to be fit for the future
The RBA Review provided a valuable opportunity to reflect on the RBA’s monetary policy analysis,

 decision-making and transparency. As you know, we incorporated meaningful changes prior to the

 commencement of the new Monetary Policy Board including press conferences after each meeting, publishing

 more information on our forecasts and key judgements, the media statement following meetings being issued

 by the Board rather than the Governor and the minutes of the Board meeting providing a more fulsome

 record of the discussion. We have an ongoing commitment to communication and transparency, and one recent

 change is to publish an unattributed record of votes in the post-meeting statement. I believe these

 changes have and will continue to be valuable in enhancing the communication and accountability of our

 decisions.
The establishment of the Governance Board is also supporting the efforts we are making to strengthen the

 Bank’s management, culture and operations including lifting risk management practices to meet the

 challenges of a modern central bank.
And more generally, we have made substantial progress in responding to the recommendations of the Review

 and to embed meaningful and lasting change. I can already see the impact of these changes. We are seeing

 signs of cultural shift, underpinned by a commitment to be more open and dynamic, which we will build on

 in coming years. While much has been achieved, we recognise that this is an ongoing journey of

 transformational change and continuous improvement.
The Governance Board will report on our progress on achieving the objectives of the Review by the end of

 this year. These changes are all designed to strengthen our ability to do our work and enhance the

 welfare of the Australian people
Thank you for listening. My colleagues and I look forward to answering your questions.
