BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Interview With Ladies Finance Club
DATE: 16/12/2025
SPEAKER: Sarah Hunter
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2025/sp-ag-2025-12-16-2.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Podcast
Interview With Ladies Finance Club
Sarah Hunter
Assistant Governor (Economic)
16 December 2025
–
Online
Molly Benjamin
Welcome to the Get Rich podcast, Sarah. We’re excited to have you on to learn about all things

 RBA and inflation.
Sarah Hunter
Thank you so much for having me. I’m looking forward to it.
Molly Benjamin
So I actually thought, you know, what’s a good place to start? Well, let’s actually start

 with what actually is inflation and what is inflation at the moment?
Sarah Hunter
Yeah, it’s an excellent question. It’s such an economist term, isn’t it? You hear

 about it from economists all the time. So inflation is just the percentage increase in prices from

 one year to the next. Different prices will go up and down by different amounts from year to year. So

 we use an average of that, which is the Consumer Price Index. So when we talk about inflation as

 macroeconomists, generally speaking, we’re talking about what’s happened to the Consumer

 Price Index from last year to this year. And in terms of where inflation is right now. well actually

 today’s a really exciting day. We’re recording this on the day that we get the monthly CPI.

 So the monthly inflation data for the first time, we’re going to get it in just under an

 hour’s time from when we’re recording. So I can’t give you the precise number at the

 moment because I don’t know what it is. I’ve got to wait to find out. But for the September

 quarter, so that was for the three months through to the end of September, it was

 3.2 per cent. But find out in a little while what it’s gone to more recently.
Molly Benjamin
Okay, so what makes up the CPI like the Consumer Price Index?
Sarah Hunter
As I said, generally speaking, we want to look across all the different prices across the economy.

 What’s in the Consumer Price Index is basically a weighted average of what everybody, all

 households, all individuals spend across the economy in any given year. So it’s everything from

 rent, if you pay your rent, through to food, through to the cost of going out to eat, clothes,

 furniture, literally everything that households spend in a year. What the ABS does is take all of

 that information. They work out what proportion the average household spend spends on each of those

 things, then they look at the price change for each of those categories and they sort of aggregate

 all of that up to make up headline inflation. So what’s really interesting is that no one will

 actually be the average. So you might spend a bit more on rent than another household. You might

 spend a little bit less on food. If you don’t own a car, you won’t be spending any money on

 petrol, but other people will. So that is in the basket. So it can actually be kind of tricky because

 you’ll see this headline number and you just think, well, that doesn’t really fit for me.

 It probably doesn’t because it’s an average across everybody. It’s not sort of

 representative of any one person.
Molly Benjamin
Okay, great. And is high inflation good or do we want low inflation?
Sarah Hunter
So generally speaking, we think we want low inflation. And for us here at the Bank, we define that as

 between 2 and 3 per cent. So that’s prices going up on average by between

 2 and 3 per cent a year. The reason we like to keep inflation low and stable, so in

 that target, is when inflation’s higher, it can just be a little bit harder for everybody to

 manage. So for instance, if inflation’s running a bit faster than that, as it was a couple of

 years ago, your wages might move and keep up eventually, but for a period of time, you only get a pay

 rise once a year, that isn’t happening. So it’s a bit harder for households to budget and

 plan because prices are increasing faster, but your wages may not keep up in the near term. It’s

 also pretty tough for those that might be getting social security benefits and other supports from

 the government for the same reason, because they only get reset once a year or once every six months.

 But in between, you’ve still got prices that are rising. If they’re rising quickly,

 that’s really tough. And businesses as well, when they’re making decisions about whether or

 not to invest in a new factory, say, or bring in some new equipment or maybe hire some extra people

 or not. If prices are generally rising quickly, it can be a little bit harder for them to work out if

 the increase in the price for their product is because prices are generally going up or actually

 because there’s extra demand for what they do and they need to expand. So we like to keep

 inflation low and stable because it just makes it easier for everyone to plan and get on with their

 lives. Okay, awesome.
Molly Benjamin
So let’s say I went down to Coles, I filled up my grocery trolley last year, and it cost me

 $100. This year I put the exact same groceries in, but now it costs me $102 for the exact

 same amount. So that would be like high inflation, or that’d be like a 2 per cent

 inflation. Is that how it works?
Sarah Hunter
Yeah, that’s exactly right. And probably what you’ll notice when you do that is that some

 of the things you put in your trolley are about the same price they were a year ago. Some of the

 things might be a bit cheaper, but most things have gone up at least a little bit in price. And so

 that’s that, you know, $100 to $102. So that’s the aggregate or the average that

 the ABS are measuring. What you do with your shopping trolley is just a smaller version of that. So

 that’s exactly right.
Molly Benjamin
Okay, so then if inflation comes down, let’s say next year, does that mean prices come down?
Sarah Hunter
It doesn’t. And that’s a really tricky thing. I know, because we all have to get used to

 those higher prices. So what we’re trying to do is keep the rate of inflation so the speed that

 prices are going up sort of low, like I said earlier. But what we’re not trying to do is make

 prices fall back down. My own personal version of this is milk. I still remember before COVID when it

 was a dollar a litre in the supermarkets, you know, you went and it was a dollar for one litre, two

 dollars for two. Now it’s a lot more than that right. And it’s never going to be a dollar a

 litre again. We’re not trying to get it to go back down, but I still have to catch myself and

 remind myself when I’m doing my own weekly shop if that’s the case. But I know from the job

 we’re not trying to get prices to fall because actually falling prices are pretty tricky for an

 economy to deal with as well, because businesses have to adjust to that kind of environment.

 It’s not what we’re used to, households as well. So we actually don’t want that. I

 know it would be nice, it seems nice for lower prices, but actually we don’t want that. We just

 want inflation to be low and stable, but still positive. So we want small price rises, not big price

 rises.
Molly Benjamin
So your milk version is my version of a 30 cent Maccas cone.
Sarah Hunter
There you go.
Molly Benjamin
No longer 30 cents, they’re like 35 cents. And I’m like, the ice cream

 hasn’t changed in size since I was 12. But I’m assuming it’s the labour, it’s the

 ingredients, it’s the overheads that’s all gone up with inflation.
Sarah Hunter
Exactly, yeah. The price of everything has gone up. So the thing we all notice is when we go to the

 shops or you go to Maccas and you buy. Yeah, and your ice cream cone. But what Maccas are seeing on

 the other side is that the costs of the inputs have gone up, that the milk that would go into the ice

 cream, wages, rents, all of those other things, all those prices, generally speaking, all of those

 prices will move together over time and so everything sort of coming in goes up a bit in price and

 then the final price goes up a bit as well. And we just want to keep that rate low and stable. But

 you’re absolutely right.
Molly Benjamin
So what does inflation mean for like my savings in a bank account versus my mortgage?
Sarah Hunter
Yeah, so it depends on what happens to the interest rate. So I’m sure everyone knows you put

 your savings in the bank and you’ll get paid some interest by the bank for that. Or if

 you’ve got a mortgage, you probably know what your mortgage interest rate is, which is the

 interest rate you have to pay.
Molly Benjamin
I mean, we should know. I don’t know if we all know, but we should know.
Sarah Hunter
Or at least know that you have to do that. So really, what inflation, what that means for those is

 what happens to the interest rate. And so what we at the Reserve Bank have been doing over the last

 few years is, we came out of COVID late ‘21, early 2022, and then we got a big burst of

 inflation coming through. And so to try and bring inflation back down, we were raising the interest

 rate. We started in May ‘22, and the last of the rate rises was in November ‘23. What we

 were trying to do through that period was just slow the economy down a bit. We’re trying to keep

 demand and supply in balance. We’re trying to get it back into balance to get inflation back

 down. Because if you have demand running stronger than supply, then what happens is you’ll get

 inflation. So you’ve got people trying to spend money in the economy, businesses trying to

 invest and expand. And if everyone’s trying to do that at the same time, it just means

 there’s pressure in the system and prices get pushed up and that comes through as high

 inflation. So we were raising interest rates to try and bring inflation back down, to try and

 rebalance the economy. So through that period of time, if you had a mortgage, your monthly payments

 went up. I’m sure everyone who had a mortgage will remember that really well. If you had some

 savings in the bank, then the interest that you would get on the savings was going up at the same

 time.
Molly Benjamin
Because then that’s encouraging people to keep more money in a bank account.
Sarah Hunter
Yeah, exactly, exactly.
Molly Benjamin
And don’t spend it as much.
Sarah Hunter
Right, exactly. Which is that sort of dampening down. That’s one of the ways that higher rates

 dampen down demand and help to rebalance the economy. And then from earlier this year, we got to a

 point where we felt like actually demand and supply were coming back into balance. Not quite there

 yet at the start of the year, but getting closer. Inflation had come off, and so we started cutting

 rates. And so the first cut was in February this year, and then we did a couple of others after that.

 And so then the opposite is working. So now if you have a mortgage, your repayments, if you’re

 on a variable rate, your repayments will have come down a bit. That’s the monthly minimums.
Molly Benjamin
But the interest on your bank account also has come down.
Sarah Hunter
Exactly, exactly. So it’s this sort of rebalancing going on that’s playing through.
Molly Benjamin
Okay, awesome. So the cash rate, so the money we’re getting in our bank account is very much

 connected to the interest rate. And again, like, this might be a bit of a blonde question, but who

 comes up with the interest rate? Do you guys? The RBA?
Sarah Hunter
Yeah. No such thing as a blonde question by the way.
Molly Benjamin
I’m blonde. Well, I used to be, I need to get my roots done, but yes.
Sarah Hunter
So we set one interest rate in the economy, the cash rate. But actually the rate that you’ll be

 paying on your mortgage or the rate that you’ll get if you’ve got savings with a bank,

 that’s actually decided by the bank itself. But what usually happens for most of those interest

 rates is that they’re linked to the cash rate. So maybe when you took your mortgage out, you

 might remember that they might have said your interest rate is going to be the cash rate plus an

 amount. And so when the cash rate moves, then your mortgage rate moves. And it’s usually the

 same for a savings rate on a bank account as well. When the cash rate moves, that gets passed through

 in both directions into savings rates. So we don’t set those rates directly, the banks do, but

 they’re usually linked to the cash rate, which is why when the cash rate moves, you’ll see

 a change.
Molly Benjamin
Which is connected to inflation and keeping inflation at 2 to 3 per cent.
Sarah Hunter
That’s right, yeah. So we’re trying to really, what we’re trying to do at the Bank

 here, we’re trying to keep inflation between 2 and 3 per cent. And in doing that,

 if we do that sort of on an ongoing basis, that’ll keep the economy, as we say, in balance. And

 another way of saying that is that in the labour market will be, the economists call it, we call it

 full employment. But you can think of that as a point where everybody who wants a job either has one

 or can get one in a reasonable amount of time. And those two things will come together in the sort of

 long term. So over time, if we keep inflation between 2 and 3 per cent, then

 we’ll have the labour market at full employment. And that’s a great outcome. That’s

 what we’re trying to achieve.
Molly Benjamin
Awesome. And then what’s a recession? And is that connected to this?
Sarah Hunter
It can be. Although monetary policy, we’re not trying to generate a recession.
Molly Benjamin
No.
Sarah Hunter
We definitely don’t want that. A recession is defined as a period of time, usually six months,

 at least six months where GDP, so that’s a measure of activity, or how much is going on across

 the economy, where that measure declines for six months. And we measure it every three months. So you

 get one quarter where it declines, and if you get a second quarter after that where it declines, then

 economists would call that a recession. Normally recessions are triggered by some kind of shock. So

 we’re not trying to do it with policy, but something can happen that can trigger a recession. A

 good, a great example recently is the pandemic, COVID. So the economy had a recession in 2020 because

 of COVID. We had to shut large parts of the economy down and obviously then GDP went down and we

 ended up with a recession. And so usually what happens then actually is that monetary policy, so the

 Bank will respond to try and support and push against that shock. And we did that in COVID too, so we

 could sort of see it happening. So in March 2020, we cut interest rates all the way to

 0.1 per cent. That sort of emergency type levels very, very low. And we did some other

 policies too, just to try and provide some support. We couldn’t completely offset what was

 happening, but we did all of that to provide some support through the really tough times and then to

 help things get going again once lockdowns ended and we could all get back to sort of more normal

 life. So normally a recession comes from a shock and then monetary policy will respond.
Molly Benjamin
Okay, awesome. And so then, oh my gosh, I’ve got so many questions on inflation. So how do

 global events, like what’s going on in Ukraine, what’s going on in the Middle East, how do

 like global events influence inflation in Australia? Does that have an effect on inflation?
Sarah Hunter
Yeah, it definitely does. So I know we’re a long way away geographically from most parts of the

 world, but actually we’re really very connected with the rest of the world. So there’s a

 couple of channels that that can come through. The sort of more direct or the quicker channel is

 through what happens to the prices of things that we have to import. So, for example, we import

 petrol, oil. We don’t produce much oil ourselves, so we have to import it. Obviously we put it

 in our cars to drive. And so the Ukraine conflict, for example, what happened when that broke out was

 that there were concerns in global markets about oil supply. Obviously Russia being an oil supplier

 was part of that. And so oil prices spiked up, they jumped up and that came through pretty quickly

 into petrol prices. People might remember petrol going to way above $2 a litre in early 2022. So

 that’s one sort of direct channel that it comes through and then the other way it can come

 through, and I’ll show my age a bit here, but if people can remember the Global Financial Crisis

 way back in 2008, 2009. The other way it can come through is just if the global economy goes into a

 recession, then that sort of spills through to us, so we get fewer tourists visiting because other

 countries aren’t doing as well economically. Back then, the US was at the centre of that

 particular shock. It can come through as weaker demand for some of our other exports and that then

 dampens down what happens here at home. We also get connections through financial markets too. So

 back, again the GFC, back then we had a big correction in stock markets and things like that that

 then flowed through to the local economy. So, yeah, we’re a long way away, but we’re very

 connected. So global definitely matters.
Molly Benjamin
Awesome. And if we look at a really like, simple example. I remember a few years ago, I’m a

 Queenslander originally, but I remember like many years ago there was a banana shortage. So everyone

 wanted bananas. Banana prices skyrocketed. So is that like banana inflation? Is that like a version

 of how it works?
Sarah Hunter
Totally. So that’s a really great example of a supply shock. I remember that too. It wasn’t

 long. I’m married to an Australian, we’ve been together a long time. Wasn’t long after

 we first got together. I remember coming here and bananas were like $20 a kilo or something.

 Unheard of prices. It was crazy. Yeah, no, it’s a great example of a supply shock. So there was,

 there was a tropical storm, wasn’t there, that sort of wiped out the banana crop. And so

 basically there were not many bananas and people still wanted to buy and eat bananas, so that pushed

 the price up. So that’s an absolute classic supply shock. And it sort of played out as

 you’d expect. So banana prices were high for a while, then the farmers sort of replanted and

 rebuilt the crops and things and eventually the supply came back to normal and the prices came back

 down. That was actually an example where the supply shock was so big that afterwards prices did come

 back down. But it was quite an extreme shock for bananas.
Molly Benjamin
But we shouldn’t think our coffee is going to come down anytime soon.
Sarah Hunter
No, unfortunately not. I’ve noticed that too. It has gotten a bit more expensive because

 there’s been some supply disruptions and just more demand. Like coffee, coffee here is great. So

 I’m not surprised we’re paying more for coffee.
Molly Benjamin
So again, with like the $5 coffees we’re paying. So with our wage growth, is our wage

 growth generally, do we see that increase over the years as well, or is that the aim?
Sarah Hunter
Yeah, that’s normally what happens. But as I said earlier, it can take a bit of time with wages

 because most people will get their pay maybe reset once a year. If you work for a private company,

 that’s quite common. But some people actually their pay agreements get set over a two or even

 three-year period. So if you have an enterprise agreement, if you work for the government, for

 example, lots of government workers are covered by EBAs and some people in the private sector too.

 Then your agreement actually sets out what your pay rises are going to be for the next two or three

 years typically. So that’s why higher inflation can be really tricky because it can take time

 for wages to respond. But normally wages eventually will catch up with what’s happened to price

 inflation. And we’re starting to see a bit of that happening at the moment here actually for a

 time when inflation was really high, wages didn’t keep up with it and that was what made it such

 a tough period. But now we’re starting to see wages actually grow faster than prices and so a

 bit of that we think is probably some catch up from that period. So yeah, in the very long run if you

 look over like a 10-year period or 15, 20-year period, you’ll see that wages and prices, wages

 will at the very least keep up with prices and actually they tend to grow a little bit more than that

 because you get a productivity gain as well.
Molly Benjamin
Yeah, because they would need to otherwise you would be like not being able to afford anything.
Sarah Hunter
Yeah, exactly. And so we have a liaison program here at the bank and when we talk to employers about

 how they think about setting wages, they’ll often tell us, well we think about what’s

 happened to prices, to inflation and that’s one of the factors we consider and we know when,

 when those agreements are being bargained for, that often will be a consideration on both sides. You

 know what’s happened to price inflation? So how much do wages need to move given what’s

 happened to prices? So yeah, it generally over the medium, longer term you’ll find your wages

 will be keeping up with prices.
Molly Benjamin
Because let’s say you were getting, your work was like we’re going to give you a

 2.5 per cent pay rise, but inflation’s at 2.5 per cent. Are you actually

 getting a pay rise?
Sarah Hunter
Yeah, that’s right. That sort of wages keeping up with inflation up, right,
Molly Benjamin
Yeah, that’s just keeping up, right?
Sarah Hunter
Yeah, exactly. It’s not necessarily moving faster. So that’s something to, yeah always you

 should be keeping that in mind. That part of the wage increase is kind of there to keep up with price

 inflation and so that as a benchmark is a good benchmark.
Molly Benjamin
Awesome. Okay, great. So you work for the Reserve Bank of Australia, the RBA, because we love to

 shorten everything in Australia. So what’s your like main job? Because we know like the big four

 banks, but you guys are, you guys are a little bit different.
Sarah Hunter
Yeah, we are. GFC is only an acronym here in Australia, by the way. Everyone else still calls it the

 financial crisis.
Molly Benjamin
Oh yeah, no, we love an opportunity to shorten something.
Sarah Hunter
Anything shortening. Yeah. So the RBA, we have a few different jobs that we do, our responsibilities.

 So we’re a bit similar to the big banks, but we are quite different in some ways. So one of our

 jobs is what we’ve been talking about. We call it monetary policy, but basically setting the

 cash rate, so interest rates, to keep inflation between 2 and 3 per cent. And if we do

 that then we should have the economy operating around full employment or in balance. So that’s

 one of our jobs. But it’s not our only job. We also have some responsibilities for financial

 stability. So if financial markets get very bumpy and rocky, and we’re in a sort of crisis-type

 situation like the GFC, then we’ll intervene in response to that. And we’re also the ones

 that run the payment system. So when you tap your card or your phone to pay for your coffee and you

 pay the cafe, we’re running the system in the background to make that happen. Which I think is

 quite important. I would be quite worried if I tap my card and nothing happens. So that’s a job

 that we have too. A bit more in the background, but pretty important one I’d say.
Molly Benjamin
So do you guys talk to other reserve banks of countries? Like, is that, are they the reserve bank of

 the UK or the reserve bank of America? Is that a thing?
Sarah Hunter
Yeah, it’s totally a thing. So pretty much every country, well, every currency area will have

 its own central bank. So yeah, we have like the RBNZ is the Kiwi version. We’ve got the Bank of

 England in the UK. The Federal Reserve is the US central bank. So we talk to all of them and

 it’s important because sometimes if it’s a global shock in particular, we really want to

 understand what others are seeing and how they’re thinking about it. And so we can think about

 what that means for us. And even outside of that, in more normal times, like right now, it’s

 just good to be talking to others that are trying to do the same thing and achieve the same thing.

 Because most, certainly for advanced economies, most central banks want that low inflation and an

 economy at full employment. And then they’ll also have that financial stability responsibility

 and the payment system too. So it’s just good to connect with others that are trying to do the

 same thing and learn from them.
Molly Benjamin
Awesome. And just a final question on it, or actually maybe I’ve got one more after this, but

 that 2 to 3 per cent, why is it 2 to 3 and not like 1 per cent or

 4 per cent?
Sarah Hunter
Yeah, it’s a really great question because it’s not, it’s different in different

 countries. So some countries have just 2 per cent, the Kiwis have 1 to

 3 per cent. So there’s no rule that says it has to be 2 to 3. It can be

 different. It’s really all about having a target that’s low. So we. So

 4 per cent, or certainly above 4 per cent, we think of that as a bit high. So

 it’s about having a target that’s, that’s low. So 2 to 3 is good, but we

 don’t want it to be say, zero or a negative number. We don’t want prices to fall because

 that’s really hard to adjust and work through. So falling prices, if that happened over time

 continuously, then that would mean, for example, like wages would, would need to be falling too to

 sort of match that as we were talking about earlier. But that’s really tricky and I think

 it’s hard for everyone to sort of wrap their heads around. So low is good, but we still want it

 to be positive. So 2 to 3 per cent. Actually that was agreed between the Bank and the

 Government in the 1990s when they first set up inflation targeting, the framework. It hasn’t

 been changed since, but it was really the reason it was chosen was a low number to be going after.

 So, you know, two and a half in the middle, but not too low. And that’s where it came from.
Molly Benjamin
Okay, awesome. And then I guess looking, so it’s the 26th of November today when we’re

 recording this. It’s going to come out in a few weeks time, but obviously we’re coming to

 the end of the year. So what is the outlook for 2026 looking like from an economist’s point of

 view?
Sarah Hunter
So our current forecast of what we think is going to happen today is that inflation, we think

 it’s going to be sort of stay a little bit above the target band through next year. And some of

 that’s because there’s some temporary factors that are being unwound at the moment. So for

 instance, anyone who lives up in Queensland or in WA or Tasmania, you probably noticed that your

 state electricity rebate, that didn’t get renewed. So you had that last year, but you don’t

 have that this year. So that’s pushed up. And the federal rebate is also at the moment,

 it’s legislated to be to come to an end at the end of this year. So that’s going to push up

 on inflation as well. So for just a period of time, inflation is going to stay a bit above our

 target. But then as we go through the end of next year and into 2027, we think inflation is going to

 come back down and maybe not get to 2.5 per cent. But our current forecast, we get to sort

 of 2.6 per cent in late 2027. And in terms of the economy and growth and like the labour

 market, we think things are going to be pretty stable we hope. So the economy growing around

 2 per cent a year, which is what we think, what economists call trend growth. But we think

 that’s the pace the economy can manage without generating inflationary pressures. And we think

 the labour market is going to be pretty stable as well. So what I hope is that if people have got a

 job, they’re able to stay in that job or if they’re looking for a job, it doesn’t take

 too long. That’s what we think for the next couple of years.
Molly Benjamin
Okay, awesome. And so with inflation maybe going up a little bit higher, is that what you’re

 saying for next year, from a practical sense, from our listeners point of view, maybe it’s time

 just to put a little bit of extra savings into that emergency fund in case you might need that for

 later on.
Sarah Hunter
Yeah, well, I think, yeah, I think I’d say is that just to be aware that there’s some stuff

 that’s going to unwind that will make things a bit more expensive. I think electricity is the

 biggest one. I always have to look for it on my own bill at home actually. But there is a line item

 that says about the government rebate the $75 off. At the moment, you’ll get that for the

 last three months of this year, but you won’t get it for the first three months of next year and

 beyond. So just being aware that that’s going to happen and planning around those sorts of

 things, that feels like a good idea. That’s certainly how I’m thinking about it myself.
Molly Benjamin
Awesome. And for those freaking out a little bit about that, definitely check out our episode we did

 on solar. Thank you so much Sarah, this has been so informative. I’ve learned so much about

 inflation and the role of the RBA. It’s pretty, pretty important what you guys do, so I’m

 glad you’re doing it.
Sarah Hunter
Oh, thank you. No, this has been an absolute pleasure. Really, really enjoyed it. Yeah, I hope your

 listeners got something out of it, too. It’s been really good fun.
Molly Benjamin
Awesome. Thanks so much.
