BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Monetary Policy Decision
DATE: 08/07/2025
SPEAKER: Michele Bullock
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2025/mc-gov-2025-07-08.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

More on the July 2025 monetary policy decision
Media Conference
Monetary Policy Decision
Michele Bullock
Governor
Sydney
–
8 July 2025
Audio
42MB
Watch video: Media Conference – Monetary Policy Decision, Sydney
Transcript
Michele Bullock
Thank you for coming. So today the Board decided to leave the cash rate on hold at
 3.85 per cent. Monetary policy has been working as expected and we’ve made good
 progress on bringing inflation down over the past 18 months. But quarterly trimmed mean
 inflation has only been in our 2 to 3 per cent target range for one quarter at
 2.9 per cent in March. Very pleasingly unemployment remains low at 4.1 per cent.
 And we’ve already cut the cash rate by 50 basis points since February this year, the
 effects of which are still to flow through to the economy. The data and policy outcomes around the
 world since the May meeting have been close to what we expected in our latest baseline forecasts
 published in May, but economic conditions remain uncertain. We’re waiting to confirm whether
 inflation is still on track to sustainably reach 2.5 per cent.
Since the May meeting, the two monthly CPI indicators have been broadly consistent with
 our forecasts for headline inflation and show that we’re moving in the right direction. However,
 some components suggest that underlying inflation in the June quarter could be a little higher than our
 forecast. Wages growth has eased over the past year but growth in unit labour costs remains elevated
 alongside continued weak productivity growth. By our next meeting in five weeks, we will have the June
 quarter CPI, another labour market reading, further information about international developments and an
 updated set of forecasts. So the Board decided to wait a few weeks to confirm that we’re still on
 track to meet our inflation and employment objectives. As well as a very thorough consideration of
 Australian economic conditions, global developments took up a lot of time at the Board meeting over the
 past couple of days. The likelihood of a severe downside scenario associated with a trade war which we
 set out in our May
Statement,
that likelihood has abated. But this is a very fluid situation
 and we will continue to watch the data here and overseas very closely to see how things play out.
 We’re continuing to analyse what developments overseas mean for conditions here in Australia and
 particularly for inflation and the labour market.
Based on what we know today, the Board continues to judge that it is appropriate to
 maintain a cautious, gradual approach to easing monetary policy. We remain alert to adverse outcomes that
 could cause a sharp deterioration in the outlook and monetary policy is well placed to respond decisively
 if necessary. The Board’s strategy has been to bring inflation down while avoiding a sharp rise in
 unemployment. This strategy has meant that we didn’t take rates as high as some other countries so
 it may be that we don’t need to reduce rates as much as some other countries have done.
In summary, we must keep inflation down while trying to maintain a healthy jobs market
 because when inflation is low and stable and people can get jobs, it is good for households, communities
 and good for the broader Australian economy. When inflation is low and stable people don’t need to
 spend time thinking about it and households and businesses can instead focus on what’s important to
 them. So thank you and I’m happy to take your questions.
Brandon How
Thanks, Governor. Brandon How from Capital Brief. Given that today’s rates decision was
 contrary to market expectations, do you think the RBA has effectively communicated with the public
 and markets since May? Or is there additional value to the RBA recalibrating market expectations at
 this time and potentially looking to August, does today’s decision open the door to a rate cut
 larger than 25 basis points?
Michele Bullock
Thanks, Brandon. I think communication generally, actually, has been going pretty well. I think what
 was the difference was that reasonable people can differ in their interpretations of data and I think
 there was a couple of things. One was the labour market data and the other was the monthly CPI data.
 A lot of people focused on the headline CPI number at 2.1 per cent but we don’t think
 inflation in a sustainable way is that low. We think it’s higher. Our interpretation of the data
 I think was a bit different. Opportunities like this, for me to communicate that, I think is very
 helpful. What I would say is that what the decision today was about was about timing rather than
 direction. And I think I’ve made this point in the past but our forecasts guide us and, yes,
 they get more uncertain the further we go out but at least in the near term what we’re looking
 for is confirmation that we are basically on our forecast path and that gives us confidence that we
 are on a path towards easing further.
Juliette Saly
Governor, Juliette Saly, Ausbiz. As we have said it’s come quite as a shock to many, the
 Treasurer as well saying this is going to be a disappointment to millions of Australians. Luci Ellis
 who used to work with you saying just get on with it. What changes between now and the next five
 weeks and to Brandon’s point could we then see a bigger cut if a cut is warranted?
Michele Bullock
Thanks for the question. I think, again, to the point about the recent CPI data that we saw, a lot of
 the focus was on the monthly data. And we think that’s a little too volatile and not quite
 representative of what’s really going on with inflation. So we’re a little cautious about
 that. I think a lot of people reacted very much to that. What we would - the quarterly CPI is the
 comprehensive thing that gives us the best read. There was a couple of components in that monthly CPI
 that suggested to us that the quarterly CPI might be a little bit higher than what we’ve been
 forecasting in May. That doesn’t necessarily mean that we’re off track but we just want to
 get the data to confirm that we are pretty much on track. You will recall the forecasts had an
 assumption of a gradually easing interest rate path in it and what we’re looking for is
 confirmation that we still look to be on the path for inflation and with those assumptions.
Patrick Commins
Governor, Patrick Commins from
Guardian Australia
. We saw a split decision in the Board.
 This is the first time we’ve seen that as part of the new regime. Can you tell us more about the
 people who didn’t vote in favour of the majority, whether they were RBA staff and what they
 voted for?
Michele Bullock
They are unattributed votes, so I can’t tell you who voted what way. What I can say is that what
 it demonstrates, I hope, is that there was really good active debate in the boardroom about the pros
 and cons of holding and easing. And I would characterise it as saying that the difference between the
 two camps really was down to a slightly softer reading - those who wanted a cut, a slightly softer
 reading of the data than those who wanted to hold just for the time being. And also, a little bit
 more concern about the downside risks particularly on the international side for those people who
 wanted to ease. But, again, I will emphasise I think I made the point earlier that the difference was
 not about directionally; it was more about timing.
Victoria Thieberger
Governor, Victoria Thieberger from The Conversation. You mentioned productivity hasn’t picked
 up. One of the issues we’ve seen is capex has been very soft, negative over the past year,
 expectations are pretty flat and also negativity has predated all the trade uncertainty we’ve
 had. What do you think it is going to take for businesses to start spending up again?
Michele Bullock
Well, I think in terms of what the Reserve Bank can do certainty in terms of price stability would be
 very helpful for businesses, I think, because when businesses are having to worry about inflation and
 I think that isn’t helpful for their investment plans. But it is challenging in the current
 environment because international environment at the moment is very uncertain and it is very
 uncertain for businesses and also consumers, but you would expect it to show up with businesses.
 Interestingly, the NAB survey came out today and we’re still not really seeing it show up in
 businesses in Australia. Certainly, we don’t have the same direct exposure to the US that many
 other countries have so that might be part of it. But I think certainty from us in terms of inflation
 and a stable economy, and I think in terms of the productivity side of things, we’re not the
 only country with productivity issues. United States aside, most countries have seen slowing
 productivity. There are other issues that have got to be addressed and they’re for governments
 and I think that’s part of the government’s reform roundtable to address those issues.
David Chau
Governor, David Chau from
ABC News
. A lot of Australians with big mortgages are probably
 a bit disappointed about today’s decision to keep rates on hold. How would you explain it to
 them? What was the biggest thing that prevented you and your colleagues cutting rates today?
Michele Bullock
I do understand that and I do understand that households with mortgages are very keen to see interest
 rates decline because it helps them with their cash flow. I’m very conscious of that. I’m
 also very conscious we don’t want to end up having to fight inflation again. We want to make
 sure we’ve nailed it. As I said, the biggest thing here is that it wasn’t really
 directionally where we think we’re heading in terms of easing. It was more about timing. And
 just making sure - we’ve only had one quarter of underlying inflation just back in
 2.9 per cent. Underlying inflation at the moment gives us the best idea of the underlying
 inflation pulse, if you like, because the headline numbers are mixed up a bit by particularly energy
 rebates. So the underlying is the best read. And all the Board’s decision today was recognising
 that, look, there’s five weeks until the next meeting. By then we will know what the June
 quarter CPI is and if it comes in as we think it will, a little bit at the margin we’re a little
 bit worried about but if it comes in as we think it will, continued decline, that validates our
 easing path and so that’s what we’re waiting for. That’s the reason - as I said
 earlier, it wasn’t so much the difference in opinion amongst the Board wasn’t so much
 directionally, it was about timing.
Matt Cranston
Matt from
The Australian
, Governor. Firstly, for all the economic students out there in
 Australia, can you tell us what is the importance of central bank independence? And then secondly
 just to follow on you have got the productivity roundtable that you will be attending next month. And
 you said today that there was continued weak productivity outcomes. You guys - the RBA actually has
 productivity returning to trend. Mining productivity was more than 60 per cent of all
 productivity for the decade leading up to COVID. But that’s all declined. So how can you
 possibly put that back into trend? Where do you get that productivity from?
Michele Bullock
So on central bank independence, what’s important there is that it is really important for
 people to have stable inflation expectations. One of the best ways to deliver that is to have a
 central bank that you trust to be focused on keeping inflation low and stable. So that’s the
 simple - just a very simple answer. We could go on for a while. No, I’m not going on for a
 while. On productivity, yes, productivity has been slowing and it was slowing even before the COVID
 pandemic. Basically productivity has gone nowhere apart from - it has been all over the place during
 the pandemic for various reasons but basically it hasn’t gone anywhere in years. We are looking
 very actively at productivity and what is driving productivity or what is not driving productivity.
 We are thinking about whether or not the assumptions that we typically think about are still
 relevant. And that’s ongoing work for us at the moment. I am participating in the roundtable.
 I’ll be there talking more setting the scene for what’s the context and why is it
 important. But I think it’s really good that the government and the Treasurer have latched on to
 productivity as being a really important thing we’ve got to get on top of.
Jonathan Shapiro
Governor, Jonathan Shapiro from the
Financial Review
. For the sake of transparency I was
 wondering if you could disclose how you voted in the Board meeting? For those at home who maybe
 thought they were going to get a 50-basis point cut are now seeing they are going to have to wait
 longer, how do you explain how you’ve swung from the prospect of a jumbo cut to no cut in such a
 short space of time?
Michele Bullock
So the answer on the first question is no, they’re unattributed votes. I won’t reveal how I
 voted. They are unattributed for a reason. And so the answer to that is no, I won’t tell you how
 I voted. The second thing to do with - what was the second question, sorry? That was - 50 basis
 points. I am a little surprised that that got so much reaction because I thought I said fairly
 clearly at the press conference that we discussed it briefly in the context - if you go back to May,
 I don’t know if you recall but we had basically the United States and China declaring they
 weren’t going to trade with one another anymore. 145 per cent tariffs. That was the
 end of that. Facing into that, the question seemed “well is 25 enough?”. I thought I made it
 fairly clear at the press conference that it was considered but we dismissed it fairly quickly and
 went back to the 25 and it was the 25. So people, I think, got quite excited about the fact we
 considered it. But we considered it because just for the sake of having a debate about alternatives
 but in the end the firmest and the confident cut I think I called it was 25. That was where we got
 to. So I don’t think we’re swinging around at all. I think basically, as I said earlier,
 what - we are not debating where we think directionally we’re going, provided inflation and
 unemployment continue to track where we are forecasting them to, we do see ourselves on an easing
 path. The question is timing.
Chris Kohler
Afternoon Governor, Chris Kohler from Nine News. Cut then hold, cut then hold. I mean, Australians
 might be feeling like they have got a bit of whiplash at the moment. You are saying directionally
 that interest rates are coming down but you’re speaking to households who are paying mortgages
 and going out and buying things. Are you worried at all you are going to struggle to convince them
 that you are committed to delivering relief given that it feels like we’ve hit our inflation
 target?
Michele Bullock
And I understand, Chris, why people think we’ve hit the inflation target. As I said earlier, we
 have in the sense that the headline inflation which is what people face is down sort of around the
 target. And if you look at the monthly CPI which some people quote 2.1 but I don’t think it
 is really there, but that’s actually an artefact of certain subsidies. Now, real consumers
 because they are getting the subsidies but they will roll off. What’s really important is that
 we get this underlying inflation, which is ultimately where headline inflation will end up. It is
 ultimately where we get it down. Now, I wouldn’t say cut hold, cut hold is whiplash. I would say
 that’s sensible, cautious approach to lowering interest rates in a sensible way. If you look at
 our - and I would add, too, we’re not coming from as high a level as many other countries.
 We’re coming from a percentage point below than many of them. We have the opportunity to do it
 cautiously and gradually. If you look at our forecasts that’s exactly what is envisaged in the
 forecasts that you have inflation gradually coming back down. You will recall maybe if you go back a
 lot of people are criticising us for not going higher and not getting inflation down more quickly. I
 think Australia has done remarkably well. Who would have said two years ago we would be sitting here
 now with inflation at 2 something and unemployment at 4.1. Not many people. So I think
 we’ve done remarkably well. And I think that this idea of just gradually moving as we see our
 forecasts are running in line with the ability to move quickly if we need to. I think we’re in a
 great position.
Julia Bradley
Thank you, Governor. Julia Bradley from Sky News. You say you won’t identify the voting record
 as to not stifle debate. Aren’t all nine RBA Board members esteemed enough to have their voting
 record made public and to have their arguments heard by the Australian public? The US federal reserve
 outlines their voting record. Can Australia be in a position to do the same?
Michele Bullock
No, our agreement with the Treasurer is that we will - and that was the recommendation of the Review,
 and the reason it was recommended that it was unattributed votes was that it would mean that people
 weren’t subject to lobbying, it would mean that people could speak freely, and I think
 that’s a really important part of the unattributed. It means that we can have this very, very
 good discussion and quite active discussion today with people knowing that yes, the votes will be
 recorded, but they individually can speak freely without people lobbying them. So I think it is
 actually a really important feature of ours. US has a different system. They have professional
 pointed economists, they have presidents of Fed Reserves. We have a different system and this is
 right for our system.
Julia Bradley
Do you think we wouldn’t be able to have that free, frank debate –
Michele Bullock
I think it would stifle free and frank debate, frankly.
Julia Bradley
Thank you.
David Taylor
Governor, David Taylor
ABC
. No one knows what’s going to happen with Trump tariffs,
 right. It is the great unknown. There is the potential for a lot to go wrong on global financial
 markets. The Commonwealth Bank today has come out and said that there is the possibility the
 Australian dollar might fall as much as four cents against the greenback in coming weeks or months,
 who knows. Are you keeping your powder dry? The cash rate is at 3.85 per cent. If something
 does go down big time on global financial markets you do have room to move. Trimmed mean monthly
 data, it looks okay. I know you are waiting for the June quarter data for confirmation. But you are
 also, as part of it, keeping your powder dry?
Michele Bullock
I wouldn’t say we’re keeping our powder dry. If we were worried about the exchange rate
 declining very sharply, of course, that implies interest rate rises, not interest rate cuts.
David Taylor
I am more talking about being able to stimulate demand if you need to.
Michele Bullock
Yeah, well, certainly. What at the moment we’re focusing on is the domestic economy and where we
 think the domestic economy is headed. In our forecasts in May we did our baseline forecasts and we
 looked at - and in those baseline forecasts were assumptions about the sorts of tariffs we might end
 up with. You might remember we had three scenarios, trade, peace, trade war and something in the
 middle which - it is worth remembering that despite what we were facing in May which was a disaster
 after the 2nd of April’s announcements and then the Chinese announcements, everyone saying, "Oh,
 things aren’t as bad anymore." They’re still much, much worse than they were prior to April
 2nd. Trade barriers, tariffs, are going to be much, much higher. World trade is going to be impacted,
 yes. Our judgment though because we are not as directly impacted by the US itself is that the impact
 - there will be an impact on us and that’s partly what’s driving, I think, some of the
 deflationary impact in our forecasts, it is partly that. But we’re not going to be anywhere near
 as badly impacted as some countries because we’re not directly linked to the United States and
 our fortunes are much more linked to China. That’s why a lot depends on what happens there.
David Taylor
Will there be a chance the sharemarket will go through –
Michele Bullock
It is possible that financial markets will react to all of these sorts of things. We’ve seen it
 in the past. At the moment they are remarkably sanguine. Anything can happen. This is true. This is
 true. Well, I think they are pretty sanguine. Anything can happen and we’re alert to that.
Stella Qiu
Hi, Governor. Stella Qiu, from Reuters. If you are going to shock markets, how come you didn’t
 come out and push back against market pricing in the last seven weeks and does that mean that the
 Board went against the - what the RBA recommended this time and how is the market going to read your
 reaction function going forward?
Michele Bullock
That’s three questions. I will try to answer generally. I can’t go out - this is a decision
 of the Board. The Reserve Bank can’t go out and talk to markets and tell them what the decision
 is going to be ahead of the meeting with the Board. The Board has to make the decision. So even
 though markets were pricing in a cut at this meeting, it was inappropriate for me or anyone in the
 Reserve Bank, frankly, to go out and say, "Oh, you know, maybe not." Because the Board hadn’t
 met and the Board hadn’t made a decision. As you saw today, as we’ve announced the votes,
 the unattributed votes, not everyone agreed. So we can’t do that. What I would say, though, at a
 general level is that reasonable people at situations like this, reasonable people can disagree on -
 not even disagree, have different perspectives on how you should be dealing with matters. And back to
 the point in the boardroom, I think, today, the difference in perspective was a matter of timing, not
 so much direction of interest rates.
Stella Qiu
The Board went against what the RBA recommended --
Michele Bullock
I’m not.
Sarina Andaloro
Governor, Sarina Andaloro from Seven News. Home buyers and mortgage holders have been banking on this
 cut. They have been factoring it into their budgets. Have they been betrayed today?
Michele Bullock
I don’t think we’re betraying anyone. As I went back to earlier, betrayal would be to let
 inflation get out of hand. What’s made it so difficult for households over the past year or so
 has been - everyone is talking about the cost of living. We’re never going to go back from the
 level of prices now but we can at least stop them from rising as quickly. I think that households
 should be banking on us to make sure that we don’t let inflation get away again. The direction,
 as I said, is provided inflation keeps coming in as expected we can expect interest rates to decline.
 But we need to make sure we’ve nailed inflation and the other point I would make is that the
 other part of the mandate, employment, we’re delivering at the moment we are - we’ve still
 got really good employment, low unemployment rate relative to history. That’s also really
 important for households. That’s what they need in order to buy their houses, meet their
 mortgage repayments. I know it’s tough. I know that they’ve been through a really tough
 haul with interest rates and cost of living and so on. But the best thing we can do for them is to
 try and meet our mandates of keeping inflation low and unemployment as low as we can.
Sarina Andaloro
With the greatest of respects, can I draw your attention to some of the commentary that’s coming
 from households online. A lot of people asking how many members of the Board are actually mortgage
 holders and home buyers?
Michele Bullock
Well, personally, I don’t know the answer to that question. So I haven’t looked at the
 online commentary. But I understand that people had expected perhaps that there might be a rate cut
 today. My message to them is that provided we are still on top of inflation, which is what we intend
 to be, then - and we’re getting confirmation that we are, then yes, there is an easing cycle
 coming.
Cameron Micallef
Hi, Governor. Cameron from Newswire. To follow up on a few other questions. If it is just a case of
 timing why as Chalmers say not disappoint millions of households. Why not pass on a rate now instead
 of waiting until August?
Michele Bullock
As I said earlier, because there are a couple of indications that things are a little higher in
 inflation side than we wanted to see. We want to confirm with a full quarterly CPI that we’re
 still on track to deliver inflation continuing down to the middle of the band over time. That’s
 the reason we’re waiting - that’s the reason we’re waiting. We decided to hold. And
 we’ll reconsider again in August with this extra information and new forecasts and that will
 allow us to decide whether or not we’re still on track for continuing to ease.
John Kehoe
Governor, John from the
Australian Financial Review
. You mentioned there was a couple of
 components in the monthly inflation figures that gave you a bit of pause to think there is a little
 bit of an upside risk for the full quarterly underlying numbers. What were those couple of
 components? Are you reluctant to move based on monthly inflation data? And are you generally just
 going to wait for the quarterly inflation data barring some external economic event that might give
 you some reason to move otherwise?
Michele Bullock
So in the monthly numbers, the couple of components that concerned us a little bit were house
 building costs and durable goods. They were a little higher than we thought. But having said that,
 and this is why we want to see the quarterly numbers, the monthly CPI is not a full CPI. Each month
 has different components in it. The middle month has more services, the previous month has more
 goods. They bounce around a lot. If you look at the monthly numbers, they bounce around a lot. And
 the other thing is that the trimmed mean for monthly isn’t calculated the same way as the
 quarterly. So there is a number of reasons why we take a little bit of signal from it but we
 don’t really depend on it. The number we like to see is the quarterly because that gives us the
 best reading. And this, of course, is our problem because we only get four readings a year. And it is
 very difficult - I have said this before - it is very difficult on four readings a year to get an
 idea of momentum of inflation. Other countries have full CPIs every month and that’s - much
 better idea about the momentum of inflation coming from that. So that’s why, and I think the
 Board in its decision has been cautious, it’s been cautious, careful and it is trying to make
 sure that it gets this right. This has paid off well for us. We’ve been cautious for a while now
 and I think it’s paying off and I think you just have to look at where we are and we can
 continue this cautious approach. And if something external comes then we can react because we have
 got room to move.
Swati Pandey
Governor, Swati from Bloomberg News. My question is around communications and to follow up from what
 Stella asked, there has been rumblings in the market about the RBA’s communication strategy.
 There has been seven weeks of silence, there has been some comment that the press conferences have
 become short-term tactical trading opportunities, to not provide long-term view into what RBA is
 thinking around how they view for full employment is evolving or where r-star is, like you don’t
 really get that deep insight into economics and given that the number of speeches have come down as
 well, there is a lot of discussion to explain the rate decision rather than shape views around, you
 know, where some of these key like r-star or NAIRU is for example which allows the market to shape
 their expectations as well. Do you think the RBA’s communication strategy is failing? And given
 that you yourself said that you’ve been surprised how market interpreted the 50-basis point
 commentary, is there something the RBA can do to improve that communication to the market so that
 there is no shock?
Michele Bullock
So many questions. First of all, is the communication strategy failing? No, I don’t think it is.
 We put out four times a year a
Statement on Monetary Policy
and it goes through all the
 things that you talk about. It goes through the outlook, it goes through NAIRU, spare capacity,
 neutral rates, it is all there. People can read it. It doesn’t change week by week. This stuff
 on NAIRU, neutral rate, these things don’t change week by week. We have quarterly information on
 all these things. I would think if you look at those things now compared to those documents now
 compared to a couple of years ago, they are much clearer, easier to follow, they give you a much
 better narrative. I think they’re much better. So no, I don’t think so. In terms of these
 press conferences, it is designed to explain the decision and I think I do answer questions about -
 to the extent that I can say where we’re going. But sometimes it’s not possible to say
 where I’m going. I know a lot of people are really certain that they know exactly what to do and
 exactly how to get there. I’m not quite so certain. So I try to give a bit of a feel for that.
 And I’m trying to talk to the public. And I’m trying to help them to understand what
 we’re focused on and why we’re doing what we’re doing. And traders and market
 economists and so on, they’ve got all this other material they can go and look at. They can look
 at our quarterly
Statement on Monetary Policy
and see where we’re going. So no, I
 don’t think it is. And we do lots of speeches. I just don’t do as many speeches because I
 do this. And I do three Senate estimates and I do two House of Representatives. We’re out there
 all the time. So answer - no.
John Rolfe
John from the
Daily Telegraph
and
Herald Sun
. Does the trimmed mean for the
 June quarter need to come in at 2.6 per cent or less for there to be a rate cut in August?
 And is it the case - I mean, when will Australia get a full monthly CPI like other nations?
Michele Bullock
Second question you will have to ask the ABS that question. On the first question, what I would - so
 at the moment I think our quarterly forecasts for the June underlying is 0.6 for the quarter.
 And it may be at the margin, it might be a little bit higher than that. Again, what we’re going
 to do when we come to this point is we will also have a new set of forecasts, we’ll have a new
 cash rate path which will be as it always is assumed as the assumed path of the market. We will
 assume that path and then we will see what our forecasts churn out for that. So I’m not going to
 put a number on if it comes in at 2.6 we’ll cut and if it comes in at 2.7 we
 won’t. What we’ll be doing is looking at it in the context of where the forecasts think it
 is leading us. If we think it is leading us back to the centre of the band there will be an
 opportunity for the Board to consider that at the August meeting.
Natasha Moore
Hi Michele, Natasha at the
Fin Review
. You have discussed throughout the conference how
 the RBA has considered a slow gentle lowering of the cash rate. As you say this, young people such as
 myself are increasingly struggling with the possibility, or lack thereof, of entering the housing
 market. How do you think the idea of asking them to wait for a decrease will go? Thank you.
Michele Bullock
Look, I sympathise with that. I do. I would say, though, it is not only interest rates that are the
 issue for the young people, it is the housing prices. And there is nothing we can do about housing
 prices. And in fact, I’ve heard criticisms that we shouldn’t lower interest rates because
 housing prices will go up, so we can’t win, really. Can’t put them up, can’t put them
 down. So I understand that but, again, what I’m saying is that provided we stay on track with
 our inflation, which that’s what we’re looking to do, then there is opportunity for
 interest rates to come down. The question of housing prices, of course, is something we can’t do
 anything about and that’s a whole story for governments in particular.
Jacob Greber
Governor. Jacob Greber,
ABC 7.30
. So listening back to the press conference so far
 global developments took up a lot of the Board’s time. You retain an ability to move if you need
 to. And if something external comes up we can react. That does sound awfully like you are keeping
 policy stimulus in reserve for when something bad happens. We’ve talked about trade. Can you
 elaborate on what those scary things are that you’re talking about and thinking about? And
 secondly, how much faith are you putting on the government’s reform summit to really lift living
 standards in Australia?
Michele Bullock
So it is sort of - very similar to David’s question of keeping our powder dry. Let me be a bit
 more direct. We are not keeping interest rates high just in case. We’re not doing that. We are
 reacting to the domestic data, domestic inflation data and the employment data and trying to find our
 way through it. When I say that we’ve got room to move if we need to, it is addressing the fact
 - everyone knows there is this big chunk of uncertainty out there to do with the trade situation at
 the moment. Now, if it all goes according to what some - what the market seem to think we will end up
 with a baseline of tariffs substantially higher than we had prior to April 2
nd
, prior to
 the Trump administration, and that’s going to be bad for the world economy. It is going to be
 bad for Australia as a small open economy that has done very well out of an open trading environment.
 Ultimately how that impacts us will depend on China and how China reacts. If China reacts by - to the
 impact on it by fiscal and monetary stimulus and keeping its growth going that will help to cushion
 for us. But all I’m saying is that if things really do in the world economy take a very bad turn
 and that impacts us badly, we’ve got interest rates much higher than they were - let me - sorry,
 just go back a step. Pre-COVID, interest rates were already down at 1.25 per cent. We had
 hardly any room to move during COVID. So all I’m saying is that if something really bad does
 happen we’ve got more room to move and we’ve got room to move. But we’re not
 deliberately holding interest rates high in order to give ourselves more powder.
Jacob Greber
On the productivity summit? The government’s productivity summit?
Michele Bullock
I think it is a good idea. I don’t have any particular comments on it. I’m speaking at it
 but I think it is a really good thing to do. We need to focus on productivity.
Tom Dusevic
Good afternoon, Governor. Tom Dusevic, from
The Australian
. You spoke just now about the
 caution around the global outlook. Can you outline for us a little bit more about what are the
 domestic concerns that you have? And in particular, I know you have made reference to unit labour
 costs. Obviously, that’s part of the productivity story. There is some mention about the pricing
 power of companies. Could you just tell us how you see that playing out over the next few months?
Michele Bullock
Well, productivity isn’t a month-by-month thing. Productivity is a much more medium-term sort of
 concept. What we see at the moment, at least in measured unit labour costs, is that they are elevated
 because productivity is low and wages have been increasing a bit more quickly. That doesn’t mean
 that wages - often if - what you would expect is if productivity is not growing very quickly, then
 wage growth will actually adjust to the lower rate of productivity growth. So these things sort of -
 it is not all in isolation. So I think we do have elevated labour costs at the moment but having said
 that, will that stay that way? Certainly the fact that inflation is continuing to come down suggests
 that they probably are not going to stay that way.
Tom Dusevic
So wages are still a big part of the data story?
Michele Bullock
Wages growth has been moderating as well but productivity is what’s sort of driving the rise in
 unit labour costs. But the conundrum is that inflation is coming down at the same time. So there is
 something going on there and I think generally what you would expect is if productivity doesn’t
 recover, then wages growth will have to come back to meet productivity growth.
Tom Dusevic
Thanks, Governor.
Michael Janda
Michael Janda from
ABC News
. Governor, does the RBA’s focus on unit labour costs
 risk prioritising the business profit share of national income over the opportunity for workers to
 recover some of the purchasing power they lost through falling real wages over the past three years?
Michele Bullock
No, I don’t think we’re prioritising profits over wages. I think we have seen real wages
 start to recover and that’s, in fact, what’s helping to at least lift slowly consumption at
 the moment. So we are seeing a recovery in real wages. The unit labour costs story really is
 something that we’re just keeping an eye on because, ultimately, that might be something that if
 businesses can pass it on, if, that might drive a bit of inflation. In fact, so we don’t have a
 goal for it. I don’t want to give anyone the impression we have some sort of goal for profit
 shares and labour shares. We don’t. It is just another indicator that might go to why inflation
 is high but what we do know at the moment - and we get this from liaison - is that demand is such
 that it is recovering a bit, but businesses are still finding it hard to pass on costs, whether it be
 labour costs or input costs. It is not just labour costs that are impacting businesses at the moment.
 It is their input costs as well. It is electricity.
Michael Janda
Profit share has come down a bit from what were record high levels a few years ago. Is that where
 some of the rise in unit labour cost is being absorbed?
Michele Bullock
I don’t know where - I mean, the profit share actually, if you take mining out, has actually
 been pretty flat. So unit - some of it will have been absorbed in margins, I suspect. At least
 recently that’s what we’re hearing but I wouldn’t get obsessed with the idea that
 somehow we’re obsessed with unit labour costs because we think that that’s the way that
 businesses maintain their profit margins. That’s not - it is about indications that it might
 give to us that there might be inflationary pressures in the system. That’s the reason
 we’re interested in it.
Sophia Rodrigues
Sophia from Central Bank Intel. What was the Board’s judgment on monetary policy setting and
 whether you still think that it is somewhat restrictive and how long are we going to have somewhat
 restrictive if it was somewhat restrictive before the May cut? And how far does the Board feel and my
 emphasis on "feel" because we’re going to feel our way to neutral - how far does the Board feel
 we are away from neutral?
Michele Bullock
So neutral, this concept - I think it is actually a very difficult concept to use in a
 meeting-to-meeting concept for monetary policy. It has sort of a good medium-term - there is good
 medium-term context to it. But in terms of making a decision meeting-to-meeting, thinking about where
 we are relative to neutral and deciding where to move relative to neutral, is not really the way the
 Board thinks about it. What the Board is looking at is financial conditions, it is looking at
 interest rates, looking at growth in credit, it is looking at, you know, cash market, it is looking
 at bond rates, it is looking at borrowing costs for businesses, these sorts of things. These are the
 broad things it is looking at in terms of financial conditions. On that basis, I think the Board
 still thinks there is a little bit of restriction in there. The question is how much is there? And I
 don’t think we know and we probably won’t know till we get there. And that’s another
 reason for the cautious, calm approach. As we think we’re getting there we have to just be a
 little bit careful that we don’t overdo it one way or the other. So I don’t have any more
 firm answer for you. I can’t tell you where neutral specifically is. I can’t tell you where
 the terminal rate necessarily will be. What I can say we think at the moment the direction is down,
 but it is cautious.
Michael Heath
Governor, Michael Heath from Bloomberg. Just to till a little bit of old ground there, if I
 understand correctly under the new regime of having the Board setting policy, I mean once upon a time
 in my early days you would find a leak, if the market was looking the wrong way, someone would put
 out a leak and would say in fact the forecasts are a bit different, this is not happening. But under
 this regime what you seem to be saying is that can’t happen because you can’t pre-empt what
 an independent Board is going to say. Is that a fair assessment?
Michele Bullock
That’s a fair assessment. So I can’t go out and suggest to the market that the decision
 might be X if the decision hasn’t been made. And the decision is made by a Board of nine people,
 all independent, and I hope you see today from the release of the unattributed votes that reasonable
 people can have different opinions on what the right move is. That’s what I’m saying. I
 can’t go out there and can’t send Reserve Bank people out there to tell the market to
 expect something different because we don’t know what the Board necessarily is going to decide.
