BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Monetary Policy Decision
DATE: 04/11/2025
SPEAKER: Michele Bullock
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2025/mc-gov-2025-11-04.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

More on the November 2025 monetary policy decision
Media Conference
Monetary Policy Decision
Michele Bullock
Governor
Sydney
–
4 November 2025
Audio
31.8MB
Watch video: Media Conference – Monetary Policy Decision, Sydney
Transcript
Michele Bullock
Good afternoon everyone. Today, as you will have seen, the Board decided to leave the cash rate

 unchanged at 3.60 per cent. Inflation in the September quarter was higher than we were

 expecting in our previous forecasts although you might recall at the September press conference I did

 highlight to you that after the July and August CPI indicators we were expecting inflation to print

 higher than those forecasts. In the event trimmed mean inflation, which is how we track underlying

 inflation in the economy, rose by 1 per cent over the September quarter, materially higher

 than our 0.6 per cent forecast in August. Now, we think some of this was driven by

 temporary factors such as travel costs, council rates and fuel, and we don’t expect some of

 these to continue. We are, however, taking signal from stronger price increases that may suggest more

 inflationary pressure in the economy than we thought before. In particular the cost of new dwellings

 and market services both increased by more than expected and inflation in these components tends to

 be more persistent. At the same time the unemployment rate has gone up. It’s still low relative

 to history and monthly data are volatile, but the labour market does seem to have eased. Employment

 is growing, but at a slower pace than before. Overall when we take into account a broad range of

 indicators we judge that the labour market is still a little bit tight relative to full employment.

 This highlights an important judgment in our forecasts. We still think there’s a bit of excess

 demand in the economy. This may be what is manifested in the inflation data. Nevertheless we are

 alert to the risk that we have misjudged the gap between demand and supply in the economy in either

 direction.
Central banks often need to talk about trade offs when bringing inflation down because tighter monetary policy has generally led to larger

 increases in unemployment. This was the case in previous disinflationary episodes in Australia and

 this has been true in this episode for some other countries. Taking a longer view our inflation and

 full employment objectives are complementary. Keeping inflation low and stable enables strong and

 sustainable employment growth. The period since COVID has been unlike any other that we’ve

 experienced, including the fact that we’ve managed to get inflation down and keep jobs growing

 at the same time. The resilience of the labour market also meant that we started cutting rates from a

 relatively strong position. When combined with the fact that we hadn’t raised rates particularly

 high this could mean that less easing in monetary policy is needed in this episode compared to

 previous ones. So the Board will remain cautious, driven by what the incoming data tell us about the

 outlook. I’m happy to take your questions.
Edward Boyd
Edward Boyd at SkyNews. Governor, you’ve got a technical assumption in the monetary decision

 statement of one more rate cut next year. With inflation materially higher than expected, material

 miss to your forecast, do you need to start tempering peoples’ expectations for rate cuts in the

 future?
Michele Bullock
So, yes, we do have that technical assumption of one more rate cut, and if you take the forecasts at

 face value that would suggest that in 2027 we get back to 2.6, which is close-ish to 2.5, so on the

 one hand you could argue that that’s about where we want to be. The bottom line, though, as we

 know, forecasts are very uncertain and the further out you go the more uncertain they are. So at the

 moment our judgment is that the material missed on this occasion was at least partly temporary

 factors, so a number of things just randomly sort of increasing more quickly, but there is some

 element of persistence in there. So the Board is going to be watching closely. We actually start to

 get monthly CPI next month. It’s going to be volatile, it’s going to be bereft with a few

 seasonal problems but nevertheless it will be some information we’ll have, monthly from now on,

 and the Board will be feeding that sort of information into its forecasts and its outlook to see if

 we can in fact continue to see disinflation in the economy notwithstanding the current September

 quarter number.
Stella Qiu
Stella Qiu from Reuters. Did you consider cutting interest rates at all at today’s meeting, and

 during the discussions today and yesterday has any of the Board members sounded more worried about

 the spike in the unemployment rate?
Michele Bullock
No, we didn’t consider cutting. We basically just talked about holding and the reasons to hold

 and then discussed strategy moving out depending on what way. You’ve highlighted what I think I

 highlighted in my opening statement which was that unemployment went up a little bit more than we

 expected but so did inflation. So we’re being a little bit cautious here as to what we read. We

 think there’s a little bit of information in both. Naturally the Board are concerned about

 employment as well because that’s part of their mandate, but we’re, I’d say, at the

 moment we’re a little more concerned about making sure that we do get inflation sustainably back

 in the band, because as the forecasts show in the
Statement on Monetary Policy
this blip

 in September is going to stay in the inflation numbers for basically the next 12 months. So

 it’s going to have a three on it, which is not ideal. We are expecting the quarterly numbers to

 moderate, but - so for those reasons I think we’re alert to the downside with employment, but

 we’ve also got this inflation number sitting there as well. So that’s why the caution.
Matt Cranston
Matt Cranston from The Australian. Governor, is there still some risk that inflation could get away

 from you, and how confident are you that policy is actually restrictive enough, bearing in mind that

 all your forecasts are predicated on another rate cut?
Michele Bullock
It’s a very good question, Matt, and we do think that there are mixed signals on the tightness

 of financial conditions. Some things like credit spreads and equity markets suggest that things are a

 little bit easy, other things like the amount of disposable income that people are putting into their

 mortgages, and also the credit-to-disposable income suggests things are a little bit tighter. So

 there’s a mix there. We still judge we’re marginally on the tight side and that is

 what’s baked into the forecasts, that we’ve still got a little bit of tightness which is

 going to take a little bit of heat out of the economy and bring inflation back down, but it’s

 also true that the forecasts, as you see, only come back down to 2.6 per cent. So the

 Board’s going to have to wait and see and it’s possible that there’s no more rate

 cuts, it’s possible there’s some more, but as I said earlier, we didn’t go up as high,

 we might not have to come down as far.
Michael Janda
Michael Janda from ABC News. Don’t you think forecasting a 4.4 per cent quarter-ended

 unemployment rate is quite optimistic given that we’re already at a monthly rate of

 4.5 per cent, especially given the observation in the
Statement on Monetary

 Policy
that many large firms are cost cutting at the moment?
Michele Bullock
Well, that is our forecast and it’s based on the fact, I think, that, as I said, there was some

 news in the 4.5 per cent but we know the monthly numbers are volatile. What we’re

 doing is we’re looking at the forward indicators, and that’s things like vacancies are

 pretty elevated still, the quits rate has jumped, there’s evidence from surveys like the NAB

 survey and also from our liaison that businesses are still finding things a little bit on the tight

 side. Those forecasts are suggesting to us that there’s a bit more stability in the labour

 market than you might think in just looking at that number jumping from 4.3 to 4.5. You could

 think there’s a little bit of optimism in there, and that’s why I say we’re conscious

 of risks on both sides, but at the moment our best guess is that the unemployment rate will remain

 reasonably stable from here on in because of those forward-looking indicators that we’re looking

 at.
Michael Janda
Is one of those risks stagflation?
Michele Bullock
No, I don’t think so. I think at the moment we’re still confident that inflation is going

 to come down and we’ve got employment at a pretty good place.
Luke Kinsella
Luke Kinsella from The Financial Review. The decision noted that there are uncertainties regarding

 the assessment that monetary policy remains a little restrictive and the statement noted that the

 cash rate was already below some estimates of neutral. At the last press conference you said that you

 don’t emphasise assessments of the neutral rate, but is it something you’re thinking about

 more given the uptick in inflation and in light of that was a rate hike considered at this meeting?
Michele Bullock
So two questions. First question - in answer to the second question, no. In relation to the neutral

 rate, we do run models and they do have a wide swathe, and you’ll know that, that the central

 estimates have a wide range, but if you add the uncertainties around those it’s massive. Having

 said that, we do look at these models to give us some sort of idea and benchmark, but really what

 we’re looking at is we’re looking at what we think is happening to financial conditions,

 and the ultimate judgment on whether or not inflation is - on whether financial conditions are

 restrictive is what’s happening to inflation and excess demand. So that’s really what

 we’re focusing on and that has been coming down so we have judged that things are restrictive,

 but the closer you get to neutral the harder it is to know.
Tom Richardson
Tom Richardson from The Nightly, Channel 7. You’ve said in the past you’re not abandoning

 2.5 per cent as the official inflation target, the mid-point of the band, but I think your

 latest forecasts don’t have inflation core or trimmed mean falling as low as

 2.5 per cent the way through 2027. So are you really still targeting 2.5 per cent

 or is anything below 3 good enough for you?
Michele Bullock
The answer to that is yes, the Board is very definitely targeting 2.5 per cent. Just below

 3 is not good enough for the Board, and I think, again, when you take those inflation forecasts

 at face value with the one more interest rate cut in there, what that’s telling you is that

 it’s really an interesting question about whether there’s many more rate cuts left to come.
Effie Zahos
Effie Zahos, 9News. Households would argue that they’ve taken the RBA’s medicine, that

 they’ve tighten the belts, so who is to blame now for the uptick in this new inflation?
Michele Bullock
Well, I guess there’s a couple of things. The first is that it’s possibly telling us that

 there’s a little more excess demand in the economy than we had thought, and it’s sometimes

 hard for people to understand that, but if you take just a very - a microcosm, a very sort of simple

 example, I don’t know how many people have tried to get a tradie, perhaps, to work on their

 house. It’s difficult. What that’s telling you is that in that particular microcosm of the

 Australian economy that the demand for these services is above the ability of this to supply it. So

 that’s what I mean when I say demand is a bit above supply, and when that happens inflation

 tends to rise. So, yes, the way monetary policy works is by raising interest rates. It influences

 people through the cashflow channel, those that have mortgages, it encourages people who have savings

 to save and encourages people who have mortgages to save as well, in fact, and it has influences on

 the exchange rate. So it works through those channels to try and dampen the excess demand.

 That’s what I try and explain to people. It’s an economy-wide thing. We do understand it

 affects different people in different ways, but monetary policy is blunt in that way.
Swati Pandey
Swati Pandey from Bloomberg News. First question is - -
Michele Bullock
Only question.
Swati Pandey
Only question. It’s related. It’s related. Do you still have an easing bias, and what is

 the - if unemployment was to go up to let’s say 4.
5/4
.6 per cent

 and stay there, what can we expect you to do given the risk of inflation still remains?
Michele Bullock
You know exactly what I’m going to say to that. I don’t give forward guidance. What I will

 say is what I said before, which is that if you take the forecasts at face value we do see elevated

 inflation in the first 12 months because of the most recent numbers, that’s baked in now,

 and then we see the quarterly numbers starting to come off and delivering an inflation rate of around

 about 2.6 per cent by the end of the period. But there’s a great deal of uncertainty

 of that. It also incorporates a technical assumption of one interest rate cut. So what I would be

 suggesting is that the Board is watching very carefully. We think we’re pretty close to neutral.

 We may be a little bit restrictive, we may not. So there may be a slight - a decrease, there may not,

 and the Board is going to be going meeting by meeting and using data to inform that outlook and see

 whether or not that outlook still looks reasonable, and if it isn’t they’ll change their

 mind. We don’t have a bias.
Shane Wright
Shane Wright from The Age and Sydney Morning Herald. You know how much I like to count words in the

 monetary policy statement. You mention the quits rate 12 times. The quits rate had been falling

 for three consecutive quarters and there’s been a spike in the most recent quarter. Is there a

 danger around pulling noise and the signal that’s going on, the Bank has had that issue going

 back trying to work out, and the fact that you’ve referenced the quits rate just in here, based

 on one quarter is there a little bit of danger that perhaps that’s overreading what’s going

 on in the jobs market?
Michele Bullock
It’s not reading it independently, and we mention it usually alongside things like capacity

 utilisation, what we’re seeing in vacancies is held up as well. Yes these things can be a little

 bit bouncy, but our judgment on a lot of these forward-looking indicators is that they’re at the

 moment stabilised. So some of them were heading in an easy direction but they seem to have stabilised

 and that’s the basis. So I wouldn’t say we’re focusing entirely on the quits rate.

 We’ve got other things we are looking at here and we also are looking - I think the other thing

 to be looking at here is unit labour costs and they’re still rising quite quickly.
Tom Dusevic
Good afternoon, Tom Dusevic from The Australian. Last week in your fireside chat you talked about

 that episode of rising public pressure and commentary during the big inflation where people were

 saying you should go harder on inflation. You said that you decided to go a little easier to maintain

 employment. I’m interested to know what role does outside commentary and how does it affect what

 goes on in the Board room?
Michele Bullock
That’s an interesting question. So we’re alert to outside commentary, and I think some of

 the Board members are alert to it as well. They read papers. But I think the Board very much makes

 the decision based on what they think is right. I don’t think they are moved by outside

 commentary and I think you saw that in July when everyone thought we were going to move and we

 didn’t. So they are conscious of it, and they’re conscious of it in the sense that they

 want to understand what alternative views are, but they also want to make up their own mind and do

 what they think is best. So they’re not immune to it, but I wouldn’t say they are driven by

 it.
Juliette Saly
Juliette Saly from ausbiz TV. In September you mentioned that if consumer spending remains robust

 there may be fewer rate cuts. Given the recent consumer spending index that we saw, how confident are

 you consumption could remain robust if we’re at or end the cycle? And a then a cheeky question,

 did you have time to bet on the Melbourne Cup?
Michele Bullock
Answer to the second question, no, and I don’t even know who was running in it. At the time we

 did get a household expenditure indicator. Again these data can be a bit volatile. I think our

 initial take with that information is that it probably doesn’t change our judgment on

 consumption for the time being. We did get quite a strong June quarter consumption, you will recall,

 in the national accounts. So it doesn’t really, I don’t think, change our view for the

 September quarter, but it’s an interesting point, and I think this is one of the risks that we

 have here is that we do have a pretty strong labour market, strong initial conditions, as I said,

 we’ve got rate falls - three rate cuts, still the bulk of that has yet to come through in terms

 of its effect on the economy. So we’ll be watching that to make sure that it doesn’t feed

 through too much into consumption and ultimately consumption that can’t be met by supply. So

 that’s the key. It is a balancing act.
Sophia Rodrigues
Sophia Rodrigues from Central Bank Intel. Your baseline scenario is on one cash rate cut. I would

 like to believe that the Board was also presented with alternative scenarios where the cash rate

 remains flat through the projection period and where the cash rate is slightly higher. Which of those

 alternatives delivers you inflation sustainably at the target mid-point?
Michele Bullock
Well, again, subject to all the uncertainties, if you don’t lower the cash rate from here then

 that gives you a little bit more downward pressure on demand at the margin, you know, because

 it’s 25 basis points, so that might make it - given we’re already at 2.6, if you put

 that in then it might get you to 2.5 a bit more quickly. So I guess, you know, yes you can do

 different scenarios, but again I would emphasise once you’re getting out to 2027 we have to do

 these forecasts, we need to do them, but we know they’re very uncertain the further out you go.

 That’s why bit by bit more information comes in, we can reassess those forecasts as we move and

 change if we need to.
Cameron Micallef
Hi Governor. Cameron from NewsWire. With inflation rising, how concerned should mortgage holders be

 about their Christmas spending impacting future rate cuts?
Michele Bullock
Well, at the moment what the Board is saying is that we just haven’t lowered interest rates at

 this point and we’ll come back to this point in December, because we have another meeting in

 December just before Christmas, and we can reassess then with more information. We’ll have

 national accounts, labour market, first monthly CPI, so there will be more information there. I would

 say we’ve already had three interest rate cuts. I know mortgage holders want more, but it’s

 also important we make sure we keep inflation under control because ultimately that’s also what

 impacts peoples’ living standards. So it’s really important we get that right too.
John Kehoe
John Kehoe from the Australian Financial Review. You’ve got core inflation at

 3.2 per cent for at least the first half of next year, which is well above

 2.5 notwithstanding the temporary mechanical factors driving some of that. Some economists are

 saying you’re going to be on hold for quite some time, through to the middle of next year, and

 that means the next move in interest rates, whenever that may be, could just as well be up as it

 could be down. Is it plausible that if you’re on hold for a long time that you could move rates

 in either direction?
Michele Bullock
Anything’s possible, I think, John. At the moment all I would say is I think we’re at the

 right spot we need to be at the moment and we can respond where the risks arise. So if the risks turn

 out to be on the downside, which some people have suggested on the employment side, we’re able

 to respond. Likewise if the risks are on the upside we’re able to respond. But I think at the

 moment we think we’re where we need to be.
Brandon How
Thanks Governor, Brandon How from Capital Brief. I just wanted to confirm at the board meeting today

 did you consider the potential need for rate increases in the near future, and what’s

 underpinning the view that quarterly inflation will come down after the next 12 months?
Michele Bullock
No, we didn’t consider a rate rise. What’s underpinning the view that in a quarterly sense

 that underlying inflation will start to come down is that, as I said, some of the increases, things

 like rates went up by 8 per cent. We saw fuel go up. It’s always very volatile. We saw

 electricity - not electricity, that’s obviously in the headline, but there’s some of these

 things that just sort of went up and it wasn’t clear why they were necessarily going up. The

 ones we did take signal from were the ones that we do think reflect possible underlying inflation

 pressures and that’s the housing, the new dwellings, and also the market services. Both of those

 things tend to be persistent and they are reflective, we think, of a bit of a recovery in demand in

 some sense. So that’s the sorts of things that we’re looking at to just keep us focused on

 inflation.
David Taylor
David Taylor, ABC. The New York Federal Reserve injected $50 billion into the US banking system

 on Friday, then the same New York Federal Reserve injected a further $20 billion into the US

 financial system yesterday, so all up $75 billion via repurchase agreements going into

 essentially Wall Street banks, or banks. Analysts the ABC have spoken to have said this could be the

 early signs of a brand new global credit crunch. What’s your view on that?
Michele Bullock
Well, I guess my first point would be that the Fed have got themselves, as I think Jay set out, to a

 position now where they think their reserves are about as low as they can go without introducing

 difficulties in the money markets for banks trying to get liquidity. So this is obviously part of

 their response to do that. I don’t think there will be a credit crunch because I think

 that’s exactly what the Fed is trying to avoid, getting some sort of liquidity crunch for their

 banks over there. I think the Fed is well aware of that and I trust they will be focusing on that. In

 terms of Australia, there isn’t a credit crunch here. There is liquidity out there and there is

 credit out there for those who choose to take it up.
David Taylor
If I can follow up really quickly, without the Federal Reserve intervening there would be a credit

 crunch.
Michele Bullock
But that’s the whole point of the Federal Reserve. The Federal Reserve is injecting cash

 liquidity into the banking system over there through repurchase agreements because they’ve

 reached the judgment that their reserves have come down far enough now that if they came down any

 further they would start to introduce these problems, so the Fed’s on to it.
Cecile Lefort
Governor, Cecile Lefort from The Financial Review. Central banks in the UK and the US are easing

 despite inflation above target, and I was wondering could that happen also in Australia, particularly

 if the job market weakens, and do you see the problems in the job market as structural versus

 cyclical?
Michele Bullock
The reason I think they’re easing is because they think that their inflation is coming down

 anyway, even as they ease. So the question really is - the question I think we should be asking is if

 we ease much further do we think inflation will continue to come down? I think, again, if you take

 our forecasts at face value, I think that’s a bit marginal. But we didn’t go up to

 5 per cent and above 5 per cent. We only went to a bit above 4. So we’re not

 expecting to have to come down quite as far as those other countries.
Cecile Lefort
And the job market? Do you think it’s structural?
Michele Bullock
Well, the Reserve Bank has a mandate for full employment, that’s full employment that is

 consistent with low and stable inflation. We can’t affect that unemployment rate. Whatever that

 unemployment rate is, consistent with low and stable inflation, depends on other things like skills

 training and job matching and those sorts of things. That’s not something we can do anything

 about.
Luca Ittimani
Luca Ittimani from Guardian Australia. As you said the Board isn’t happy getting below

 3 per cent, it wants to be at 2.5 per cent, but you’re not going to get

 there on these forecasts, which do include a rate cut within the next 12 months, but

 there’s a lot of room to miss if something comes out in the next couple of quarters. How much

 damage would it do to the bank’s credibility if despite seeing that you’re going to stay

 above 3 per cent for a while you still cut in the next 12 months?
Michele Bullock
Well, what I would like to think is that people understand now that we are not wedded religiously to

 a particular path, that what we are trying to do is very actively analyse the data as it comes

 through. We’re not backward looking. We take the data that we’ve got, we use that as a

 starting point and then we attempt to forecast using our models, using our judgment about what the

 outlook might look like. I would have thought, quite frankly, that it would be worse for the bank to

 stick to its guns rather than change its mind in the face of new information. So if it turns out that

 the unemployment - bottom falls out of employment and that means inflation comes down very quickly,

 then yes, you might be cutting, but I wouldn’t say that that’s damaging the reputation. I

 would say we’d be looking to information to tell us that ahead of time and hopefully react. So

 that’s the way I think central banks are working. We are trying to be forward looking.
Jacob Shteyman
Thanks Governor, Jacob Shteyman from AAP. Back to your forecasts given, with the assumption of one

 extra cut inflation will still be above the band in about a year’s time. Is the RBA comfortable

 waiting that long to get back in the band or is there the possibility that more hikes could be needed

 to get back in the band sooner?
Michele Bullock
So the fact that we’re out of the band for the next few quarters is - we discussed a bit earlier

 - it’s a mechanical effect because we’ve had a big jump in the September quarter and that

 will now stay in those numbers in a year ended sense for effectively the next 12 months. So

 that’s the mechanical effect. What we are expecting is that embodied in our forecasts is that

 when the quarterly numbers start to come out for December, March etc, and we’ll be getting

 monthly CPIs, what we’ll see is that some of that big jump was temporary, transitory, if you

 like, and so that will not be repeated and then we will - we still think there’s a bit of

 underlying inflation left from some other items which might show up. But we are expecting in a

 quarterly sense for underlying inflation to come back down again, maybe to the top of the band, not

 right to the middle, but certainly if you think about it in an annualised sense, certainly more

 towards the top of the band, so we will see that happen. That’s what we are forecasting. Now,

 we’ll be looking at the data and if that doesn’t look like it’s happening then

 we’ll have to re-examine our forecasts and our thinking about how much of it was temporary and

 how much was not.
David Chau
David Chau from ABC News. Your forecasts gave borrowers a lot of hope that interest rates would be

 cut quite significantly in the next 12 months. Now, those hopes appear to have been greatly

 diminished or even dashed. What would you say to them?
Michele Bullock
I think I’ve been fairly cautious about making predictions about what would be happening to

 interest rates. I think I’ve always - in fact if you go back as far as February when the Board

 made its first cut it used words in the statement to the effect of cutting too quickly or cutting too

 much might stop the disinflationary process. The Board has always been cautious, so I’m not sure

 I would describe the way that the Board has spoken in its statements, or I’ve spoken, has

 somehow given people hope that there’s lots and lots of interest rate cuts to come. I think, as

 I said earlier, we didn’t go up as high as many other countries, we therefore possibly have less

 room to come down, and I think the most recent inflation data just remind us that we need to be

 data-driven, we need to be looking at what that might imply for the forecasts and it’s

 imperative and the board is committed to getting inflation back down to the mid-point of the target

 band.
Millie Muroi
Millie Muroi from the Sydney Morning Herald and The Age. You said earlier the inflation and

 unemployment objectives are complementary and that low and stable inflation is key to that. Does that

 mean that over the long-term controlling inflation is the focus and perhaps priority for the RBA

 because that will keep the jobs market strong?
Michele Bullock
Well, I think it depends a little bit on where you see risks lie. If it seemed that - so I think it

 depends, is the bottom line. Mostly I think the focus has to be on inflation, but it’s entirely

 possible that you find yourself in a circumstance, as some countries overseas have done, where their

 unemployment rate has shot up, in which case the risk isn’t on the upside to inflation, the risk

 is on the downside to employment. So I would say it depends very much on the circumstances

 you’re in and where you think the relative risks are lying for how you’re going to balance

 those objectives.
Michael Pascoe
Michael Pascoe, Michael West Media, Governor. The underlying factor that continues to concern you,

 the dwelling costs, we’ve got a double impetus there that’s mentioned in the statement, the

 5 per cent deposit for first home buyers increasing demand, interest rates having been cut

 stirring investors in particular, doubled inertia there. Would macroprudential controls at this stage

 make your life a lot easier?
Michele Bullock
Macroprudential tools are to address financial stability issues rather than - and so if it was judged

 that some of the activity in the housing market was leading to perhaps riskier lending, perhaps

 exacerbating the housing cycle then, yes, macroprudential tools might have a role to play there, and

 I think the sense in which it would affect monetary policy is that if we felt there were financial

 stability issues therefore we couldn’t lower interest rates and we wanted to, then

 macroprudential would be a good thing to sort of try and marry up with to address that risk. But at

 the moment I don’t think we see financial stability risks so I’m not seeing a

 macroprudential role with monetary policy at the moment.
Michael Pascoe
Why not use macro more freely?
Michele Bullock
Well, that’s not for me to decide. That’s obviously for APRA to decide, and if there’s

 no financial stability implications on this then I don’t see us telling APRA what to do as a

 very helpful intervention. Thank you.
