BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Open the Door and See the Mountain: Reflections from a Recent Trip to China
DATE: 22/05/2025
SPEAKER: Andrew Hauser
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2025/sp-dg-2025-05-22.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Open the Door and See the Mountain: Reflections from a Recent Trip to China
Andrew Hauser
*
Deputy Governor
Speech to the Lowy Institute
Sydney
–
22 May 2025
Audio
51.9MB
Q&A Transcript
Download
570KB
Watch video: Speech by Andrew Hauser, Deputy Governor, to the Lowy Institute Sydney
Introduction
Of all the trends shaping the Australian economy over the past half century, one of the most profound has

 been the long swing towards Asia (Graph 1) and, more specifically in recent years, China – now

 our biggest single trading partner by a country mile (Table 1).
1
But China is also front and centre

 in the US administration’s rapidly evolving tariff strategy. How that strategy plays out, and how

 China responds, are therefore key issues for the economic outlook in Australia, and hence the RBA’s

 monetary policy.
Graph 1
2
Table 1: Australian Goods Trade with the United States and China (2023)
Rank in Australian ...
Australian exports to country as share of ...
Australian exports from country as share of ...
Australian trade balance (US$bn)
Exports
Imports
Australian exports
Country imports
Australian imports
Country exports
US
5
2
4%
0.5%
11%
1.7%
−18
China
1
1
37%
7%
25%
2%
71
Sources: Observatory of Economic Complexity; UN Comtrade.
Given the importance of understanding the Chinese economy, the RBA has maintained a small team based at

 the Australian Embassy in Beijing since 2011, to take the temperature of the economy up close.
3
Their

 work, together with the work of our Australian-based staff, directly informs our Monetary Policy

 Board’s deliberations – most recently earlier this week – and our broader analysis.
4
I recently joined the team to speak with a wide range of organisations drawn from right across the Chinese

 economy and the Australian export community, in both Beijing and Shanghai. The trip, arranged months

 earlier, turned out to be auspiciously timed, because it came in the week after so-called

 ‘Liberation Day’ – when US tariffs on China rose to 145 per cent, and China

 retaliated in kind.
Tonight, I want to discuss four key themes that we heard that week, and which – despite the further

 dramatic turn of events since then – seem so far to have stood the test of time.
For anyone wanting to cut to the chase, or, in the words of the Mandarin saying, ‘open the door and

 see the mountain’, I’ll put it more bluntly: don’t count China out.
Theme 1: People felt the economy was finally turning a corner in early 2025
Nearly everyone we spoke with felt the Chinese economy was at last turning a corner in the months leading

 up to 2 April:
The September 2024 Politburo announcements and subsequent policy pivot were seen as a recognition of

 the need both for further stimulus and for a more determined switch in emphasis from boosting supply

 to boosting demand.
The DeepSeek announcement, President Xi’s meeting with business leaders in the private sector

 and his well-publicised handshake with Jack Ma, triggered renewed optimism in support for the private

 sector and its capacity to innovate and harness the benefits from high technology, after a period of

 negative government sentiment, declining foreign investment and technology embargoes.
Property markets seemed finally to be showing signs of stabilising, at least in larger cities, after

 years of declining sales, investment and prices.
5
It’s important to put these points in context. For anyone visiting China, the ever-present abandoned

 housing developments and stationary cranes provide a potent reminder of the challenges the Chinese

 economy has been through. But an improvement in sentiment, if it persists, would itself be an important

 economic development, after such a long period in the doldrums. And harder data also support the view

 that domestic demand growth had begun to strengthen in the first quarter of 2025.
Theme 2: ‘Liberation Day’ was a genuine shock
Against this backdrop, the eye-popping tariff tit-for-tat escalation in early April came as a genuine

 shock to most of those we spoke with. Significant increases were of course expected – but there was

 surprise along three dimensions. On
scale
, the typical expectation had been for a
25–50
percentage point increase: anything over 60 was judged

 to be an effective embargo. On
speed
, expectations of a rolling increase, or a

 negotiation period, were dashed. And on
scope
, the huge tariffs on China’s

 southeast Asian neighbours were seen as being aimed at cutting off trade and production chains that

 linked China to the United States via third countries. Some also contrasted the scale and immediacy of

 the Chinese retaliation with the absence of a similar reaction in Europe and elsewhere in the West,

 disappointing those hoping for a common front.
It is difficult to quantify the economic impact these mega-tariffs could have had on China. But

 expectations in China appeared to be in the range of 1.5–2 percentage points of GDP in 2025,

 before accounting for any offsetting policy stimulus.
Theme 3: China feels it has a strong economic hand in responding to tariffs
Those are big numbers. But for every expression of surprise, we also heard a striking confidence that

 China was going into this trade war with a strong hand.
6
Judged solely in economic terms, that view

 rested on four main planks:
First, a
deep belief in the authorities’ commitment to deliver the growth target of

 ‘around 5 per cent’ a year
. This goal may attract scepticism in some

 quarters –10-year bond yields in the 1.5–2 per cent range certainly suggest market

 participants have doubts over the medium term. But the commitment to the goal had a seemingly totemic

 status amongst most of those we spoke with.
Second, a
confidence that the Chinese authorities had the policy tools, the space and the

 will to inject the domestic stimulus needed to compensate for any weaker growth in

 trade
. There are limits to this of course. Past efforts to boost domestic consumption

 have had mixed success. Many of the authorities’ existing policy tools are best suited to

 boosting supply, which diverts resources from consumption and adds further to production capacity,

 bearing down on inflation. And the barriers to a more persistent rise in consumption are arguably as

 much structural as cyclical, reflecting a limited social safety net, and constraints on the use of

 capital markets to manage savings.
7
There are questions too about how much headroom is

 left for further stimulus. Public debt is elevated, particularly at local government level;
8
nominal interest rates are already quite low, and focused on exchange rate and financial stability as

 well as demand management; and the central bank has made it clear it does not favour quantitative

 easing.
9
This may be one reason why the authorities bided

 their time in the immediate aftermath of 2 April, spurning the ‘big bazooka’ policy

 package that some in the financial markets hoped for. But a range of monetary and financial easing

 measures have subsequently been announced, and the authorities have underscored their commitment to

 expand fiscal policy if needed to support the growth target.
10
Third, we heard a
general expectation that a large share of the economic costs of

 US tariffs

 would fall on the United States itself, and a determination not to cushion that

 impact
.

 Nearly half China’s exports to the United States are products for which the United

 States has

 limited alternative external suppliers, including lithium batteries, computers, smartphones

 and video

 game consoles (Graph 2, lower right quadrant). Indeed, the massive advance in

 technology use is

 one of the most striking impressions to any outside visitor.
11
The pass-through of

 US

 tariffs to US consumer prices for such goods is likely to be high – perhaps explaining

 why many

 were quickly exempted.
12
Much of the rest of China’s exports

 (Graph 2, lower left quadrant) are products for which the United States is not a

 dominant source

 of demand, so could to some degree be divertible to other markets. There are far fewer

 products in

 the upper part of Graph 2, where the United States is a dominant source of demand for Chinese exports, and hence is more likely to have market power.
The inflationary impact of US tariffs on US consumers could, of course, be reduced if the

 Chinese

 currency were devalued substantially, as happened in
2018–2019
.

 But we detected little expectation that this would happen, because China would want to

 avoid:

 insulating the United States from its own tariffs; provoking retaliation from other

 countries;

 triggering capital outflow of the kind seen around the 2015 devaluation; or undermining

 the political

 and social gains (including recognition of China’s economic and technological

 advance) perceived

 to flow from a stronger exchange rate. Some noted that, according to simple measures of

 purchasing

 power parity such as the
Economist
’s ‘Big Mac Index’, the

 Chinese

 currency was more likely to
appreciate
rather than depreciate against the

 dollar, if

 left to its own devices.
13
Graph 2
There
was
of course a recognition that Chinese exporters would face real economic costs

 if high tariffs persisted. It was too early to see any of that at the time of our visit. But we did

 hear a determination to face into it, if it came.
Fourth,
we heard real doubts about how much manufacturing currently done in China would

 relocate to the United States
. Elevated labour costs, and a finite stock of advanced

 manufacturing skills, were thought to make it impossible to produce many goods at the prices US

 consumers expected to pay – as would the absence of the highly integrated, co-located supply

 chains that had developed within China as well as across Asia. And there were doubts about the

 viability of long-term investment in factories while the volatility of US policy settings remained so

 elevated.
14
Recent weeks have walked us back from the precipice a little. The rapid reductions in US tariffs on

 China’s Asian neighbours saw a pick-up in production and export via third countries, as was evident

 from the April trade data. And the threat of ‘mutual assured (economic) destruction’ provided

 the context for the rapid, if ostensibly temporary, reduction of United States and China tariffs. Those

 tariffs still remain well above historical levels, of course – and future increases, or other trade

 barriers, cannot be ruled out. But in view of the near-term de-escalation, China’s seemingly strong

 negotiating position and its scope to inject further stimulus, our baseline projection for Chinese GDP

 growth in the May
Statement on Monetary Policy
is 4.8 per cent in 2025 and

 4.4 per cent in 2026 – only modestly changed on three months ago.
15
Theme 4: Australian companies see opportunities amidst the risks
As part of our trip, we held a roundtable discussion, organised by Austcham Shanghai, with a large group

 of Australian firms active in China, across retail, agriculture, banking, finance, law, steel, health

 care, manufacturing and commercial property. What really struck me about that session was how upbeat

 most, if not all, of the firms were about the outlook for their businesses. The recovery in sentiment in

 early 2025, and confidence that the authorities would ‘do what it takes’ to sustain the economy

 was part of it. But there was also a sense that recent developments in trade policy could enhance their

 competitive position in Chinese markets.
There’s always a risk of survivor and recency bias in such discussions, of course – and the

 firms involved varied considerably in size (and hence macro-economic impact). But we heard something

 similar in separate discussions with companies active in steel and iron ore – the latter, of

 course, being Australia’s largest export to China by some distance. They saw few threats to the

 scale and cost advantages of Australian ore relative to other producers in the near term (longer term

 challenges from the energy transition are of course a different matter).
16
Their

 central expectation was for Chinese steel output to remain relatively robust, remaining at or near one

 billion tonnes a year in the near term. A large majority of Chinese steel is consumed domestically; and

 demand has been sustained in recent years by a pivot from property-related uses towards manufacturing and

 infrastructure. Further Chinese policy stimulus was expected to continue to involve (steel-intensive)

 infrastructure investment, despite the pivot to consumption.
17
Chinese steel exports were

 obviously seen as more vulnerable to a slowdown in global demand. But direct exports account for a little

 more than a tenth of Chinese steel output (very little of which goes to the United States). And indirect

 exports via steel-intensive products, like machinery, ships and cars) are roughly the same again.
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
My goal this evening was deliberately narrow – to set out what I heard in China in the immediate

 aftermath of ‘Liberation Day’.
That narrative, at that time, was pretty positive: that the Chinese economy was seen as picking up in

 early 2025; that China felt it had a strong hand in responding to the economic impact of tariffs; and

 that Australian companies in China saw opportunities amidst the risks.
But, just as clearly, it was also partial – in four important ways.
First, it was just a moment in time – and as Jay Powell reminded us recently, life moves pretty

 fast.
18
Tariff settings have already moved on dramatically, and will doubtless change further, whether up or

 down. And we’ll soon start to see data on just how the existing tariffs – still high by

 historical standards – are affecting the Chinese and global economies.
Second, it was just one set of views, from one country with a story to tell. Some of the judgements may

 prove wide of the mark – the tolerance for bearing economic costs may prove lower; domestic

 stimulus may prove to be harder to deliver; and so on.
Third, no in-the-moment assessment can hope to capture the ‘general equilibrium’ effects of such

 dramatic changes. An example of this is the possibility that Australian firms might in time face more

 intense competition, at home and overseas, from Chinese firms discounting output diverted from US

 markets. It’s unclear how big an effect this would be, given the limited overlap between Chinese and

 Australian outputs.
19
But it’s clearly on the minds of others in the
Asia–Pacific
region.
20
Last, but not least, is perhaps the elephant in the room: how purely economic factors of the kind

 I’ve discussed here will interact with more strategic considerations, and where that leaves

 Australia. I’ve neither the competence nor the authority to discuss such issues – but I know

 that others on the panel and in the audience tonight here do! So I look forward to our discussion.
Thank you.
Endnotes
I am particularly grateful to Samual Nightingale

 and Patrick Hendy for their assistance in writing this speech. Thanks go also to Adam Baird, Sue

 Black, Michele Bullock, Natasha Cassidy, Kassim Durrani, Samuel Evangelinos, Georgia Face, Sarah

 Hunter, David Jacobs, Bradley Jones, Christopher Kent, Vanessa Li, Penny Smith, Morgan Spearritt

 and Grace Taylor and for their comments and contributions on an earlier draft.
*
The economic ties between Australia and China go

 beyond trade alone, as discussed in: Lowe P (2018), ‘
Australia’s Deepening Economic Relationship

 with China: Opportunities and Risks
’, Address to the
Australia–China
Relations Institute, Sydney, 23 May; and Kent C

 (2019), ‘
Remarks at the Australian Renminbi

 Forum Melbourne
’, Melbourne, 12 June. As the animated chart in one of my

 co-panellists’ co-authored Lowy article vividly shows, these trends are not unique to

 Australia: China is now
many
countries’ biggest trading partner: Rajah R and A

 Albayrak (2025), ‘China Versus America on Global Trade’, Lowy Institute
The

 Interpreter
, 30 January.
1
I am once again grateful to Ashley Owen of Owen

 Analytics for this chart.
2
Importantly, the team has Mandarin skills. The

 importance of Chinese language skills in Australia is long debated. Mandarin is spoken at home by

 nearly 700,000 people in Australia, making it the most common language other than English:

 ABS (2022), ‘Snapshot of Australia, 2021’, 28 June. Yet the proportion of

 non-native Australians studying Chinese language at school is tiny: Field L, R Wilson and K

 Cruickshank (2024), ‘Prioritized But Declining: An Analysis of Student Participation in

 Asian Languages Courses in Secondary School
2001–2021
’,
Curriculum Perspectives
, 44, pp 263–277; the top level of fluency may not

 reach four figures: ABC (2019), ‘Are There Only 130 Australians of Non-Chinese Heritage

 Who Can Speak Mandarin Proficiently?’,
ABC News
, 24 June; and the public

 sector faces particular challenges, as highlighted by Jiang Y (2021), ‘Chinese–Australians

 in the Australian Public Service’, Lowy Institute Policy Brief, 12 April.
3
Our latest assessment of the economic outlook,

 including our China assessment, is set out in RBA (2025),
Statement on Monetary

 Policy
, May. Recent RBA publications on China include: Baird A, S Nightingale

 and G Taylor (2025), ‘
Behind

 the Great Wall: China’s Post-pandemic Policy Priorities
’, RBA
Bulletin
, January; Hendy P, E Ryan and G Taylor (2024), ‘
The

 ABCs of LGFVs: China’s Local Government Financing Vehicles
’, RBA
Bulletin
, October; Maher W (2024), ‘
China’s

 Monetary Policy Framework and Financial Market Transmission
’, RBA
Bulletin
, April; Baird A (2024), ‘Urban Residential Construction and Steel

 Demand in China’, RBA
Bulletin
, April; Adams N, D Jacobs, S Kenny, S Russell

 and M Sutton (2021), ‘
China’s

 Evolving Financial System and Its Global Importance
, RBA
Bulletin
,

 September; Jones B and J Bowman (2019), ‘
China’s Evolving Monetary Policy Framework in

 International Context
’, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2019-11; Day I and J Simon

 (eds) (2016),
Structural Change in China: Implications

 for Australia and the World
, Proceedings of the RBA Annual Conference, Reserve

 Bank of Australia, Sydney,
17–18
March.
4
Some felt the support provided to the developer

 Vanke also signalled a change in tone from the public authorities.
5
Richard McGregor, my co-panellist at Lowy here

 tonight, has suggested if there were ‘a German word for being resolute and freaked out at

 the same time, that would capture the mood in Beijing’: McGregor R (2025), ‘My China

 Trip Made One Thing Clear About the Global Trade War’,
Australian Financial

 Review
, 15 April. If there is, I am yet to find it!
6
China’s national savings rate remains

 amongst the highest in the world: see, for instance, Wolf M (2024), ‘China’s Excess

 Savings are a Danger’,
Financial Times
, 6 March.
7
See Hendy, Ryan and Taylor, n 4. Fitch also cited

 this as one reason for its downgrade to China shortly after ‘Liberation Day’ (see

 FitchRatings (2025), ‘Fitch Downgrades China to “A”; Outlook Stable’, 3 April),

 although the government strongly rejected that assessment (see Huaxia (2025), ‘China Deeply

 Regrets, Rejects Fitch Ratings Downgrade’,
Xinhua
, 3 April).
8
Gongsheng P (2024), ‘China’s Current

 Monetary Policy Stance and Evolution of Monetary Policy Framework in the Future’, Keynote

 Speech at the 15th Lujiazui Forum, 19 June.
9
See, for instance, the comments made by Lan

 Fo’an at the IMF Spring Meetings: Xinhua (2025), ‘China’s Finance Minister Vows

 More Proactive Fiscal Policy’,
Xinhua
, 24 March.
10
Though now de-emphasised from official Chinese

 communications because of the friction it generated overseas, the 2015 ‘Made in China

 2025’ program is worth a look (see PRC State Council (2015), ‘Notice of the State

 Council on the Publication of “Made in China 2025”’, Center for Security and Emerging

 Technology Translation, 8 May). According to the European Union Chamber of Commerce in

 China, China is now a (limited or complete) global technological leader in six of the

 10 sectors singled out for investment in that plan (see European Chamber (2025), ‘Made

 in China 2025: The Cost of Technological Leadership’, Report, 16 April).
11
There is some evidence of this happening the

 other way too: China has exempted imports of medical equipment and industrial chemicals, products

 in which the United States is dominant, from its own tariffs.
12
The Big Mac index suggests that the Chinese

 currency is 39 per cent undervalued against the US dollar: The Economist (2025),

 ‘Our Big Mac Index Shows How Burger Prices Differ Across Borders’,
The

 Economist
, 28 January.
13
Such points are of course eerily reminiscent of

 concerns cited by Western firms considering locating in China only a few decades ago.
14
The February forecast already assumed some

 increase in tariffs.
15
Most Australian ore will require an

 intermediating process like direct reduction to be usable in cleaner electric arc furnaces. See,

 for instance, Australian Trade and Investment Commission (2024), ‘Australia Forges a Future

 Made from Green Steel’, 28 August.
16
It was noted that Australian producers would be

 exposed if Chinese demand fell sharply for any reason, for instance, if the government imposes

 production controls. That’s because there are no alternative iron ore export markets of the

 scale of China. Indian capacity is much smaller, and can use domestic ore; and there is little or

 no production growth outside of southeast Asia.
17
See Powell J (2025), ‘Economic

 Outlook’, Speech at the Economic Club of Chicago, Chicago, Illinois, 16 April; also

 Walsh R (2020), ‘Ferris Bueller’s Day Off – “Life Moves Pretty Fast”’, ACMI,

 1 October!
18
See RBA (2025), ‘
Box A:

 How Might Tariffs Affect Australian Trade?
’,
Statement on Monetary

 Policy,
May, and Fenner S (2025), ‘Net Impact of US Tariffs on Industries Limited

 but Uneven’, Westpac IQ, 1 May for analyses of this issue.
19
See, for instance, The Economist (2025),

 ‘Why China Has the Upper Hand in Its Trade War with America’,
The

 Economist
, 1 May.
20
