BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: The RBA’s Monetary Policy Implementation System – Some Important Updates
DATE: 02/04/2025
SPEAKER: Some Important Updates
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2025/sp-ag-2025-04-02.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
The RBA’s Monetary Policy Implementation System – Some Important Updates
Christopher Kent
*
Assistant Governor (Financial Markets)
KangaNews Debt Capital Markets Summit
Sydney
–
2 April 2025
Audio
27.5MB
Q&A Transcript
Download
455KB
Watch video: Why Productivity matters
Introduction
I would like to thank KangaNews for the opportunity to discuss some important updates to the system for

 monetary policy implementation in Australia. The Reserve Bank Board discussed this late last year, and we

 are now ready to announce operational changes to our Open Market Operations (OMOs) that will support the

 transition to ample reserves.
Monetary policy implementation is at the core of the financial system’s plumbing. It is how we give

 effect to changes in the cash rate target, influence other money market rates and provide liquidity to

 the banking system. Importantly, it enables us to conduct monetary policy in a way that best contributes

 to both price stability and full employment.
The RBA achieves this by providing banks access to Exchange Settlement (ES) balances – otherwise

 known as reserves. Banks use these funds to settle payments with other banks and the RBA. Banks also hold

 reserves for precautionary and regulatory purposes. In response to various price signals, and to help

 manage their reserves and deal with their funding needs, banks borrow and lend reserves in money markets.

 These transactions underpin key interest rates in the Australian economy – such as the cash rate

 and short-term money market rates like bank bill swap rates.
An effective monetary policy implementation system is critical for all market participants. It aids in the

 smooth transmission of monetary policy, supports good functioning of money markets and hence other key

 financial markets, and encourages greater resilience in the financial system.
In March last year, the Reserve Bank Board endorsed the new system for implementing monetary policy.

 Banks’ demand for reserves would be satisfied in full at our OMOs, at a price near the cash rate

 target, using full allotment repurchase agreement (repo) auctions. We call this system ‘ample

 reserves with full allotment’ because it supplies as many reserves as banks demand at our OMOs.
In April last year, I discussed why the Board endorsed this framework.
1
In brief, it is a simpler and more

 robust system for us to operate compared with the alternatives. It is also similar to systems used by

 other central banks, including the European Central Bank and the Bank of England. Banks will determine

 the amount of reserves they hold to suit their liquidity needs. The system is resilient to structural

 changes affecting banks’ underlying demand for liquidity as well as policies that might affect the

 size of the RBA’s balance sheet (such as unconventional policies if they were to become necessary

 again). At the same time, it implies a materially larger steady-state balance sheet for the central bank

 compared with pre-pandemic times.
Over the past year or so, we have been working on the detailed design of this system, and today I am

 announcing some important changes. I stress that these changes are operational in nature. They do not

 represent or signal a shift in the stance of monetary policy. Nor do they have a bearing on the Monetary

 Policy Board’s current approach to allowing bond holdings acquired during the pandemic to mature.
Specifically, effective from 9 April 2025, we will:
increase the price of all new OMO repos by 5 basis points to 10 basis points over the cash

 rate target; OMO will continue to be offered at a floating rate
introduce a seven-day term, in addition to the existing 28-day term, at each weekly OMO.
Before outlining the Reserve Bank Board’s deliberations and explaining why we have decided to make

 these changes, I want to review recent market developments.
Recent developments in markets
Reserves have declined around $110 billion over the past year (Graph 1). Most of this reflected

 the final repayment of the Term Funding Facility (TFF) in June 2024. Subsequently, the level of reserves

 has fluctuated around $240 billion, and the cash rate has remained close to, but slightly below, the

 cash rate target.
Graph 1
Activity at our OMOs increased from around $3 billion a week in the June quarter of 2024 and has

 stabilised around $7 billion. This increase occurred shortly after the final repayment of the TFF,

 alongside a broader tightening in liquidity conditions in money markets globally. In response, banks

 accessed more reserves from OMO, and some of those funds appeared to have been recycled into other money

 markets. This was an early indication that the full allotment system was working as intended –

 reserves rose automatically in response to an increase in demand for liquidity while increases in money

 market rates were largely contained (Graph 2).
Graph 2
Current market conditions suggest that the transition to ample reserves – that is, a level of supply

 that is in balance with banks’ underlying demand – is ongoing. The stock of reserves remains

 elevated, reflecting the bonds still on the RBA’s books that we purchased during the pandemic. Our

 expectation is that reserves will continue to decline gradually for a time in response to the decline in

 the RBA’s bond holdings.
2
Eventually though, the supply of reserves will approach

 banks’ underlying demand, and thereafter banks’ participation in OMO should pick up to offset

 the effect of further declines in the RBA’s bond holdings.
Underlying demand for reserves is hard to estimate and it will only become evident as we approach ample

 reserves. We have done modelling work and banks have also provided us with estimates of their own demand

 for reserves. This suggests that underlying reserves could be anywhere between $100 and

 $200 billion.
3
An advantage of our full-allotment system in the face of

 such uncertainty is that the transition to ample reserves can occur without us needing to know the level

 of banks’ underlying demand ahead of time. OMO use will rise automatically. Such a move, combined with an

 assessment of market conditions and liaison with the banks, will indicate when reserves have reached an

 ‘ample’ level. Private market activity may also increase as we approach this point –

 particularly in the short-term repo and cash markets. This is because banks wanting additional reserves

 on non-OMO days will seek to borrow them in private markets. Other banks can lend reserves if they have

 more than they need. The scale of this activity will depend in part on the extent to which banks choose

 to economise on their reserve holdings, given that obtaining reserves at OMO and leaving them in ES

 accounts comes at a cost to the banks. I will come back to this point in a moment.
Principles for an ample reserves system
Over the past year, the RBA has consulted banks, estimated the underlying demand for reserves, and

 considered the ways in which the new ample reserves system might operate. We have published a
summary of

 consultation responses
on our website today; thank you to those who contributed. This work informed

 discussions at the Reserve Bank Board late last year at which three key principles for the ample reserves

 system were considered:
Sufficient monetary control
. The Board agreed that the primary objective for monetary

 policy implementation was to achieve sufficient ‘monetary control’. This involves the cash

 rate trading close enough to the target with other short-term interest rates tethered to the cash

 rate to be consistent with the desired stance of monetary policy.
Supporting private markets
. The Board agreed that we could achieve the primary objective

 of monetary control while still allowing deviations of the cash rate from target. Allowing the cash

 rate to trade within a modest range will avoid the RBA having an overly large presence in markets and

 thereby encourage banks to use private markets. Well-functioning private markets will help banks to

 better manage their funding needs in normal times and times of stress. Banks can be encouraged to use

 private markets by setting the price for OMO in a way that avoids the RBA having an overly large

 presence in the repo market.
4
Using a mix of different operations to supply

 reserves could also be used to avoid an overly large presence in any one market.
Minimising risk to the RBA balance sheet
. Providing reserves carries risks for the RBA

 – both financial and operational. The size and nature of the risks depend on the quantity of

 reserves as well as the characteristics of the operations used to supply them. Under an ample system,

 the RBA will provide more reserves compared with the earlier corridor system. OMOs do not carry

 interest rate risk because the floating rate of our OMOs is linked directly to the rate we pay on our

 liabilities. However, the use of other operations to supply reserves could entail financial risk.
A key question we considered was how to balance these principles given there is some tension between

 them. For example, we could have a high degree of monetary control by setting a low price for OMO

 close to the ES rate. But that would encourage banks to obtain a lot of reserves via OMO, crowding

 out private market activity and implying a large balance sheet for the RBA. Decisions on the

 configuration of OMO as well as the mix of other operations to supply reserves will need to balance

 these various trade-offs.
Changes to the configuration of our OMOs
We have been running full-allotment OMOs since the onset of the pandemic. We switched these from daily to

 weekly auctions from October 2021. We then offered a term of 28 days and at a price 5 basis

 points above overnight indexed swaps from early 2022. We then switched this price to a floating rate that

 was 5 basis points above the cash rate target from February of last year. The system has worked well

 under an excess reserves system and has delivered an acceptable degree of monetary control. However, as

 reserves will decline further, and demand for OMO will pick up when reserves are no longer in excess of

 banks’ underlying needs, we judged that some further changes were warranted.
A key issue is that at a price of 5 basis points above the cash rate target, meeting a large increase

 in the demand for funds at OMO might impair, at least at the margin, the health of other private money

 markets. Similarly, this low price for OMO will lead to a larger RBA balance sheet than otherwise and

 implies a tighter degree of monetary control that we judged to be necessary. At the same time, the

 current 28-day tenor is too long for those banks that may need additional reserves for only short

 periods, and it is much longer than the tenor of some key markets, particularly for overnight cash.
The changes I have announced will better allow us to balance the various trade-offs between meeting the

 three principles I have outlined. The two changes effective from 9 April 2025 are:
We will increase the price of all new OMO repos from 5 basis points to 10 basis points over

 the cash rate target.
5
We will offer a seven-day tenor in addition to the current 28-day tenor.
Auctions will continue to take place once a week (generally on a Wednesday morning).
An OMO rate of 10 basis points over the cash rate target remains consistent with the Board’s

 desired degree of monetary control. Under this higher OMO price, we expect the cash rate will trade

 within a reasonable range of the cash rate target. Accordingly, the cash rate, and other money market

 rates, will be consistent with the desired stance of monetary policy.
Importantly, this higher price for OMO implies a lower overall demand for reserves than otherwise. The

 higher price will provide more of an incentive for participants to recycle reserves in private markets.

 Banks can still come to OMO to acquire reserves to meet their payment needs and obtain

 ‘precautionary reserves’ for unexpected liquidity needs or to lend to others. But the higher

 price will reduce banks’ incentives to obtain more reserves at OMO than necessary. A bank can make

 good use of private markets as a source of reserves if they face an unexpected need for funds.
Offering a seven-day tenor has a couple of benefits. OMO will provide a closer substitute to overnight

 cash and funding from other short-term money markets. By itself, this will strengthen the degree of

 monetary control over those key markets. This decision is also consistent with feedback from market

 participants that a shorter tenor would help them to better manage their liquidity needs. However,

 respondents to the consultation also expressed an interest in the 28-day tenor. Retaining that longer

 tenor allows banks and the RBA to more efficiently manage their OMO activity by reducing operational

 burdens associated with more frequent rolling of positions.
During consultation some market participants wanted more frequent operations, but we believe the current

 weekly auction is enough to anchor the cash rate and other money market rates to the target. This setup

 also encourages banks to use private markets, especially on non-OMO days. In line with APRA’s

 standards, banks must have strong frameworks for forecasting their liquidity demands and managing their

 liquidity risks. These processes are becoming more important as banks need to increasingly engage in

 private money markets to meet their liquidity needs.
As we transition to the ample reserves system, the RBA and market participants will gain valuable

 insights. We will actively monitor market conditions, engage with banks, and respond if needed, including

 by adjusting our OMO or other administered rates.
Features of the ample reserves system
Private markets
As we transition to ample reserves, some banks may need more liquidity than their current ES balances. One

 option is to borrow reserves from a bank with a surplus, benefiting banks on both sides of such

 transactions. This private activity may be associated with short-term volatility in money markets as

 prices adjust to supply and demand changes. Within reasonable bounds, this is a sign of healthy markets.

 Weekly full allotment OMOs will help banks meet their liquidity needs. But to limit volatility, banks

 should be ready to transact in various markets, including the cash market. Banks might use OMOs to

 acquire reserves for precautionary reasons or to lend into other markets when prices are high. Over time,

 banks will refine their reserve management approaches in the ample reserves system.
The RBA’s overnight standing facility
If banks face unexpected liquidity needs on a non-OMO day or after OMO has taken place, and cannot find

 liquidity on suitable terms in private markets, we would expect and encourage them to use the RBA’s

 overnight standing facility (OSF). This facility provides reserves overnight at 25 basis points

 above the cash rate target, thereby limiting deviations in money market rates from the cash rate target

 set by the Monetary Policy Board. While the price is set to avoid displacing private market activity, it

 provides an incentive for banks to use the facility when other sources are more expensive.
Historically, market participants have been reluctant to use this facility. However, both the RBA and APRA

 expect that banks should use the OSF as part of their liquidity management if they fall short on their

 daily liquidity needs. We will encourage its use as part of the new normal.
In the rare case of broader stress across the banking system, the RBA could run an unscheduled OMO. But

 that would not be the standard approach in the case of a few banks requiring additional liquidity that

 could otherwise be provided in the market or via the OSF.
Other operations
In addition to our open market repo operations, the RBA plans to use other operations to provide reserves

 across a range of markets, including foreign exchange swaps and purchases of short-dated government

 bonds. We would not use these to influence rates or liquidity in those markets. Rather, they will help

 the RBA to limit the extent of our footprint in any one market, particularly the repo market, and manage

 operational risks. The use of these operations is expected to be some time away since reserves supplied

 via OMO should gradually rise to meet demand as the supply of reserves from our existing bond holdings

 declines. We will outline our plans for these operations before actively using them to manage monetary

 policy implementation.
The rate paid by the RBA on reserves
When the RBA moved to an excess reserves system in March 2020, banks had little need to borrow in the cash

 market, and the cash rate became closely anchored to the ES rate (Graph 3). The Reserve Bank Board

 narrowed the spread between the cash rate target and ES rate to 10 basis points and announced the ES

 rate in its monetary policy decisions. As we continue to transition to ample reserves, borrowing rates in

 private markets will rise as demand for liquidity from those sources increases, partly due to the higher

 rate at our weekly OMO. Consequently, the ES rate will be less significant as an anchor. Because of this,

 starting in May the Monetary Policy Board will announce the cash rate target in its decisions but not the

 ES rate.
Graph 3
Moreover, from time to time the RBA may adjust the ES rate if that will help to better meet the objectives

 of the ample reserves system. For example, we may need to provide market participants with more of an

 incentive to recycle excess reserves by altering the ES rate, thereby changing the opportunity cost of

 holding reserves. Any such adjustments would be purely operational in nature and would not represent a

 shift in the stance of monetary policy. Indeed, such changes in the ES rate could occur as needed. While

 we would convey these clearly to the market, such changes would not require the approval of, or

 announcement by, the Monetary Policy Board.
Next steps
To reiterate, the changes to our operations will take effect on 9 April 2025.
It is important that banks focus on their liquidity management practices as we continue to transition to

 the ample reserves system. During the excess reserves period, many did not need to top up their reserves,

 but now all banks must be ready to use our facilities and transact in private markets.
The RBA and APRA will encourage banks to use the overnight standing facility as needed as part of their

 routine liquidity management. Today we have released a
joint statement
to emphasise this commitment and

 together we will engage with banks to ensure they understand the role of the OSF and are comfortable and

 ready to use it to manage liquidity as the system transitions to an ample level of reserves.
Meanwhile, we will continue to monitor conditions in key markets, including by talking regularly with

 market participants.
Finally, I stress that these changes have no implications for the stance of monetary policy. They do,

 however, represent important changes in the plumbing that supports the transmission of monetary policy

 and underpins critical activities across the financial system.
Endnotes
I thank Sean Dowling, Gian-piero Lovicu, Thomas

 van Florenstein Mulder and Aidan Penman for their excellent assistance in helping to prepare this

 speech.
*
See Kent C (2024), ‘
The Future System for Monetary Policy

 Implementation
’, Bloomberg Australia Briefing, Sydney, 2 April.
1
In particular, the Australian Government will

 repay the RBA by issuing new bonds to the private sector (or receiving more in revenue than it

 spends), which will drain reserves from the system. Note that for the bonds issued by the

 governments of the states and territories this reduction in reserves happens on the days that

 semis mature.
2
Bristow L (2024), ‘
Modelling Reserve Demand with Deposits and the Cost of

 Collateral
’, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2024-08.
3
Other operations could include foreign exchange

 and cross-currency swaps as well as purchases of near-maturity Australian Government Securities.

 RBA (2024), ‘
Minutes of

 the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
’, Hybrid, 9 and

 10 December.
4
The price on existing OMO repos will remain

 5 basis points over the cash rate target.
5
