BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: What Has Australian Macroeconomic Thought Achieved in the Past Century – And Where Can it Contribute in the Next?
DATE: 09/07/2025
SPEAKER: Andrew Hauser
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2025/sp-dg-2025-07-09.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
What Has Australian Macroeconomic Thought Achieved in the Past Century – And Where Can it Contribute in the Next?
Andrew Hauser
*
Deputy Governor
Speech to mark the centenary of the Economics Society of Australia, Australian Conference of Economists
Sydney
–
9 July 2025
Audio
37.9MB
Q&A Transcript
Watch video: Speech by Andrew Hauser, Deputy Governor, to the Economics Society of Australia
Introduction
It is a great honour to address you on the 100th anniversary of the Economics Society of Australia.
1
It’s an honour because, over that past century, Australian thinkers have helped develop some of the

 most important building blocks in open economy macroeconomics – the branch of economics that seeks

 to understand how the global trading economy works.
Those were significant – sometimes world-leading – intellectual achievements.
But they were more than just that. Because they also shaped the policies and institutions that helped

 Australia navigate the global economy of that period so successfully, delivering wealth and stability for

 its citizens.
Indeed Australian macroeconomic research has pulled that trick off twice. First, powering the ideas that

 lifted the country out of the Great Depression to flourish after the Second World War. And, second,

 helping to design a reform program that rescued the country from the slump of the 1970s, and led to more

 than a quarter century of recession-free growth.
Two Golden Ages, marshalling thought into action.
But to thrive in the next 100 years, Australia’s researchers will need to go for the hat-trick.
And that’s because the tectonic plates of the global economic system are once more in flux, as free

 trade is rolled back; geopolitical alliances shift; climate change accelerates; and productivity growth

 slows to a crawl in most developed countries.
Simply
coping
with such changes will take skill. Turning them to Australia’s
advantage
– identifying and exploiting new trading structures and sources of growth

 – will require rich new thinking from Australian academia.
The
good news
is that many of today’s policy problems lie at the very heart of

 Australia’s intellectual comparative advantage. The
challenge
is whether we can relearn

 the lessons of the past – drawing in our best talent, strengthening the incentives for

 policy-relevant research, and forging deep links between academics and policymakers.
In my remarks today I want to look back at some of those successes of the past century, before posing some

 questions for the future.
What is
Australian
macroeconomic thought?
But before doing so, I should try to clarify what I mean by
Australian
macroeconomic thought.
Is it macroeconomic research
about
Australia?
By
Australians? Conducted
in
Australia? It could be any of the above. But if you wanted a ‘vibe’, in the

 great Australian tradition of
The Castle
, I’d suggest three defining features:
2
First, an emphasis on small open economy macroeconomics, with a particular role for the commodities

 and energy sectors. That reflects the nature of our economy and the challenges we face. But it also

 has global application: our context is also our comparative advantage.
Second, a focus on solving practical real-world policy issues, rather than pushing forward more

 abstract frontiers. Many influential Australian macroeconomists have also served as senior public

 policymakers.
Third, a world-leading capacity to develop the analytical tools necessary to drive successful

 economic policy – in particular small open economy quantitative macro-models and macroeconomic

 data.
The past 100 years: Two ‘Golden Ages’ of Australian economic thinking
3
To illustrate how these themes played out over the past 100 years, I’m going to split the period

 into two halves. The first lies either side of the Second World War; the second straddles the economic

 reforms starting from the 1980s. Each in its own way can legitimately be called a Golden Age, in which

 Australian ideas both advanced the global knowledge frontier and delivered prosperity for Australia.
The first Golden Age
The first period, from the birth of the ESA in the 1920s to the late 1960s, saw Australia pull itself out

 of the depths of the Depression and navigate a world war.
Australia’s response to these challenges was shaped by its economic context as a small commodity

 exporter. For much of the period, the growth model relied on expanding exports of raw materials

 (primarily agricultural), using huge quantities of imported labour and capital. The central question in

 such an economy was how to maintain both internal and external balance, in the face of external shocks.

 To achieve these goals, the authorities relied primarily on centralised control. The exchange rate was

 pegged to sterling; credit volumes and interest rates were typically administratively set, and

 wage-setting was heavily institutionalised.
4
Tariffs were used actively, in an attempt to protect and

 foster domestic industry, lift employment and reduce the economy’s reliance on volatile global

 commodity markets.
5
Many great Australian thinkers helped shape this first Golden Age – but today I will focus on just

 two.
The first is Lyndhurst Giblin.
Giblin was a model Accidental Economist. He devoted his first 45 years to everything
but
the subject: he was part of the Klondike gold rush, served as a Tasmanian MP and received the Military

 Cross for gallantry on the Western Front.
6
Yet little more than a decade after the First World War,

 Giblin had developed one of the most important building-blocks of macroeconomics.
As Government Statistician for Tasmania and later Ritchie Professor of Economics at the University of

 Melbourne, Giblin had a ringside seat for the Great Depression – which in Australia began in 1928

 as commodity prices fell, accelerating in 1929 with the global slump. Giblin saw that sharp declines in

 world prices for agricultural produce – Australia’s main export – would not only lower

 Australian farmers’ incomes, but would also cause them to spend less. And that in turn would lower

 incomes for others, causing a slump to ripple out through the wider economy. That rippling could be far

 larger than the first-round impact alone, amplifying the domestic repercussions of a global shock.
Giblin set out this startlingly simple but revolutionary idea – the modern-day multiplier in all but

 name – in a 1930 lecture. That’s a year before Richard Kahn’s seminal
Economic

 Journal
paper, and six years before Keynes’
General Theory
. What is today

 known universally as the ‘Keynesian multiplier’ could and perhaps should be called the

 ‘Giblin-Keynes multiplier’. Yet neither Kahn nor Keynes made any reference to Giblin’s

 work, or even appeared aware of its existence.
7
Giblin, however, was far less interested in global acclaim than he was in working out how Australia could

 rescue itself from the Depression – and that was a hotly contested question. The then Premier of

 New South Wales, Jack Lang, had a simple answer: default on state and Commonwealth debt to the United

 Kingdom and use the savings to stimulate domestic activity. But default risked destroying

 Australia’s future borrowing capacity, rendering its economic model unworkable.
8
The Bank of England, in the form of the widely disliked Otto Niemeyer, had a different proposal: cut wages

 and balance the budget. Based partly on his multiplier analysis, Giblin worried that approach would be

 too deflationary. With Douglas Copland, Leslie Melville
9
and others, he helped prepare the 1931

 ‘Premiers Plan’, which argued that Australia should accompany lower wages and a balanced budget

 with monetary easing to ‘spread the loss’. A sharp devaluation against the British pound,

 executed the same year, provided further support to external competitiveness. Giblin framed the challenge

 as tackling an ‘outside problem which is causing an inside problem’
10
– concepts that years later would be formalised as external and internal balance.
Although Giblin used what would come to be thought of as a ‘Keynesian’ analytical tool (the

 multiplier), his policy prescriptions were decidedly
un
-Keynesian: this was no

 debt-financed fiscal expansion. Writing in the
Melbourne Herald
in 1932, Keynes himself

 recognised the plan ‘saved the economic structure of Australia’. But he advised against its

 wider use, arguing that competitive devaluation or wage deflation would leave no-one better off, and

 advocating ‘public works’ rather than ‘further pressure on money wages or a further

 forcing of exports’.
11
Giblin’s thinking evolved in the same direction over time, and by the end of the Second World War he

 favoured using government spending to stabilise the economy and keep unemployment low. That view informed

 Australia’s position at the Bretton Woods conference, where it argued that relaxing trade

 protections – a key goal of the United States – without also committing to full employment

 could leave countries like Australia badly exposed to external shocks.
12
And it formed the core of the

 1945
Full Employment
White Paper, developed by Giblin alongside Melville and

 ‘Nugget’ Coombs – later the first Governor of the RBA
13
– which set the basis for

 policy in much of the post-war period.
My second case study is Trevor Swan – regarded by many as Australia’s greatest economist.
Swan made not one but two key contributions. The first is summarised in the ‘Swan diagram’, and

 extended in the ‘Salter-Swan’ model developed with fellow Australian Wilfred Salter. The model

 is designed to help think about policy coordination and trade-offs in a small economy like Australia,

 with trade and a fixed exchange rate. The model elegantly demonstrated many of the issues the country

 faced in the first Golden Age trying to achieve both internal and external balance. And it illustrated

 how different combinations of macroeconomic tools – including fiscal, wage, exchange rate and trade

 policy – might be used to maintain both in the face of international shocks.
Swan’s second seminal contribution was aimed at thinking through how to foster longer term economic

 growth. Swan showed that medium-term growth in real per capita labour income depends on the rate of

 technical progress, growth in the labour supply, and growth in the capital stock. This was a crucial

 insight for Australia, which relied heavily on high rates of immigration. Swan’s framework showed

 that, in such circumstances, sustained growth in real incomes also required rapid growth in productive

 capital and technical progress. Without that, real incomes would stagnate or fall. Important messages for

 policymakers at the time – and still relevant today.
Swan’s personal story is fascinating. Amongst other things, he was a perfectionist, and that –

 combined with his preference for supporting
Australian
economics – led him to publish

 his work slowly (if at all), and exclusively in local journals. As a consequence, much of the credit for

 his pioneering ideas on growth, including a Nobel prize, went to Robert Solow rather than Swan.
14
But

 like Giblin, Australia mattered more to him than global fame. Alongside his role as ANU’s first

 Professor of Economics, Swan was Chief Economist to the Prime Minister’s Department (in the 1950s)

 and a member of the RBA Board (from
1975–1985
).
15
The second Golden Age
The second Golden Age – from ideas to action – straddles either side of the deep economic

 reforms of the 1980s and 1990s.
The reforms overturned the paradigm of the first Golden Age. The exchange rate was floated. High tariffs

 were replaced with much freer trading arrangements. Constraints on the financial sector were released;

 and, in time, the central bank was made independent and asked to hit an inflation target. Of course,

 there was good luck too, as huge new export markets opened up in Asia. But taken together, these changes

 ushered in an extended period of prosperity for Australia.
16
The intellectual groundwork for the reforms was laid years earlier, as recognition dawned that frameworks

 of centralised control and protectionism were undermining, rather than protecting, competitiveness,

 productivity growth and living standards.
17
This was far from unique to Australia, of course. But

 Australian thinkers again made important contributions to the evolving global consensus – perhaps

 most notably on the case against trade protection, through the work of Max Corden. Corden showed that the

 economic costs of tariffs were much larger than previously recognised, once general equilibrium effects

 were accounted for. His work, including the concept of ‘net effective rates of protection’,

 which captured the impact of tariffs on imported inputs as well as outputs, remains widely cited –

 and, sadly, is highly topical again today.
18
Like his earlier compatriots, Corden did not just push forward academic thinking – he also rolled up

 his sleeves and got stuck into policymaking for Australia. His work had a profound impact on the

 enquiries led by John Crawford over the 1960s and 1970s calling for a rationalisation of tariffs.
19
And it

 led, through the advocacy of Fred Gruen, to the Whitlam government’s across-the-board

 25 per cent cuts in tariffs in 1973, which began the long and winding road to free trade.
20
The

 Tariff Board was renamed the Industries Assistance Commission – and two decades later became the

 Productivity Commission: quite a journey!
21
The reforms of the Second Golden Age reflected a dawning recognition that – subject to safeguards

 – flexible market prices could facilitate adjustment to both internal and external shocks more

 effectively than administrative controls. These were not uniquely Australian ideas (Ross Garnaut called

 it ‘the Washington consensus come to Australia’). But strong advocacy by the government and

 wider public institutions helped them take root. And the overlay of specifically Australian policies

 – including the
1983–1996
Prices and Incomes Accord –

 helped maintain social and political support for reform. The strength of such equity considerations,

 familiar from Giblin’s work in the 1930s, remains an important feature in Australian macroeconomic

 policy debates to the present day.
Across both Golden Ages, Australia also had a world-leading role in two areas of practical policymaking:

 quantitative macro-modelling; and economic data.
Australia’s first general equilibrium macro-econometric model was developed in the early 1940s by

 – who else – Trevor Swan! Indeed Swan’s model has a decent claim to be among the first

 globally, coming after Jan Tinbergen’s 1936 model of the Netherlands but more than a decade before

 Lawrence Klein and Arthur Goldberger’s model of the United States. Once again, Tinbergen and Klein

 both received Nobel prizes; Swan (who didn’t even publish his model during his lifetime) did not.

 From the early 1970s, the Treasury and RBA built a suite of state-of-the-art open economy

 macro-econometric models.
22
ORANI, one of the most advanced large-scale computable

 general equilibrium models of the time, was used in the Crawford enquiries.
23
And in

 the 1990s, Warwick McKibbin and Peter Wilcoxen developed the global hybrid DSGE/CGE model,

 ‘G-Cubed’, used most recently to provide widely cited assessments of the impact of US

 tariffs.
24
The strength of Australia’s economic data has an even longer pedigree.
25
As the

 first Government Statistician of New South Wales from 1886, Sir Timothy Coghlan produced a series of

 yearbooks that set global standards for the measurement of aggregate income and occupational

 classification in national censuses.
26
Half a century later, Keynes’ disciple Colin

 Clark helped bring modern national income accounting to Australia. And there have been many other

 examples of methodological trailblazing since then – including early adoption of survey sampling

 approaches and an integrated business register; and pioneering use of satellite imaging and integrated

 data sets.
27
The critical importance of effective data gathering to

 Australia’s economic success was reflected: in its independent institutional setting at the heart of

 government; in its job titles – the head economic adviser to government was for some time known as

 the ‘Chief Statistician’; and in its ability to attract some of Australia’s top minds,

 from Giblin, Sir Roland Wilson and Charles Wickens right up to today.
28
Before I leave this brief stroll through the past, I should acknowledge the key role that the ESA itself

 played in this history. Many of those I’ve talked about today were presidents of the Society; and

 many of their ideas appeared in its publications.
29
Like Australian macroeconomics in general, a defining

 feature of the Society has been its focus on ideas that can be
implemented
, not just

 admired. Douglas Copland, ESA’s first President, encouraged members to involve themselves in the

 practical affairs of government and business – a principle captured in the Society’s aim

 ‘to encourage the teaching and study of economics and its application to Australia’. The RBA

 has long been an active supporter of that program. Bernie Fraser held the Presidency of the Society while

 he was RBA Governor in the early 1990s, hosting central council meetings in the Bank’s boardroom in

 Martin Place. And two of our current Department Heads played leading roles more recently: Jacqui Dwyer

 was an executive adviser on economics education; and Penny Smith was President of the NSW branch,

 supporting the launch of the Society’s Women in Economics Network.
Will there be a third Golden Age? The worry … and the call to arms
By any standards, then, the past century has been an extraordinary story – of world-leading

 thinking, deployed by the country’s best academic minds, working hand-in-hand with policymakers,

 helping to pull the economy from the jaws of global turmoil and setting it on the path to prosperity.
So the killer question is this: can Australian macroeconomic thinking do it again, as the world economy is

 once more in flux?
Ask that question of the macro research community today, and some seem worried:
about Australia’s ability to attract, retain and grow top academic talent;
30
about diminished academic incentives to work on issues of greatest policy relevance to Australia;
31
and
about perceptions of a weakened partnership between academia and policymakers.
32
Views differ on how serious those worries are. The best Australian research remains world-class. And we

 don’t need to solve everything ourselves: the scope to draw on global thinking, adopting and

 adapting it to Australian conditions, is far greater than in Giblin’s day.
But, where there
are
concerns, they should be seen as a call to arms, not a cause for

 despondency. And that’s because the defining macroeconomic challenges of our age – the rolling

 back of free trade; the implications of shifting geopolitical alliances; climate change; and the need to

 reinvigorate productivity growth globally – lie right in our areas of comparative advantage.
The question is how to leverage that advantage. Let me break that into three sub-questions.
How can we build on Australia’s historical strength in open economy macro?
The long arc back to a more regionalised, less open, international trading system, coupled with the

 realities of climate change, poses fundamental questions for Australian macroeconomic research along at

 least three dimensions:
First, how will the composition and geographical location of our export markets change in response to

 evolving trade policies and geopolitical alliances? What implications will those shifts have for

 domestic output, investment, labour markets and pricing? And how do we harness our natural and human

 resources to take advantage of those shifts?
Second, how will global commodity demand change over time? How long will markets for

 ‘traditional’ minerals including coal, gas and iron ore – mainstays of the economic

 model in Australia today – persist? Will markets for ‘new economy’ minerals and

 renewable energy sources take their place, and how can Australia best position itself to take

 advantage of such trends?
33
And, third, how will these and other structural shifts change the sorts of shocks that stabilisation

 policy, including monetary policy, needs to respond to? How will that influence optimal policy

 design? And how might we need to adjust our thinking about trade-offs, across the different policy

 goals and tools available?
Understanding the macroeconomic risks, and opportunities, from these structural changes is a vital

 priority for research – to protect the economy, but also to ensure a clear path for future growth.

 The good news is there is a rich history of Australian macro research
34
and modelling
35
to

 draw on. The challenge is that this will only take us so far: dealing with tomorrow’s world will

 require us to apply and extend that research to answer new questions.
How can we deepen the links between academia and policymakers?
Second, how can we deepen the links between academia and policymakers – the secret sauce of the

 first two Golden Ages?
There are certainly some great examples today. Several Commissioners at the Productivity Commission are

 current or former academics, including Catherine de Fontenay, ESA’s President. The Treasury’s

 competition review has an expert advisory panel, including academics. And many of our top universities

 and think-tanks have groups focused on fostering engagement on macroeconomic policy issues.
36
One of the most profound issues of our time is how to reverse the productivity slowdown. This is by no

 means a uniquely Australian challenge – but the Second Golden Age demonstrated the power of

 harnessing academic ideas and policy to drive a long-term recovery in productivity. Important work is

 underway on this topic in the public sector, some of it in conjunction with academia: for example,

 researchers at the Productivity Commission, Treasury and RBA have analysed the causes of the productivity

 slowdown, its links to competition, innovation and dynamism, and the implications for the wider

 economy.
37
And the Commission currently has five separate

 inquiries underway into potential practical reforms,
38
which among other things will serve as inputs

 to the Government’s Economic Reform roundtable in August.
39
A lot of research in this space makes use of Australia’s excellent microdata. The availability,

 quality and breadth of Australian de-identified datasets on business and individuals is comparable to

 anywhere in the world – due in no small part to the excellent work of the Australian Bureau of

 Statistics, as well as the Australian Tax Office and Department of Social Services.
40
Being

 at the forefront in this space offers scope for researchers to do globally relevant and frontier work, in

 an Australian context: the best of both worlds. For example, at the RBA we are currently using it to

 assess frontier questions around how monetary policy affects labour supply, and how pricing dynamics

 changed during the recent increase in inflation.
41
How can we communicate the urgency of the challenge?
Third, what can we do as a community to communicate the urgency of the challenge, to show its importance

 and draw new talent into this vital work? Bringing academics, policy economists and policymakers together

 can help us reach a common understanding, of both the problems and the potential solutions. In that

 context, conferences like this one can be extremely powerful, as can the work of the ESA more generally.

 But it is crucial that both sides – policy and academia – buy in. And we need to focus, as a

 profession, on
how
we communicate our thinking. The Golden Ages were full of people like

 Giblin who specialised in translating big ideas into simple language. As Danielle Wood argued at last

 year’s APS Economist conference, it has never been more crucial for economists to speak directly and

 plainly.
42
The role of the RBA
Many of those I spoke with in preparing this speech emphasised the leading role that the RBA could play,

 as one of the most prominent consumers and producers of Australian macro research; and as a training

 ground. The RBA has a rich history at the leading edge of central bank research – and we remain

 engaged across a wide range of issues today.
43
But as I’ve already noted navigating the complex

 and unpredictable world of tomorrow will pose big new challenges.
That’s why, spurred on by the findings of the RBA Review, the Bank will be refreshing its research

 strategy, with a new set of priorities, identifying the big questions that need to be answered to support

 future policymaking. We’ll use those priorities to hold ourselves to account – but we’ll

 need external help too. Part of that will involve deeper collaboration on specific research topics,

 building on the centres of excellence here in Australia.
44
And part of it will involve finding new ways

 to come together collectively, building on our existing workshops and conferences, and our six-monthly

 academic advisory panel.
45
Here too there is more than an element of ‘back

 to the future’ – it was nearly 75 years ago when Coombs, as head of the Commonwealth

 Bank, the
de facto
central bank, first conceived of convening senior academics to critique

 the exercise of policy. As we face into a more complex world, we need that support and challenge more

 than ever.
46
Conclusion
Let me conclude.
A 100th birthday is always a cause for celebration.
For Australian macroeconomics that is true with bells on.
Two Golden Ages, forged in response to fundamental shifts in the global paradigm – powered by

 world-class thinking, ruthlessly applied to a single end – improving the lot of the Australian

 people.
As the global paradigm shifts again, the challenge is to go for the hat trick.
The
good news
is the policy questions facing us, and the world, lie four-square in

 Australia’s areas of comparative advantage.
But to exploit that advantage, we need to relearn the lessons of the past – drawing in our best

 talent, strengthening the incentives for policy-relevant research, and deepening the links between

 academics and policymakers.
As a trading economy reliant on world markets, we have no choice but to respond. But we can go one better:

 by marshalling our best brains we can turn this challenging environment to our advantage.
At the RBA, we stand ready to play our part in this great endeavour.
Thank you.
Endnotes
I am particularly grateful to Jonathan Hambur for

 his assistance in writing this speech; he is truly a co-author. Thanks go also to Sam Munn and

 Emily Shaw for their research support; to Selwyn Cornish, Guy Debelle, Catherine de Fontenay,

 David Gruen, David Kalisch, Greg Kaplan, Andrew Leigh, Renee Fry-McKibbin, Warwick McKibbin, Alex

 Millmow, James Morley, Alex Rosen, Dennis Trewin, David Vines and Justin Wolfers for their

 helpful preliminary discussions; and to Anthony Brassil, Michele Bullock, Thomas Cusbert, Ian

 Harper, Sarah Hunter, Jarkko Jaaskela, Bradley Jones, Christopher Kent, Claude Lopez, Mick Plumb

 and Penny Smith for their comments and contributions on earlier drafts.
*
There is some debate as to exactly when the ESA

 began, and hence when the centenary should be celebrated. The proposal that a new society be

 established was first made by Lyndhurst Giblin in 1924 – a year he said ‘might perhaps

 be called A.E.1 – the first year of economists in Australia’: Coleman W, S Cornish and

 A Hagger (2006),
Giblin’s Platoon: The Trials and Triumph of the Economist in

 Australian Public Life
, ANU E Press, Canberra. A Provisional Committee was established

 later in 1924 – but the New South Wales and Victorian branches were formed in May 2025, and

 a permanent Central Council only came into being in August of that year. So 2025 has a decent

 claim to be the ESA’s ‘official birthday’ at the very least! I learned these and

 many other facts from a draft of Alex Millmow’s excellent forthcoming history of the ESA.
1
Overseas readers may wish to consult Sitch R

 (director) (1997),
The Castle
, Motion Picture, Working Dog Productions, Australia. A

 vibe probably does not make a ‘School’ in the Chicago or Austrian sense, as Selwyn

 Cornish discusses in Cornish S (2008), ‘Economics in Australasia’, in SN Durlauf and LE

 Blume (eds),
The New Palgrave Dictionary of Economics
, Vo1 1, 2nd edition,

 Palgrave Macmillan, London, pp 308–313. There is also an excellent treatment of this

 question in Chapter 1 of Groenewegen P and B McFarlane (1990),
A History of Australian

 Economic Thought
, Routledge, London. While my speech focuses primarily on economists

 and academics active in the Australian economics community, there are of course also Australians

 working overseas at the frontier of global economic thinking.
2
The historical parts of this speech build heavily

 on the writings of, and conversations with, Selwyn Cornish, Alex Millmow and David Vines.
3
Overviews of this period include Keating M

 (2014), ‘Chapter 20: The Evolution of Australian Macroeconomic Strategy Since World War

 2’, in S Ville and G Withers (eds),
The Cambridge Economic History of

 Australia
, Cambridge University Press, Port Melbourne, pp 438–461; Garnaut

 R (1994), ‘Chapter 23: Trade Liberalization and the Washington Consensus in Australia,

 in J Williamson (ed),
The Political Economy of Policy Reform
, Institute of

 International Economics, Washington DC, pp 51–72; Millmow A (2010),
The Power of

 Economic Ideas
, ANU E Press, Canberra.
4
The history of Australia’s evolving attitude

 towards tariffs is fascinating. Lyndhurst Giblin was a co-author of the influential 1929 Brigden

 Report (or
The Australian Tariff: An Economic Enquiry
to give it its true title),

 which advocated the maintenance of high tariffs as a means of sustaining national income. Paul

 Samuelson wrote a masterly summary of the intellectual provenance of this view in Samuelson PA

 (1981), ‘Summing Up the Australian Case for Protection’,
Quarterly Journal of

 Economics,
96(0), pp 147–160.
5
For a concise summary of Giblin’s life, see

 William Coleman’s entry in King JE (ed) (2007),
A Biographical Dictionary of

 Australian and New Zealand Economists
, Edward Elgar, Cheltenham. For a more in-depth

 assessment, see Coleman, Cornish and Hagger, n 1. An evocative letter to the editor from Sidney

 Crawford in the Adelaide-based
Advertiser
marking Giblin’s death described him

 as having ‘the brain of an Einstein in the body of a prize fighter’: Crawford S (1951),

 ‘The Late Professor Giblin’,
The Advertiser
, 7 March.
6
See Giblin LF (1930),
Australia, 1930: An

 Inaugural Lecture
, Melbourne University Press, Melbourne. Giblin’s conception of

 the multiplier was certainly somewhat narrower than the modern understanding (see, for example,

 Markwell DJ (2000), ‘
Keynes and

 Australia
’, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2000-04) – but the family

 resemblance is unmistakeable.
7
As is well known, the row over Lang’s

 proposals was so fierce, it led to a split in the Australian Labor Party in 1931.
8
Among other achievements in his long career,

 Melville was also inaugural Professor of Economics, University of Adelaide; the first economist

 appointed by the Commonwealth Bank; leader of Australia’s delegation to the Bretton Woods

 Conference; Australia’s Executive Director, IMF and the World Bank; Vice-Chancellor of the

 ANU; and Director of the Tariff Board.
9
See Millmow, n 4, p 85. Interestingly,

 Giblin also tentatively supported a floating exchange rate – another idea that proved ahead

 of its time!
10
See Markwell, n 7, pp 20–21.
11
See Coleman, Cornish and Hagger, n 1; Markwell,

 n 7.
12
Coombs was also Economic Advisor, Treasury;

 inaugural head, Department of Postwar Reconstruction; leader of Australian delegations to the Hot

 Springs Conference in 1943, the Geneva conference that created the GATT (1946) and the Havana

 conference (1947) on international trade; Chancellor ANU; and Economic Advisor to Prime Minister

 Whitlam.
13
Unlike Giblin and the multiplier, the model is

 sometimes known as the ‘Solow/Swan growth model’. Solow himself was gracious in

 recognising Swan’s contribution: see Solow R (1997), ‘Swan, Trevor W’, in T Cate

 (ed),
An Encyclopedia of Keynesian Economics,
2nd edition, Edward Elgar, Cheltenham

 and Northampton.
14
For further discussion of Swan’s life and

 contributions, see Dimand RW and BJ Spencer (2008), ‘Trevor Swan and the Neoclassical Growth

 Model’, NBER Working Paper No 13950; Cornish S (2024), ‘Trevor Winchester Swan: Life

 and Contributions to Economic Theory and Policy’,
Economic Record
, 100(330),

 pp 281–437.
15
For a good overall summary of this period, see

 Berger-Thomson L, J Breusch and L Lilley (2018), ‘Australia’s Experience with Economic

 Reform’, Treasury Working Paper. For discussions of Australia’s financial, capital and

 exchange rate deregulation, see Grenville S (1991), ‘
The Evolution of Financial

 Deregulation
’, in
The Deregulation of Financial Intermediaries
,

 Proceedings of the RBA Annual Conference,
20–21
June;

 Debelle G and M Plumb (2006), ‘The Evolution of Exchange Rate Policy and Capital Controls in

 Australia’,
Asian Economic Papers
, 5(2), pp 7–29; Ballantyne A, J

 Hambur, I Roberts and M Wright (2014), ‘
Financial Reform in Australia and China
’,

 RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2014-10.
16
See, for instance, Kelly P (2000), ‘
The Politics of Economic Change in

 Australia in the 1980s and 1990s
’, in D Gruen and S Shrestha (eds),
The

 Australian Economy in the 1990s
, Proceedings of the RBA Annual Conference,
24–25
July; Garnaut, n 4.
17
For a short summary of Corden’s work and

 impact, see Irwin D (2023), ‘Trade Theory and Trade Policy: The Work of Max Corden,
1927–2023
’,
VoxEU
, 28 October.

 Corden’s later work on ‘Dutch Disease’, with Bob Gregory and Peter Neary, would

 also prove vital for understanding the impact of the Noughties mining boom on the structure of

 the Australian economy. See, for instance, Corden WM and JP Neary (1982), ‘Booming Sector

 and De-industrialisation in a Small Open Economy’,
The Economic Journal
,

 92(368), pp 825–848; Gregory RG (1976), ‘Some Implications of the Growth in the

 Mineral Sector’,
Australian Journal of Agricultural Economics
, 1(Jul),

 pp 1–28. More recent work includes: Fry-McKibbin R, M Greenwood-Nimmo, R Kima and V

 Volkov (2025), ‘A Three-sector Structural VAR model for the Australian Economy’,
Journal of Economic Dynamics and Control
, 170; Kulish M, J Morley, N Yamout and F

 Zanetti (2023), ‘Dutch Disease, Unemployment and Structural Change’, CAMA Working Paper

 No
38/2023
; P Downe, K Hanslow and P Tulip (2014), ‘
The Effect of the Mining Boom on the Australian

 Economy
’, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2014-08.
18
See Vines D (2021), ‘A Productivity

 Commission: A Proposal for an Australian-style Approach to Creating a Policy-Reform Process for

 the UK’, INET Oxford Working Paper No 2021-13. During his long career, Crawford was also

 Director of Research at the Department of Postwar Reconstruction; Inaugural head of the Bureau of

 Agricultural Economics; head of the Department of Commerce and Industry; head of the Department

 of Trade; and first Vice-Chancellor and then Chancellor, ANU.
19
Corden and Gruen had collaborated on a 1970

 paper that set the scene for this change: Gruen FH and WM Corden (1970), ‘A Tariff That

 Worsens the Terms of Trade’, in IA McDougall and RH Snape (eds),
Studies in

 International Economics: Monash Conference Papers
, North-Holland, Amsterdam,

 pp 55–58. Interestingly, at the time, Whitlam motivated the 1973 cuts as being more

 about bearing down on inflation than on improving the functioning of the economy.
20
Productivity Commission (2003), ‘From

 Industry Assistance to Productivity: 30 Years of “The Commission”’, Productivity

 Commission Paper.
21
See, for instance, Higgins CI and VW FitzGerald

 (1972), ‘An Econometric Model of the Australian Economy’,
Journal of

 Econometrics
, 1(3), pp 299–265; Norton WE and JF Henderson (1972), ‘A

 Model of the Australian Economy: A Further Report’, RBA Occasional Paper No 3G; Jonson PD,

 ER Moses and CR Wymer (1977), ‘The RBA76 Model of the Australian Economy’, in WE

 Norton (ed),
Conference in Applied Economic Research
, Proceedings of the RBA Annual

 Conference, Sydney,
5–6
December; Murphy CW (1988),

 ‘An Overview of the Murphy Model’, in ME Burns and CW Murphy (eds),
Macroeconomic

 Modelling in Australia, Australian Economic Papers
, 27(Supp), pp 175–199;

 Taplin B, P Hilek, L Antioch, A Johnson, P Parameswaran and C Louis (1993), ‘Documenting of

 the Treasury Macroeconomic (TRYM) Model of the Australian Economy’, in S Ichimura and Y

 Matsumoto (eds),
Econometric Models of the Asian Pacific Countries
, Springer, Tokyo.
22
Dixon PB (1982),
ORANI, A Multisectoral

 Model of the Australian Economy
, North-Holland, New York.
23
See, for instance, McKibbin WJ, M Noland and G

 Shuetrim (2025), ‘The Global Economic Effects of Trump’s 2025 Tariffs’, PIIE

 Working Paper No 25-13.
24
I am grateful to Australian Statisticians David

 Gruen, David Kalisch and Dennis Trewin for discussion on this topic. I have not done justice to

 their rich thoughts in this short summary – but the ABS’ own publication is an

 excellent read: Australian Bureau of Statistics (25005), ‘Informing a Nation: The Evolution

 of the Australian Bureau of Statistics
1905–2005
’, ABS

 Catalogue No 1382.0.
25
Like Giblin, Coghlan lived a very full life.

 Before becoming the Government Statistician he was assistant engineer to the Harbours and Rivers

 Branch of the NSW Public Works Department, in which role he helped design Sydney’s water

 system! He had a side hustle as a journalist, writing under various aliases, and railing among

 other things against the destruction of Sydney’s native flora. In later life he was the

 Agent-General for New South Wales in London. For more, see Hicks N (1981), ‘Coghlan, Sir

 Timothy Augustine (1855–1926)’, in B Nairn and G Serle (eds),
Australian

 Dictionary of Biography
, Vol 8, Melbourne University Press, Melbourne,

 pp 48–51.
26
See Australian Bureau of Statistics (2020),

 ‘Improving Agricultural Crop Statistics Using Satellite Data’, 26 June; Australian

 Bureau of Statistics, ‘Data Integration’, available at

 <https://www.abs.gov.au/about/data-services/data-integration>.
27
Wilson was Australia’s longest-service

 Treasury Secretary and later became Chair of Qantas and the Commonwealth Bank: Sir Roland Wilson

 Foundation, ‘Sir Roland Wilson’, available at

 <https://srwfoundation.anu.edu.au/about/sir-roland-wilson>. Wickens helped establish the

 forerunner to the ANU, among other achievements: Hawkins J (2019), ‘Charles Wickens: The

 Australian Government’s First Economist’,
History of Economics Review
,

 73(1), pp 85–96.
28
Swan TW (1956), ‘Economic Growth and

 Capital Accumulation’,
Economic Record
, 32(2), pp 334–361; Corden M

 (1957), ‘The Calculation of the Cost of Protection’,
Economic Record
,

 33(64), pp 29–51; Salter WEG (1959), ‘Internal and External Balance: The Role of

 Price and Expenditure Effects’,
Economic Record
, 35(71), pp 159–297;

 Swan TW (1980), ‘The Principle of Effective Demand: A Real Life Model’,
Economic

 Record,
65(4), pp 378–398.
29
Jacqui Dwyer and colleagues at the RBA have

 described at some length the challenges of declining enrolments and poor diversity in economics

 in Australia: see, for example, Dwyer J (2024), ‘
The State of Economics
’, Address to The

 Economic Society of Australia, Sydney, 28 May.
30
Factors cited here include the intense pressure

 to publish in Top Five or A* economics journals, a list which no longer contains any Australian

 publications (Australian Business Deans Council (2023), ‘2022 ABDC Journal Quality List

 Released’, Media Release, 16 March), and increased academic specialisation in narrow

 areas of theoretical research. Neither point is unique to Australia of course – indeed,

 recent research has challenged whether the increasing global concentration in top tier journals

 and institutions is good for economics in general: see, for instance, Freeman RB, D Xie, H Zhang

 and H Zhou (2024), ‘High and Rising Institutional Concentration of Award-Winning

 Economists’, 25 June, summarised in Rodrik D (2024), ‘Is Economics in Need of

 Trustbusting?’,
Financial Times
, 30 August.
31
Factors cited here include the perceived

 reluctance by some universities to release academics to support policy work, and a reduced focus

 on research in public policy institutions – a point echoed, for example, in the RBA Review:

 see recommendations 9 and 11.4 in Australian Government (2023), ‘Review of the

 Reserve Bank of Australia – Final Report’.
32
See, for instance, the work of The Superpower

 Institute. Fascinatingly, Colin Clark predicted many of these issues 85 years ago, writing

 about the risks from burning fossil fuels faster than the environment can bear, and the

 opportunities from solar power: see Garnaut R (2012), ‘Removing Climate Change as a Barrier

 to Economic Progress: Twenty-second Colin Clark Memorial Lecture’,
Economic Analysis

 and Policy
, 43(1), pp 31–47 for a discussion of Clark’s thinking.
33
See, for instance, Dungey M and A Pagan (2000),

 ‘A Structural VAR Model of the Australian Economy’,
Economic Record
,

 76(235), pp 321–342. Examples of RBA work include Jaaskela JP and P Smith (2013),

 ‘Terms of Trade Shocks: What Are They and What Do They Do?’,
Economic

 Record
, 89(35), pp 145–159; Kulish M and DM Rees (2017),

 ‘Unprecedented Changes in the Terms of Trade’,
Journal of International

 Economics
, 108, pp 351–367; Hendy P and B Beckers (2024), ‘
How Do Global Shocks Affect Australia?
’,

 RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2024-10.
34
For example, many of the core models used by

 policy institutions are small open economy models with a resource sector, such as the RBA’s

 macro-econometric MARTIN model (Ballantyne A, T Custbert, R Evans, R Guttmann, J Hambur, A

 Hamilton, E Kendall, R McCririck, G Nodari and D Rees (2019), ‘Martin Has Its Place: A

 Macroeconometric Model of the Australian Economy’,
Economic Record
, 96(314),

 pp 225–251) and DSGE DINGO model (C Gibbs, J Hambur and G Nodari (2018), ‘
DSGE Reno: Adding a Housing Block to a Small

 Open Economy Model
’, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2018-04; Rees D, P Smith and J

 Hall 2016, ‘A Multisector Model of the Australian Economy’,
Economic

 Record
, 92(298), pp 374–408); Treasury’s EMMA model (Bullen J, B

 Conigrave, A Elderfield, C Karmel, L Lucas, C Murphy, H Ruberl, N Stoney and H Yao (2021),

 ‘The Treasury Macroeconometric Model of Australia: Modelling Approach’, Treasury

 Working Paper No 2021-09).
35
For example, UNSW’s Institute of Global

 Finance; ANU’s Centre for Applied Macroeconomic Analysis; and the University of

 Melbourne’s Melbourne Institute. Think-tanks including e61 and the Grattan and Lowy

 institutes regularly produce policy-relevant research.
36
See, for example, Andrews D and D Hansell

 (2021), ‘Productivity-enhancing Labour Reallocation in Australia’,
Economic

 Record
, 97(3187), pp 157–169; Andrews D, J Hambur, D Hansell and A Wheeler

 (2022), ‘Reaching for the Stars: Australian Firms and the Global Productivity

 Frontier’, Treasury Working Paper No 2022-01; Hambur J (2023), ‘Product Market

 Competition and its Implications for the Australian Economy’,
Economic Record
,

 99(324), pp 32–57; Champion M, C Edmond and J Hambur (2023),
‘Competition

 Markups and Inflation: Evidence from Australian Firm-level Data
’, Paper presented at

 the RBA Annual Conference, Sydney,
25–26
September;

 Hambur J (2023), ‘
Did Labour Market

 Concentration Lower Wages Growth Pre-COVID?
’, RBA Research Discussion Paper No

 2023-02.
37
Productivity Commission (2025), ‘PC Opens

 Consultation on Reform Areas for Productivity Inquiries’, Media Release, 18 May.
38
Treasury (2025), ‘Economic Reform

 Roundtable’, available at <https://treasury.gov.au/review/economic-reform-roundtable>.
39
Further detail on the ABS’ development

 agenda ‘Big Data, Timely Insights’ is available at

 <https://www.abs.gov.au/about/key-priorities/big-data-timely-insights-phase-2/about-program>.
40
Other recent frontier work looks at how

 COVID-era support policies affected the economy, and the lessons for designing policy in response

 to future shocks, which may be extremely valuable in a more uncertain and volatile world. For

 example, the effects of Australia’s JobKeeper program (Bradshaw N, N Deutscher and L Vass

 (2023), ‘The Employment Effects of JobKeeper Receipt’, Treasury Working Paper No

 2023-04; Bishop J and I Day (2020), ‘
How Many

 Jobs did JobKeeper Keep?
’, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2020-07; Andrews D, E

 Bahar and J Hambur (2025), ‘The Effects of
COVID-19
and

 JobKeeper on Productivity-enhancing Reallocation in Australia’,
Economic

 Record
, 101(333), pp 142–168), and the early superannuation release program

 (Sainsbury T, R Breunig and T Watson (2022), ‘
COVID-19
Private

 Pension Withdrawals and Unemployment Tenures’, IZA Discussion Paper No 15399; Hamilton S, G

 Liu, J Miranda-Pinto and T Sainsbury (2023), ‘Early Pension Withdrawal as Stimulus’,

 IIEP Working Paper No 2023-02).
41
Wood D (2024), ‘Here to Help: The Role of

 Economics in Contemporary Policy Challenges’, Paper presented at the Australian Public

 Service Economist Conference, Melbourne, 25 November.
42
Past highlights include Debelle G and S Fischer

 (1994), ‘How Independent Should a Central Bank Be?’ in JC Fuhrer (ed),
Goals,

 Guidelines, and Constraints Facing Monetary Policymakers
, Federal Reserve Bank of

 Boston Conference Series No 38, North Falmouth, Massachusetts, pp 195–221; Borio C and

 P Lowe (2002), ‘Asset Prices, Financial and Monetary Stability; Exploring the Nexus’,

 BIS Working Paper No 114; Blanchard O and J Simon, ‘The Long and Large Decline in I.S.

 Output Volatility’,
Brooking Paper on Economic Activity
, 1(2001),

 pp 135–164. Current work assessing and critiquing overseas findings in

 the Australian context: Brassil A (2022), ‘
The

 Consequences of Low interest Rates for the Australian Banking Sector
’, RBA Research

 Discussion Paper No 2022-08; M Read (2024), ‘
Sign Restrictions and Supply-demand Decomposition

 of Inflation
’, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2024-05.
43
For example, Bruce Preston has written

 extensively on inflation expectation and fiscal monetary interactions, which is relevant to

 challenges around optimal policy mixes and policy trade-offs with supply shocks (e.g. Eusepi S

 and B Preston (2018), ‘Fiscal Foundations of inflation: Imperfect Knowledge’,
American Economic Review
, 108(9), pp 2551–2589). James Morley has written

 on neutral rates and output gaps, which is important in the context of the productivity slowdown

 (e.g. Kamber G, J Morley and B Wong (2018), ‘Intuitive and Reliable Estimates of the Output

 Gap from a Beveridge-Nelson Filter’,
Review of Economic Statistics
, 100,

 pp 550–566) and Greg Kaplan has shown how household heterogeneity can influence the

 impact of monetary policy, which is important in thinking broadly about the best policy mix in

 response to various shocks (e.g. Kaplan G, B Moll and GL Violante, ‘Monetary Policy

 According to HANK’,
American Economic Review
, 108(3), pp 697–743).

 Recent examples of external research with RBA staff and/or RBA models include Brassil A, C Gibbs

 and C Ryan (2025), ‘
Boundedly Rational

 Expectations and the Optimality of Flexible Average Inflation Targeting
’, RBA

 Research Discussion Paper No 2025-02; Gross I and A Leigh (2022), ‘Assessing Australian

 Monetary Policy in the Twenty-first Century’,
Economic Record
, 98(322),

 pp 271–295; Liu X, AR Pagan and T Robinson (2018), ‘Critically Assessing

 Estimated DSGE Models: A Case Study of a Multi-sector Model’,
Economic Record
,

 94(307), pp 349–371.
44
For further details, see RBA, ‘
RBA

 Annual Conferences
’, ‘
Annual Research

 Workshops
’ and ‘
Academic

 Panel
’.
45
Coombs’ meetings are discussed in in Brown

 N (2001),
Richard Downing: Economics, Advocacy and Social Reform in Australia
,

 Melbourne University Press, Melbourne.
46
