BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: How Developments in International Financial Markets Shape Financial Conditions in Australia
DATE: 26/11/2025
SPEAKER: Penelope Smith
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2025/sp-so-2025-11-26.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
How Developments in International Financial Markets Shape Financial Conditions in Australia
Penelope Smith
*
Head of International Department
Australian Securitisation Conference
26 November 2025
–
Sydney
Audio
26.2MB
Q&A Transcript
I would like to begin by acknowledging the Gadigal people of the Eora Nation, the traditional custodians

 of the land we are meeting on today. I pay my respects to their Elders past and present. I also extend

 that respect to all Aboriginal and Torres Strait Islander peoples joining us today.
It’s a privilege to be here at the Australian Securitisation Conference.
A key role of International Department at the RBA is to provide advice on developments in international

 financial markets to the Monetary Policy Board and to work with colleagues across the RBA to interpret

 what these developments mean for financial conditions in Australia.
1
The aim of my talk today is to provide a flavour of how we do this. I’ll recap some key developments

 in international financial markets over the year and then explain our framework for thinking about how

 these developments can affect financial conditions in Australia, focusing on the distinctive features of

 the Australian financial system that shape the transmission of global financial market shocks.
In the interest of time, I won’t cover other important international linkages, including economic

 transmission channels, where global financial conditions affect global activity that transmits to

 Australia, or the transmission of shocks during periods of financial stress or market dysfunction. These

 have been covered in other recent RBA publications and speeches.
2
The year in review
This year has certainly been eventful. The global financial system has been affected by a convergence of

 interrelated forces. Policy uncertainty has at times been extreme as the US administration has disrupted

 established policy norms (Graph 1). Concerns about global fragmentation have been heightened. But

 despite some bouts of volatility in markets, including in recent days, risk premia have been low, fuelled

 by optimism about AI, more supportive policy settings and as the more adverse scenarios for global growth

 have not materialised.
Graph 1
Central banks have eased policy rates cautiously …
Central bank policy rates are one of the most important determinants of global financial conditions.

 Almost all central banks in the major advanced economies reduced their policy rates in 2024 and 2025 as

 inflation eased from post-pandemic highs and labour markets cooled. Japan was the exception, gradually

 tightening monetary policy in response to inflationary pressures after decades of very low inflation.

 Most central banks have taken a cautious approach as they have navigated the extreme policy uncertainty

 and while inflation remains a little above their targets due to sticky services inflation. Market

 expectations are for further gradual policy easing in some advanced economies over 2026, most notably in

 the United States (Graph 2).
Graph 2
Central banks have also continued to run down their balance sheets, in a way designed not to impact

 financial conditions meaningfully. Some have concluded, or signalled they are close to concluding, this

 process. The US Fed recently announced it will end its balance sheet run-off in December. This reflected

 a judgement that reserves were nearing ‘ample’ levels, given signs of pressure in a range of US

 money market rates.
… amid concerns of increased global fragmentation.
The potential for global fragmentation has been a major theme of 2025. Over the second half of the 20th

 century and most of the 21st century to date, increasing global integration has supported growth in

 advanced and emerging economies. This was underpinned by policies that have made it easier for goods and

 services, capital and ideas to flow across borders.
However, support for such policies has been waning for a number of years in the United States and

 elsewhere, in large part because the gains were not always distributed evenly. Inequality, including

 between regions, and the post-pandemic surge in inflation, which reduced real incomes, has provided

 impetus to growing political polarisation and nationalism. At the same time, geopolitical tensions have

 been rising.
Protectionist policies have the potential to cause a retrenchment of global trade and capital flows that

 would undermine welfare globally. The risk of regulatory fragmentation across the international financial

 system has also been increasing, as jurisdictions pursue diverging regulatory priorities, including in

 banking and digital assets.
The good news is that a retrenchment of global trade and capital flows has been more of a fear than a

 reality in 2025, at least so far (Graph 3). Capital flows, including into the United States, remain

 high. Global supply chains have been surprisingly resilient and adaptable, perhaps drawing on the lesson

 of the pandemic. Effective US tariff rates, while still much higher than at the beginning of the year,

 are lower than originally feared in April. The AI infrastructure boom has also supported trade, and by

 more than many expected.
Graph 3
Questions have been raised about the US dollar’s ‘safe haven’ status …
The role of the US dollar in international markets has received some attention this year. Concerns

 about the US administration’s policies, including the potential for lasting damage to key

 institutions, have led some commentators to question whether the US dollar can maintain its

 longstanding ‘safe haven’ or reserve currency status. Typically, the US dollar strengthens

 when global aversion rises, but after the April tariff announcements, the US dollar depreciated,

 while US Treasury yields spiked and equities fell (Graph 4).
Graph 4
Overall, the concerns about the status of the US dollar seem to have been overstated, at least for

 now. There are currently no clear alternatives to the US dollar as the world’s dominant

 currency. While the US dollar has depreciated by 6 per cent on a trade-weighted basis over

 2025, this was from a near historical high at the end of 2024. Much of the depreciation can be explained

 by standard macro determinants, including narrowing interest rate differentials between the United States

 and the rest of the world.
Foreign reserves of central banks and governments have not shown an accelerated move away from the

 US dollar in 2025. The US dollar’s share in official foreign exchange reserve portfolios

 continued to decline gradually this year, consistent with the trends of recent years (Graph 5). But

 the decline in 2025 is mostly explained by valuation effects from exchange rate movements. It has not

 reflected a generalised reallocation away from US dollar assets in reserve managers’

 benchmarks.
Graph 5
There is also little evidence of a significant reallocation away from US dollar assets by other asset

 managers. Nevertheless, there is evidence that some market participants are looking to manage increased

 risks around the US dollar. Market reports and our own liaison indicate that some non-US asset

 managers have increased their hedging of US dollar assets even though it is relatively costly to do

 this when US interest rates are higher than elsewhere.
3
… and concerns about fiscal dynamics in some countries have put upward pressure on sovereign bond yields.
Fiscal dynamics have been in focus in a number of economies overseas. The cumulative impact of responses

 to the global financial crisis and the pandemic have left gross government debt ratios higher

 (Graph 6). In some countries, political polarisation is making it challenging to reach agreement on

 policies to put fiscal settings on a more sustainable path. Ageing populations, adaptation to the

 physical effects of climate change, and increased defence spending in response to geopolitical tensions

 will continue to add to fiscal pressures over coming years.
Graph 6
Partly reflecting fiscal challenges, ultra-long end bond yields and term premia have risen over 2025 in

 some countries (Graph 7). The investor base for ultra-long bonds has also been changing.
4
Hedge funds are

 reportedly holding a larger share. While hedge funds contribute to greater market depth and efficiency in

 normal times, their use of leverage can amplify shocks. We saw this during the April market turmoil with

 the unwind of the so-called swap-spread trade that arose in anticipation of an easing of US bank

 regulation.
5
Graph 7
Depsite significant uncertainty, risk premia in global markets have been low …
Despite elevated policy uncertainty, market participants have been willing to accept very little

 compensation for risk. Equity prices have increased strongly in most advanced economies over 2025, and

 valuations have been high in the United States and Australia, despite some recent declines

 (Graph 8). Meanwhile, corporate bond spreads have been well below their long-term averages. Overall,

 market pricing suggests that investors haven’t placed much weight on the possibility of materially

 adverse outcomes for most of the year, except for a brief period after the April tariff announcements.

 However, volatility has increased somewhat in recent weeks.
Graph 8
Market optimism around AI, which has been tested a little of late, is one reason risk premia have been

 compressed. Other factors have been expansionary fiscal settings in some countries and more supportive

 monetary policy. Confidence also grew as worst-case scenarios around tariffs failed to materialise, along

 with generally better-than-expected corporate earnings, especially in the tech sector. In Australia, the

 recent decline in equity prices, which is larger than the decline in US equity prices, has coincided with

 an upwards revision in expectations for the cash rate and other domestic news.
The question of over-valuation in markets is a key one. With some asset valuations appearing very

 stretched, a reassessment of the risks or optimism around AI or corporate earnings, could see equity and

 corporate bond markets shift quickly from currently contributing to easier global financial to something

 less easy, and possibly even tight or disruptive.
… while gold prices have risen sharply.
Gold prices have been another big story in 2025. US dollar prices have increased by a staggering

 54 per cent over the year to date to record highs – the fastest annual increase since

 1979 (Graph 9).
6
Graph 9
What’s driving the increase? One factor is geopolitical tensions and the threat of sanctions. Central

 banks in some emerging markets have been increasing the share of gold in their reserves portfolio since

 Russia’s reserves were frozen in 2022 in response to the full-scale invasion of Ukraine. This trend

 may have further to run, with emerging market central banks still having smaller allocations to gold than

 many of their advanced economy peers.
Gold is also often considered a hedge during times of global uncertainty. This year, concerns about global

 fragmentation, US policy risks, including tariffs and perceived threats to Fed independence, and fiscal

 sustainability in several economies may have added to that appeal. But this explanation is hard to square

 with still very low risk premia in financial markets and stable long-term inflation expectations.
There are also some clear signs of speculative buying, including significant retail buying via exchange

 traded funds and queues forming to buy physical gold.
How do global developments affect financial conditions in Australia?
So what does this mean for financial conditions in Australia? First, let me explain exactly what I mean by

 financial conditions. Financial conditions represent the cost and availability of finance for households

 and businesses to support economic activity. Conditions are ‘restrictive’ when the cost of

 finance is high enough to place downwards pressure on aggregate demand and ‘easy’ when the cost

 of finance is low.
Monetary policy works primarily through its influence on financial conditions. Yet, while important, the

 RBA’s cash rate is not the only influence on the cost of finance in Australia. Expectations for

 inflation and the path of central bank policy rates have an important bearing, along with the

 compensation that investors require for bearing risk.
As Assistant Governor Christopher Kent recently outlined, an assessment of whether conditions are

 restrictive or tight needs to be benchmarked to something.
7
This is where the neutral interest rate comes

 in. The neutral rate is the conceptual equilibrium short-term interest rate that keeps growth at

 potential and inflation at target when no other shocks are hitting the economy. If the cash rate was held

 steady, but the neutral rate declined, then financial conditions would be tighter than otherwise, all

 else equal.
Developments in international markets have a significant influence on these determinants of financial

 conditions in Australia. Key channels of transmission include global influences on the neutral interest

 rate, spillovers from faster moving risk and term premia that are correlated across countries, and the

 exchange rate. I’ll now discuss each of these in turn.
Australia’s neutral interest rate is influenced by global and domestic factors.
In small open economies like Australia, the neutral rate is heavily influenced by international

 developments that affect the balance of saving and investment globally.
8
In recent decades, estimates of real neutral interest rates have fallen across advanced economies,

 including Australia (Graph 10). This fall reflected a secular rise in global saving that was

 unmatched by higher global investment.
Graph 10
A significant body of research has sought to explain why neutral rates fell. Explanations include the

 integration of high-saving fast-growing emerging markets into the international financial system, slower

 trend productivity growth, ageing populations, and rising inequality. Demand for safe assets also surged

 after the global financial crisis because of tighter financial regulation and while the long process of

 deleveraging dampened investment.
There is less consensus about the trajectory of neutral rates after the pandemic. Different approaches to

 estimating neutral rates provide different answers, underscoring the significant challenges in

 estimation. Some estimates have increased. This is the case for the estimates I’ve shown here, which

 are produced by James Morley from the University of Sydney and Benjamin Wong from Monash University.
9
Estimates based

 on financial market pricing have increased by a little more. However, other commonly used approaches,

 based on macroeconomic models, show little to no increase.
10
The future trajectory of neutral rates is also uncertain. Factors that could push neutral rates higher

 include growing fiscal deficits, a decline in the demand for safe assets if there is a loosening of

 post-crisis regulation, or a sustained increase in productivity growth arising from AI. At the same time,

 many of the factors that depressed neutral rates before the pandemic have not gone away. Despite AI

 optimism, productivity growth outside the United States has remained weak, and there will be continued

 population ageing.
11
The effects of AI on inequality are uncertain.
How greater global fragmentation could affect neutral rates is also ambiguous. While it could lower

 productivity growth, pulling neutral down, it could also restrict capital mobility from high-saving

 emerging markets, putting upward pressure on neutral rates in advanced economies like Australia.
12
Bringing this all together leads to the somewhat unsatisfactory conclusion: there is a lot of uncertainty

 about where neutral rates are and where they are going. What we can perhaps conclude, though, is that

 they have not fallen since the pandemic and may have even risen.
While the uncertainty may seem discouraging, it is still important to engage with, and in, research and

 analysis that help us to understand how neutral rates might be changing. Being slow to recognise

 international developments that might change Australia’s neutral rate is a potential source of error

 in monetary policy decision-making.
How much influence do international developments have on Australia’s neutral rate? That’s also

 very uncertain. Morley and Wong estimate that foreign shocks have explained about half of the variation

 in Australia’s neutral rate since the mid-2000s. They also find that estimates of the US neutral

 rate on its own is almost entirely sufficient to explain the global influences on neutral rates in

 Australia and in several other advanced economies.
The finding that the US neutral rate can explain most of the influence of global factors on

 Australia’s neutral rate is consistent with the United States’ central role in the

 international financial system. The US dollar accounts for more than half of foreign exchange

 reserves held by central banks, it is the dominant invoicing currency for international trade, and a

 reference point for pricing a wide range of financial instruments. Australia’s external assets and

 liabilities that are denominated in foreign currencies are overwhelmingly denominated in US dollars.
Risk and term premia in Australia move closely with those in other advanced economies.
Next, let me talk to the role of international spillovers into Australian financial conditions from faster

 moving risk and term premia. These premia are highly correlated across countries. In 2025, measures of

 equity risk premia, corporate spreads, and term premia in Australia moved closely with those other

 advanced economies (Graph 11).
Graph 11
The structure of Australia’s financial system means that risk and term premia have less influence on overall financial conditions …
However, the structure of our financial system means that developments in capital markets are less

 important for overall financial conditions in Australia than in some other economies like the United

 States.
Our financial system is dominated by banks, which account for around 95 per cent of household

 credit and two thirds of business debt, which means businesses’ borrowing costs are much more

 heavily influenced by bank lending rates than by the cost of capital market funding (Graph 12).
13
Graph 12
Another salient feature of Australia’s financial system is that stock market wealth is mostly held

 indirectly through superannuation. This is largely inaccessible until retirement, and previous research

 has found little connection between changes in stock market wealth and household consumption in

 Australia.
14
Additionally, as I will expand upon below, the Australian dollar exchange rate tends to appreciate with

 increases in riskier asset prices, including US share prices. The appreciation of the exchange rate

 tightens domestic financial conditions, offsetting at least part of the effect of the decline in risk

 premia on overall financial conditions.
Sovereign bond yields also tend to be correlated across economies. However, international spillovers tend

 to be largest at the longer end of the yield curve.
15
In Australia, it’s the short end of the yield

 curve that matters most for financial conditions, with most household and business lending undertaken at

 variable interest rates and most fixed-rate lending at terms of two years or less.
16
Short-term

 interest rates in Australia are mostly determined by domestic factors with the cash rate target being the

 most important influence.
17
… and the exchange rate acts as a buffer against global shocks.
The exchange rate is one of the most important determinants of Australian financial conditions next to the

 cash rate. It is a key channel of transmission for monetary policy, and acts as a buffer against global

 shocks.
18
The two key long-run determinants of the level of the Australian dollar are terms of trade, which is

 heavily influenced by commodity prices, and the interest rate differential between Australia and other

 major advanced economies. Meanwhile, global risk sentiment, which can be proxied by the volatility index

 measure of option-implied volatility or global equity prices, is important for explaining short-run

 changes in the Australian dollar, which tends to depreciate when global risk appetite declines.
Now, while the relationships between the Australian dollar and its key determinants hold on average, they

 don’t necessarily hold at every point in time.
19
At times, the exchange rate can influence financial

 conditions independently of interest rate differentials and the terms of trade. One way we monitor this

 is to compare the level of the real exchange rate to estimates of its long-run equilibrium value.
20
Currently,

 the real trade-weighted exchange rate remains within estimates of its long-run equilibrium, as it has for

 most of the year (Graph 13).
Graph 13
This year, some have questioned if the relationship between the Australian dollar and global risk

 sentiment has changed in light of the discussion about the safe-haven qualities of the US dollar. If

 this were to occur, it could undermine the Australian dollar’s effectiveness as a buffer in

 ‘risk-off’ events, and against variation in risk premia more generally.
The first observation I would make is that the correlation between the Australian dollar and US equity

 prices remained close to its historical average through most of the year, and
increased
during the April volatility, with the Australian dollar initially depreciating sharply alongside falling

 US equity prices.
21
I would also observe that Australia is a small open commodity exporting economy that is exposed to both

 the level and composition of global growth. Nothing that has occurred in the United States changes that.

 Australia could indeed become relatively more attractive to global investors over time, given our strong

 institutions and comparably low levels of public debt. This would represent a structural decline in

 Australia’s country risk premium and so a lower neutral rate.
22
However, even if that occurred,

 the Australian dollar would still be likely to depreciate during global risk-off events, as it did during

 the April market turmoil.
23
Of course, if this did not occur for some reason, and

 the Australian dollar appreciated, the tightening effect of a sharp rise in global risk aversion on

 domestic financial conditions would be amplified via the exchange rate.
Conclusion
To conclude, 2025 has been an eventful year for international financial markets. It’s also been a

 year where policy uncertainty and market confidence have coexisted in extraordinary ways. So far, some of

 the more significant downside scenarios that had been contemplated earlier in the year, including a

 retrenchment of global trade or a significant market correction, have not materialised. Noting the recent

 market volatility, this is something we continue to monitor closely.
International financial market developments affect Australian financial conditions through a number of

 channels, including through global influences on our neutral rate, spillovers from internationally

 correlated risk and term premia, and the exchange rate.
In 2025, compressed equity risk premia and credit spreads meant that financial conditions in Australia

 were easier than otherwise. However, the structural features of Australia’s financial system, such

 as the dominant role of banks, short-term debt contracts, and compulsory superannuation, mean that equity

 prices and corporate credit spreads have less weight in overall financial conditions. The exchange rate

 also acts as a buffer against global shocks.
That said, the current global backdrop demands constant attention. As April’s events reminded us, we

 need to be prepared for potential episodes of volatility and potential market dislocation.
Endnotes
*
I would like to thank

 Connor Thrall and George Tyler in the preparation of these remarks, which also benefited from the

 comments of many colleagues at the RBA.
1
International

 Department is also responsible for: the RBA’s foreign exchange operations; investment of

 international reserve holdings of gold and foreign exchange; maintaining relations with major

 international financial and policymaking institutions; the provisions of technical assistance to

 other central banks in the region; and the coordination of climate-related analysis across the

 RBA.
2
For a recent

 discussion of the transmission of financial stability shocks, see RBA (2025), ‘
4.1

 Focus Topic: How Overseas Shocks Can Affect Financial Stability in Australia
’,
Financial Stability Review
, October. For economic channels of transmission, see

 Hunter S (2025), ‘
Joining the Dots: Exploring

 Australia’s Economic Links with the World Economy’
, Speech at the Economic

 Society of Australia (Queensland) Business Lunch, Brisbane, 3 June.
3
In part due to the

 ongoing high correlation between the Australian dollar and US equities, and the lower volatility

 of the Australian dollar compared with US equities, Australian superannuation funds have not

 significantly changed their hedge ratios so far this year. See Hauser A (2025), ‘
A Hedge Between Keeps Friendship Green: Could

 Global Fragmentation Change the Way Australian Investors Think About Currency

 Risk?
’, Remarks for a function hosted by CLS Bank International and NAB, Sydney,

 16 September.
4
As pension funds in

 some countries move from defined-benefit to defined-contribution pension schemes, their demand

 for long-duration bonds is falling. In 2023, the Netherlands, which is home to the world’s

 fifth largest pension sector, legislated a full transition to defined-contribution schemes by

 January 2028. Defined-benefit funds and life insurers typically hold a larger share of

 long-duration bonds to match their liabilities.
5
Leveraged investors

 were reportedly positioned for a drop in longer term Treasury yields relative to similar maturity

 swaps, partly on expectations that an easing of bank regulation would boost bank demand for

 Treasuries. See Perli R (2025), ‘Recent Developments in Treasury Market Liquidity and

 Funding Conditions’, Remarks at the 8th Short-Term Funding Markets Conference, Washington

 DC, 9 May.
6
In 1979, gold prices

 surged against a backdrop of high inflation and high unemployment, geopolitical instability from

 the Iranian Revolution, and the Soviet invasion of Afghanistan.
7
Kent C (2025),

 ‘
Australian Financial Conditions – How

 Do We Judge How Tight or Easy They Are?
’, Address to the CFA Society Australia,

 Sydney, 16 October.
8
In the absence of

 frictions in markets, risk-adjusted return should equalise across economies. This means

 Australia’s real neutral interest rate should be the same as the global neutral rate, which

 balances saving and investment in the global economy plus or minus an Australian-specific

 ‘risk premium’. In reality, though, there are frictions, such as home bias, that create

 a significant role for domestic factors other than country specific risk premiums in determining

 neutral.
9
I’ve used these

 estimates because they’re estimated on a consistent basis across countries. Moley and

 Wong’s estimates for Australia fall within the range of estimates from the RBA’s suite

 of models. See Morley J and Wong B (2025), ‘How Important is Global r-star For Open

 Economies?’, CAMA Working Paper No
24/2025
.
10
Williams J (2025),

 ‘All the Stars We Cannot See’, Remarks at the Banco de México Centennial Conference,

 Mexico City, 25 August.
11
That said, as baby

 boomers reach retirement age, that could also see a drawdown of saving in advanced economies.
12
Less capital

 mobility would also lead to greater heterogeneity in economies’ neutral rates.
13
Australian

 corporations, including by our banks, and the government borrow in international capital markets.

 However, for Australia as a whole, foreign liabilities are almost entirely denominated in

 Australian dollars, and those that are not are hedged for currency risk and duration matched.

 This hedging means Australians corporations borrowing offshore, including our banks, are actually

 paying Australian interest rates. See Kent C (2018),‘
US Monetary Policy and Australian Financial

 Conditions
’, The Bloomberg Address, Sydney, 10 December.
14
May D, G Nodari and

 D Rees (2019), ‘
Wealth and Consumption’
, RBA
Bulletin
, March.
15
Kearns J, A

 Schrimpf and FD Xia (2023), ‘Explaining Monetary Spillovers: The Matrix Reloaded’,
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
55, pp 1535-1568.
16
In Australia,

 around 95 per cent of household debt is currently variable rate, and most fixed-rate

 mortgages are for short terms of two years or less. Similarly, Australian businesses borrow

 primarily from banks and around 90 per cent of these loans are at variable rates.
17
Kearns, Schrimpf

 and Xia (2023) also note foreign currency denominated debt and bilateral portfolio equity flows

 from the United States or euro area as significant factors that determine the size of spillovers

 into long-term rates.
18
See, for example,

 Mulqueeney J, A Ballantyne and J Hambur (2025), ‘
Monetary

 Policy Transmission through the Lens of the RBA’s Models
’, RBA
Bulletin
, April. In theory, there are two main channels of transmission from the

 exchange rate to the economy: the trade channel and the financial channel. If the financial

 channel of the exchange rate is strong in an economy, it can undermine the effectiveness of the

 exchange rate as a buffer against global shocks. However, the financial channel of the exchange

 rate is not an important channel in Australia. This is because most of Australia’s external

 debt is denominated in Australian dollars and the debt that is not is hedged. See Smith P (2023),

 ‘
The Extraordinary Decline in

 Australia’s Net Foreign Liabilities’
, Speech to the CFA Societies 2023

 Australian Investment Conference, Sydney, 18 October.
19
For example, in the

 late 1990s and early 2000s, in the wake of the Asian financial crisis and during the US tech

 boom, our terms of trade were rising, yet the dollar fell sharply as capital flowed towards

 ‘new economy’ tech stocks and away from the ‘old economy’ assets that

 dominated Australia’s exports.
20
Chapman B, J

 Jääskelä and E Smith (2018), ‘
A

 Forward-looking Model of the Australian Dollar
’, RBA
Bulletin
,

 December.
21
See Hauser, n 3.
22
In the canonical

 small open economy model, the domestic neutral rate is the global neutral rate plus a country

 specific risk premium.
23
The longer-term

 correlation between the Australian dollar and US equity prices remained close to its historical

 average through the recent market turmoil, and the shorter-run correlation increased with the

 Australian dollar initially depreciating sharply alongside falling equity prices. See Hauser, n 3.
