BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Interview with Bloomberg TV
DATE: 19/05/2026
SPEAKER: Sarah Hunter
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2026/sp-ag-2026-05-19-2.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Interview
Interview with Bloomberg TV
Sarah Hunter
Assistant Governor (Economic)
Bloomberg TV
19 May 2026
–
Sydney
Watch video: Inteview with Sarah Hunter, Assistant Governor (Economic), Bloomberg TV, Sydney
Haidi Stroud-Watts
The Reserve Bank of Australia says the risk of inflation expectations drifting higher is,
 quote, elevated, warning that if they were to become unanchored, a sharp economic slowdown could be
 required to bring them back down. RBA Assistant Governor Sarah Hunter has been highlighting those
 risks today at the Bloomberg Forum for Investment Managers and she joins us now exclusively in the
 studio. Always great to chat with you. And we say, you know, your job is to worry, right? But how
 much more worrying are you doing these days given the broader environment?
Sarah Hunter
Yeah, absolutely. It is our job to worry, so we do always pay attention to things like expectations
 and other things that might knock the economy on a short-term basis. But as we were discussing, I
 think it is because we’ve had a sequence of shocks over the last five, six years, really since
 COVID and we’re facing into another one, so that is part of what we’re thinking about.
 It’s another inflationary shock coming through the economy. We know that in particular when
 households see movements in fuel prices - so when you drive past a petrol station every day and you
 see the cost of diesel, it’s higher than it was pre-conflict. We know these are particularly
 salient, that they can have an impact on expectations. What we’re seeing at the moment is that
 short-term expectations - that’s what people think is going to happen to inflation over the next
 year or so, that they’re elevated. Not surprising given what’s happening. We’re paying
 particularly close attention to medium and long-term expectations because those are the kind of
 movements where that would suggest a bit more persistence and that risk materialising. We’re not
 seeing anything too worrying yet in that data, but we’re just conscious that it’s a
 heightened environment and so what we want to make sure, obviously, in terms of our policy lever and
 how we set policy, that we don’t have that elevation from short-term getting into medium and
 long-term. And that’s what we’re conscious of.
Haidi Stroud-Watts
Right. Because I think even 2 weeks ago you were assessing, okay, second, second half or
 second, second quarter, I should say, of 2026, we would see maybe $100 US dollars a barrel for
 oil would start coming back down. Reopening of the Straits. Nothing’s really materialised since
 then and are you having to readjust those expectations.
Sarah Hunter
In terms of what’s happening in the Middle East? Yes. So we’re not the experts on this. We
 don’t have a crystal ball and we’re certainly not geopolitical sort of commentators or
 analysts or anything like that. We use information we get from outside the bank and financial market
 pricing, all futures curves effectively for our oil price.
Haidi Stroud-Watts
The inputs are kind of changing all the time.
Sarah Hunter
The inputs are changing all the time so, yes, we’re having to monitor it every day and I’m
 sure like others, I wake up in the morning and I check my phone and wonder if something’s
 happened overnight. Yes, it’s still a very uncertain environment. We’re still finding out
 how it’s going to play out. The longer it goes on, obviously the longer prices remain elevated
 for oil and other products, the more that will come through into the local economy and will make that
 inflation outcome worse. I think like everybody, we would love to see some resolution in the not too
 distant future, but in the meantime we keep watching and waiting.
Haidi Stroud-Watts
We know that inflation has been above what the RBA would be comfortable with even prior to this
 latest conflict. But are we closer now to that real fear that inflationary, the mindset, inflationary
 mindset is becoming more entrenched?
Sarah Hunter
Well, that’s another way of talking about expectations drifting up and staying persistently high
 and that’s certainly something that we’re conscious of and looking at. I think also high
 inflation or higher inflation in and of itself is just not a good outcome for the economy. We know
 from empirically, if you look around the world, Higher inflation economies and businesses find it
 harder to invest, to make those types of decisions. For households, it’s really hard to budget.
 And that’s particularly true for those on the lowest incomes, the most vulnerable in our
 community. So I think, you know, getting inflation back down to target is a good outcome and part of
 that is making sure those inflation expectations remain anchored. And so that, I think, is the real
 sort of grounding point for the board’s decision last week and that the Governor talked about at
 the press conference as well.
Haidi Stroud-Watts
Trimmed mean hasn’t been at around 2.5 per cent or even around that for almost
 5 years now. Right. What do you think is driving that? We know the last five years have been
 pretty crazy in terms of macro events, but do you think there’s still grace for the RBA to try
 and meet that?
Sarah Hunter
Well, I very much hope so. We’re very committed to getting inflation back down. We focus on
 underlying inflation because it gives us the best steer for what will happen to headline. But
 obviously, ultimately, we want to get headline back down. I very much hope so. I think it’s been
 interesting looking at the economy over the last, I guess, 18 months or so, because in trimmed
 mean inflation, underlying inflation was moderating through to the middle of last year, more or less.
 And then it came through more strongly than we were anticipating in the second half of last year. And
 we think part of that story is capacity constraints re-emerging. We’ve got a stronger pickup in
 domestic demand than we were expecting. Some of the fallout from tariffs that we were discussing a
 year ago perhaps wasn’t as severe as many people were expecting. So I think there’s quite a
 few factors that have lifted that underlying inflation in the months immediately prior to the
 conflict. And now we have this shock coming through that will add to it again, as I was talking about
 earlier on. So I think you’ve summed up why the Board are so committed to getting inflation back
 down. You’re taking the actions they feel are necessary to achieve that because we do have to do
 that. That’s the job and we have to keep hold of that as our north star. We think we can do it.
 Absolutely. And we have a lever to do it and let’s hope that conditions become perhaps a little
 bit more stable and we can get there over the next couple of years.
Haidi Stroud-Watts
What do you see in terms of the risk of a lower potential growth rate and how that’s
 feeding into, I guess, the difficulty in being able to rein in prices too?
Sarah Hunter
We revised our forecast for productivity growth back in August last year. And we think at the moment
 and this is sort of thinking over a two or so year horizon, so quite short term really in the
 productivity world, we think that they would probably see growth at the moment probably around about
 0.7 per cent year on year and that’s lower than it has been historically. I mean, for
 us, what that means is just when we’re looking at the pace of growth in GDP, it just gives us a
 lower number, if you like, that we think about as what’s sustainable for the economy and when we
 say sustainable, we mean that that’s consistent with inflation remaining around our target. If
 we could see that productivity pace pick up a bit and that didn’t come through in inflationary
 pressures, that would be great. That would be a great outcome for the economy. It’s not a policy
 that we have really any control over. We don’t have the right levers. But if we can achieve
 that, that’s a good outcome for the country and we’d be very happy to see that but we do
 have to be mindful of where we are today in that sort of very short-term two-year horizon. And
 that’s our focus.
Haidi Stroud-Watts
Treasurer Jim Chalmers was upstairs with you again defending the government’s budget that
 was delivered last week. In terms of the implications for the RBA and for your mandate, what do you
 see those as being? And, you know, as we were talking about earlier, your also kind of trying to work
 around the modelling and forecasting around that as well.
Sarah Hunter
Yeah, absolutely and forecasting is always a challenge because there’s always things changing. I
 think in terms of the budget, we only got it on Tuesday when everyone else did, so we don’t get
 advance sight and we’re still working our way through what it all looks like and means. We are
 very conscious of and take into consideration all of the state budgets as well. And we’ve had
 some of those already, but we’ve got some still to come before our next forecasts are released
 in August. So we’re going to be putting all of that together to see what that looks like in
 terms of what’s happening to government demand. I’m also thinking about the tax side and
 how that might be changing to give us that part of that picture for aggregate demand overall in the
 economy and how that stacks up against our supply capacity. It’s very much looking through that
 aggregate lens and taking into account the states as well as the federal. The states actually are
 responsible for about half of total spending in the economy, for example, so we can’t ignore
 them, even if they perhaps don’t get quite as much attention across the country.
Haidi Stroud-Watts
Everyone’s obviously trying to work out the implications of the tax changes pertaining to
 the property market. To be fair, sentiment at least had begun to cool even before this on account of
 the rate hike cycle. Are you worried about the risk of cooling the market too much?
Sarah Hunter
Look, so we know that the housing market is and what happens in the housing market and to dwelling
 construction is actually one of the most responsive parts of the economy to monetary policy changes.
 We know when you increase the cash rate, as we have just over the last few meetings, that that will
 dampen down activity in that market. So we’re not surprised to see that response. And then, as
 you say, we’ve also got tax changes coming through as well. That’s always a risk. And if we
 see that outcome start to play out, then obviously the board will take that into consideration and be
 thinking about that in the context of future policy decisions. But as you can see in our latest
 forecast, we are expecting the pace of growth in dwelling construction activity to slow over the
 forecast horizon and that really is consistent with those increases in the cash rate that have come
 through already- so it’s not a surprise, but it’s something that we’ll be watching for
 sure.
Haidi Stroud-Watts
The economy is expected to slow in the second half of the year. We haven’t had a technical
 recession since the pandemic. Are you confident that we can avoid that?
Sarah Hunter
Oh, look, forecasting is tough. And then I would never say I’m confident on, on any particular
 outcome. But I think that what we’re seeing in terms of the lead indicators for activity and how
 we’re looking at the impact of the increase in oil price and how it flows through, let’s
 say our baseline forecast doesn’t have that outcome built into it and it wasn’t an outcome
 that we saw in the two alternative scenarios that we presented in the
Statement on Monetary
 Policy
as well. We know things could play out differently, rather obviously, in terms of
 how things play out in the Middle East. We have been running scenarios to consider alternatives. And
 in those two that we published, we don’t get that outcome either. But look, we are very alive
 that there are risks on all sides of the spectrum. Right now, is particularly challenging for central
 banks. These kind of supply shocks are really hard for us to navigate in terms of achieving our
 mandate. And so we’re focusing on what that means and then giving our best advice to the Board
 so they can make their decisions.
Haidi Stroud-Watts
Wage growth at around three per cent. Does that look reasonable or starting to look a bit
 disconnected versus the other data points?
Sarah Hunter
So, so weren’t surprised by the WPI print that we got last week. It was more or less in line with
 what we were expecting. There’s always sort of ons and offs underneath the surface. You can see
 in the forecast we do expect that WPI growth will remain around that sort of low three’s, around
 three per cent through the forecast horizon. And we’ll, we’ll see what plays through.
 That’s really connected to what we think is going to happen to the labour market over the
 forecast. And we, we do think that, you know, conditions will become a bit less tight in that market.
 And again, you can see that in the forecasts and it’s all connected with what we have, have
 happening to GDP growth. And we think that that’s going to be a little bit below trend over the
 next couple of years. But again, we’ll just have to wait and see. The baseline forecast has
 inflation getting back to 2.5 per cent at the end, but it’s built on a number of
 assumptions and judgments. And the one thing we’re, we’re always pretty confident of
 actually is that at least one of those assumptions or judgments won’t actually come true. So it
 is a constant sort of job of reevaluating and reassessing as you move through time.
Haidi Stroud-Watts
I’m told I have to let you go, but do you miss being in the private sector at this point
 in time?
Sarah Hunter
I’m honoured and privileged to do this job. It is very, very fulfilling and I have a fantastic
 team. So no, I can’t say that I won’t be doing anything else right now. Even when the job
 gets hard, I really appreciate that I’m able to do this and work with the team I have.
Haidi Stroud-Watts
Well, appreciate you taking the time to speak to us as always. Tough times being a central
 banker at the moment. Sarah Hunter, Assistant Governor and Chief Economist at the RBA, joining us
 exclusively here in our studio
