BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Recent Refinements to the Dual Mandate and Navigating Back to Target
DATE: 02/03/2026
SPEAKER: Sarah Hunter
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2026/sp-ag-2026-03-02.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Recent Refinements to the Dual Mandate and Navigating Back to Target
Sarah Hunter
*
Assistant Governor (Economic)
Norges Bank Monetary Policy Mandate Conference
2 March 2026
(
2 March 2026, 1.30 pm CET
)
–
Oslo, Norway
Before I begin, I would like to acknowledge that I have travelled here from the lands of the Gadigal

 people of the Eora nation. We are very lucky in Australia that our First Nations people protect our land

 and culture to hand down to future generations. I would like to pay my respects to their Elders past and

 present.
Thank you for inviting me to speak at this conference. It is a pleasure to be in Norway and be able to

 learn from colleagues about how mandates and frameworks can vary across central banks and the

 implications of this for monetary policy settings. My remarks today will focus on the findings of the

 recent RBA Review with respect to our mandate, the recent refinements that were made in response and how

 they have impacted the RBA Monetary Policy Board’s (Board)
1
strategy and operations. I’ll finish with

 some reflections on the current strategy and trade-off faced by the Board.
As many of you will know, a comprehensive and independent review of the RBA was conducted in
2022/23
. The Review concluded that Australia’s economic performance had

 been strong in the three decades since flexible inflation targeting was introduced and found that

 Australia’s monetary policy framework, as well as the RBA’s actions, contributed significantly

 to these outcomes.
While the Review found that Australia’s monetary policy framework was fundamentally sound, it

 recommended that it should be more clearly defined. In response, important changes were made to refine

 the RBA’s mandate and create clarity around its objectives. These changes are welcome. Amongst other

 things, the Board now provides a clearer assessment of current conditions and the outlook for the

 economy, and the implications of this for monetary policy strategy; over time, we hope that this will

 help people across the economy to better understand policy decisions.
Having said this, the changes have not fundamentally changed the RBA’s policy mandate – price

 stability and full employment were defined as objectives in the 1959 legislation that founded the RBA and

 this remains the case today. Consistent with this, the Board adopted its current strategy of bringing

 inflation gradually back to target while supporting a gradual adjustment in the labour market before the

 change to the new legislation came into effect. And it still considers that strategy to be appropriate

 under the newly refined dual mandate.
Clarification to the RBA’s objectives
The RBA adopted flexible inflation targeting in the 1990s in order to achieve the goals of monetary policy

 as set out in the institution’s founding legislation: the stability of the currency; the maintenance

 of full employment; and the economic prosperity and welfare of the people of Australia. Prior to the

 Review, achieving the inflation target entailed ensuring that inflation remained between 2 and

 3 per cent on average, over time.
Looking around the world, there is no standard approach to formally defining this mandate. Some central

 banks have explicit dual mandates for price stability and full employment, while others have price

 stability as a primary mandate with secondary objectives related to employment or economic activity. But

 our assessment is that in practice, all recognise in some way that monetary policy tends to be better

 suited to influencing aggregate demand in the economy and the pace at which inflation is brought back to

 target when it has moved away can have an impact on output and employment in the shorter run. Hence, some

 weight is also put on real economy outcomes; this manifests as the choice over how quickly policy-setters

 aim for inflation to return to target.
As outlined earlier, until early last year the legislation governing the RBA spelled out
three
distinct objectives for monetary policy – price stability, full employment, and

 the economic welfare and prosperity of the Australian people. While these objectives largely served

 Australia well, particular concerns were raised in the Review around the third objective, which was

 deemed to be ambiguous and to be providing the RBA with too much discretion.
2
In response, some changes were made last year to the relevant legislation and the agreement between the

 RBA and the government to modernise and clarify the RBA’s objectives.
3
The legislation now explains that

 the RBA’s
overarching
goal is to promote the economic prosperity and welfare of the

 Australian people, both now and into the future. And for the Board this means setting policy in a way

 that best achieves both price stability and full employment. To help clarify the implication of these

 changes for policymakers, changes were also made to the
Statement on the Conduct of Monetary

 Policy
(an agreement between the Board and the Government on how the Board will discharge its

 mandate). These changes together mean that Australia has essentially kept a flexible inflation target,

 but with clarifications around how it operates in practice. These include:
Inflation target midpoint
: The Board should aim to set policy to return inflation to the

 midpoint of the inflation target of
2–3 per cent
, so as to

 maximise the likelihood that the inflation target is met.
Full employment
: The Australian Government’s objective is for sustained and

 inclusive full employment. The Board’s role within this is to focus on achieving sustained full

 employment, which is the current maximum level of employment that is consistent with low and stable

 inflation.
Balancing the two objectives
: In setting monetary policy, both price stability and full

 employment should be considered. However, this does not mean that the Board needs to assign equal

 importance to both objectives at all times. There will be times when more weight will be placed on

 one side of the mandate than the other. The Board is responsible for determining the appropriate

 balance between the objectives as well as the appropriate timeframe to return inflation to the

 midpoint of the target range. This may vary depending on economic conditions.
Clear communication when objectives may not be met
: When inflation is expected to be

 significantly away from the midpoint or when labour market conditions are expected to deviate

 significantly from those consistent with full employment, the Board will communicate how long it

 expects it will be before it meets each objective and why. In other words, the Board will be clear

 about how it is balancing its two objectives and why.
The recent changes have made the dual mandate more explicit, and have fed into the enhancements in

 communicating the Board’s view of the economy and its strategy. But the fundamental components of

 the mandate remain the same and the continuity of the monetary policy strategy enacted by the Board

 before and after the legislative change suggest the clarification of the mandate is unlikely to mark a

 fundamental shift in how monetary policy is formulated in Australia.
Navigating back to target after the pandemic
As we all know all too well, in the years following the onset of the
COVID-19
pandemic, economies around the world experienced a sharp rise in inflation. This surge reflected a

 combination of factors, including significant supply disruptions together with strong demand, which in

 turn partly reflected the large fiscal and monetary stimulus introduced by authorities around the world

 during the pandemic. Australia was no exception, with inflation reaching its highest level in over three

 decades by late 2022 and labour market conditions becoming very tight.
In response to these developments, the Board explicitly defined its strategy in terms of both aspects of

 its dual mandate. Specifically, the Board adopted a strategy of setting monetary policy in a way that

 would bring inflation sustainably back down to target within a reasonable timeframe while allowing

 conditions in the labour market to adjust
gradually
towards full employment.
4
This strategy

 aimed to preserve as many of the gains in the labour market as possible – that is, to bring the

 labour market back to balance but not deliberately generate a negative employment or output gap.
5
It was assessed

 that inflation expectations remained anchored, and therefore that there was scope to take a bit longer to

 bring inflation back to target.
6
This strategy led to a somewhat different interest rate path to that chosen by some other central banks.

 While the RBA responded to these inflationary pressures by raising interest rates significantly, it

 raised the policy rate to a somewhat lower level than many others (Graph 1); in monetary policy

 parlance, the cash rate was set at a less restrictive level than in other economies.
7
The different

 strategies adopted by central banks appeared to reflect a combination of factors, including their varying

 assessments of risks and differing tolerance for the speed of return of inflation to target

 (Graph 2). At the time, central banks that adopted a more aggressive approach to tightening policy,

 such as the Reserve Bank of New Zealand, tended to forecast inflation returning to target more quickly

 while expecting a materially negative output gap. By contrast, central banks that sought to return

 inflation to target at a slower pace, including the Norges Bank and the RBA, tended to expect the economy

 to return to balance more gradually or expected to create only a small degree of excess supply.
Graph 1
Graph 2
This period of higher interest rates helped improve the balance between aggregate demand and supply in the

 Australian economy and allowed us to make meaningful progress on bringing inflation down. At the same

 time, conditions in the labour market eased gradually, with the unemployment rate remaining relatively

 low (Graph 3).
Graph 3
By early 2025, the Board judged that it was appropriate to withdraw some policy restrictiveness, noting

 that inflation had continued to ease and was projected to ease further as the output gap closed, growth

 in private demand was subdued and given heightened uncertainty about the global outlook. Accordingly, the

 cash rate was gradually reduced from 4.35 per cent to 3.6 per cent between February

 and August 2025.
Given the strategy adopted by the Board, this easing was intentionally modest relative to many peer

 central banks that had initially tightened policy by more. In contrast to this sub-group of peers,

 although the Australian economy was moving towards balance, there was still judged to be a little excess

 demand in the labour market and ongoing capacity pressures in other parts of the economy. Although policy

 was eased slightly, it was still judged to be restrictive.
Conditions in the Australian economy have changed markedly since mid-2025. The global economy has shown

 more resilience and growth in private demand has been stronger than expected, and conditions in the

 labour market have stabilised rather than continuing to ease. Underlying and headline inflation were much

 stronger than anticipated by both the RBA staff and market economists (Graph 4). While much of the

 surprise is assessed as being due to sector-specific temporary factors that are expected to fade, RBA

 staff now think that economy-wide capacity constraints were and are currently tighter than was previously

 assessed.
Graph 4
In response to these developments and the updated staff assessment of the economy’s fundamentals, the

 Board judged that in order to achieve its strategy of returning inflation to target in a reasonable

 timeframe, it needed to tighten financial conditions and raise the cash rate to 3.85 per cent.

 This decision was consistent with the Board’s judgement that part of the recent acceleration in

 inflation is a result of tighter capacity constraints than previously thought; the economy is now

 assessed as being further away from balance and delivering their strategy required a tightening of

 monetary policy.
What if the Monetary Policy Board had followed a different strategy?
Given we are now several years into the current strategy, one way to answer this question is to simulate

 how the economy would have evolved had the Board followed a path for the cash rate that was closer to

 that of our peer central banks. That is, a strategy that put more weight on getting inflation back to

 target faster.
For this exercise, suppose the Board had increased the cash rate from the beginning of 2022 such that the

 path adopted by the Board was in line with the average of our peers; as shown in Graph 1, the

 average peer central bank tightened policy by more than the RBA.
8
Then suppose that following the peak, the cash rate was cut at a similar speed to the average of our peers

 (Graph 5). It should be noted that this is a hypothetical path for the cash rate that amalgamates

 actual policy decisions across a range of central banks, each of which decided on their own strategy for

 tackling the post-pandemic inflation spike and faced country-specific shocks when making their policy

 decisions. In other words, this is a stylised path and is not intended to suggest a credible alternative

 strategy for monetary policy in Australia.
Graph 5
To assess how the economy would have evolved with this counterfactual path, while keeping everything else

 (including all shocks, data revisions and other events, that were not known in real time) the same, we

 used DINGO and MARTIN – two of the RBA’s core macroeconomic models.
9
In what

 follows, we used an average of the results from these models.
Unsurprisingly, a sharper increase in interest rates would have reduced the peak level of inflation and

 increased the speed of subsequent disinflation (Graph 6). We estimate that with this counterfactual

 path, year-ended trimmed mean inflation would have reached the midpoint of the target band (2.5 per cent)

 by 2025. The surprise spike in inflation in late 2025 still occurs, as it is an unexpected shock, with

 year-ended trimmed mean inflation lifting to be slightly above target at the end of the horizon.
Graph 6
But the more contractionary policy path would have caused higher unemployment (Graph 7).
10
We estimate

 that the counterfactual strategy would have caused unemployment to overshoot the level consistent with

 full employment in 2023. From then, the labour market would have continued to weaken through 2024 and

 2025, peaking at 5.3 per cent in late 2025. This continued weakening after the peak in the

 counterfactual policy rate reflects the well-known lags in the transmission from monetary policy to

 economic activity and the labour market and is consistent with the experience of our peer economies that

 I showed in Graph 3.
Graph 7
When the economy is operating beyond what is sustainable, there is no unique path for policy to rebalance the economy.

 Most countries enacted substantial stimulus during the pandemic, and all suffered

 from supply disruptions, yet central banks made different choices in response to the resulting inflation.

 Some chose to increase policy rates sharply and slow their economy quickly. The RBA Board chose a more gradual

 increase and more gradual subsequent policy rate decline, while being very mindful that this strategy relies on inflation expectations remaining anchored.
Concluding remarks
Today I have largely focused on how the RBA’s dual mandate shaped its strategy in the years of high

 inflation immediately following the
COVID-19
pandemic. The recent

 refinements to our mandate did not fundamentally alter how policy is conducted, but they did strengthen

 our ability to explain
why
we take the path we do, and the trade-offs faced when making

 monetary policy decisions.
Endnotes
*
I would like to

 acknowledge and thank Anthony Brassil, Kate Hickie, Callum Ryan and Joyce Tan who substantially

 contributed to the drafting of this speech. I would also like to acknowledge Meredith

 Beechey-Osterholm, Tim Taylor, Andrew Hauser and Michele Bullock for their comments on earlier

 drafts. Any errors and omissions are my own.
This speech was finalised on 27 February, prior to the escalation in conflict and instability in the Middle East.
1
With the change in

 legislation establishing a new Governance Board, the monetary policy decisions previously made by

 the Reserve Bank Board are now made by the Monetary Policy Board. For simplicity in this speech,

 I use the term Board to refer to whichever board made monetary policy decisions at that time.
2
See Australian

 Government (2023), ‘Review of the Reserve Bank of Australia’, March.
3
See The Treasurer and

 the Monetary Policy Board (2025),
Statement on the

 Conduct of Monetary Policy
, July. See
Reserve Bank Act 1959
.
4
See Lowe P (2023),

 ‘
A Narrow Path
’, Address at the

 Morgan Stanley 5
th
Australia Summit, Sydney, 7 June; Bullock M (2024), ‘
Economic Conditions and the RBA’s

 Transformation
’, Address at the Committee for Economic Development of Australia

 (CEDA) Annual Dinner, Sydney, 28 November; Bullock M (2025), ‘
The RBA’s Dual Mandate – Inflation

 and Employment
’, Anika Foundation Fundraising Lunch, Sydney, 24 July.
5
See Kennedy S (2023),

 ‘Post Budget Economic Briefing’, Address to the Australian Business Economists,

 18 May.
6
Bullock M (2025),

 ‘
Monetary Policy Decision
’, Sydney,

 18 February.
7
The midpoint of

 Australia’s inflation target is 2.5 per cent, which is 50 basis points higher

 than the targets set by many peer central banks. As a result, comparing headline policy rates

 across countries does not, on its own, provide a meaningful indication of relative monetary

 restrictiveness. Instead, measures such as the gap between the actual policy rate and estimates

 of the nominal neutral rate offer a more informative guide to the relative restrictiveness of

 policy settings across central banks.
8
Given we are assessing

 a counterfactual path we assume it would have been communicated in a similar way to the actual

 strategy. We therefore model the counterfactual policy path as partially anticipated by agents in

 the model: see Appendix A in Mulqueeney M, A Ballantyne and J Hambur (2025), ‘
Monetary

 Policy Transmission through the Lens of the RBA’s Models
’, RBA
Bulletin
, April.
9
We use two models

 because DINGO explicitly models individual behaviour and how people form expectations of the

 future, which is important because a clearly communicated counterfactual strategy would change

 people’s expectations and behaviour. On the other hand, MARTIN better reflects the

 historical relationships between economic aggregates and their historical persistence. For more

 details about the Dynamic Intertemporal New-Keynesian General-equilibrium Optimisation (DINGO)

 model, see Mulqueeney
et al
, n 8 (2025); Gibbs JJ, J Hambur and G Nodari (2021),

 ‘Housing and Commodity Investment Booms in a Small Open Economy’,
Economic

 Record
, 97(317), pp
212–242
; Rees DM, P Smith and J

 Hall (2016), ‘A Multi-sector Model of the Australian Economy’,
Economic

 Record
, 92(298), pp
374–408
. For more details about

 Macroeconomic Relationships for Targeting INflation (MARTIN), see Mulqueeney
et al
,

 n 8; Ballantyne A
et al
, (2020), ‘MARTIN Has Its Place: A Macroeconometric

 Model of the Australian Economy’,
Economic Record
, 96(314), pp
225–251
.
10
Unemployment is not

 explicitly modelled in DINGO, but total hours worked is modelled. Here we use a simple estimated

 equation to determine what the total hours worked path implies for the unemployment rate.
Underlying data
This file contains all
underlying data
that are available for public release.
Some graphs in this speech were generated using Mathematica.
