BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Monetary Policy Decision
DATE: 05/05/2026
SPEAKER: Michele Bullock
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2026/mc-gov-2026-05-05.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Media conference
Monetary Policy Decision
Michele Bullock
Governor
5 May 2026
–
Sydney
Audio
43.6MB
Watch video: Media conference held on 5 May 2026, Sydney
Transcript
Michele Bullock
Good afternoon. Today, as you know, the Board decided to raise the cash rate by 25 basis points.

 Since the start of the year the cash rate has now been increased by 75 basis points. These

 increases have been necessary to tighten financial conditions and slow growth in demand in the

 economy to ensure we get on top of inflation. Inflation hurts all Australians because it eats away at

 the purchasing power of our money.
Inflation in Australia was already too high before the recent conflict in the Middle East began. The

 most recent data have confirmed that some of the increase in inflation was being generated by

 economy-wide capacity pressures including ongoing tightness in the labour market.
Developments in the Middle East remain highly uncertain but under a wide range of possible scenarios

 the conflict adds to global and domestic inflation. The shock to oil and some other commodity prices

 has worsened the trade-off between inflation and growth. Already we’ve seen a sharp increase in

 fuel and related commodity prices and this is already feeding through to inflation. The recent

 increases in interest rates will have no impact on this. What these increases do, however, is to help

 to contain the domestic inflationary pressures after the inflation due to oil and related commodity

 prices eases.
Now, I understand this is a really difficult time for households who are already facing higher fuel

 prices and other cost of living pressures, but we must get on top of inflation now so that it

 doesn’t get away from us. We’re already seeing that many firms that are facing cost

 pressures are looking to increase prices of their goods and services. If left unchecked, higher costs

 get embedded into price and wage setting decisions. These second-round effects could lead to even

 higher and persistent inflation and if so would require even more tightening in monetary policy to

 get inflation under control. We’ve already seen expectations for inflation over the next year or

 so increase and we need to ensure that this does not lead to higher inflation expectations over the

 longer term.
When inflation is already too high and the economy facing capacity pressures it doesn’t take much

 additional spending to make the job of returning inflation to target more challenging. This means

 spending will need to grow more slowly for a time to help restore the balance between demand and

 supply. The recent cash rate increases have been to address the excess demand that existed in the

 economy prior to the Middle East conflict. Higher fuel prices by themselves will not address this.

 The Board now judges the level of the cash rate to be a bit restrictive, which will help to address

 the risk that inflation will be higher and more persistent once the current prices shock passes

 through the economy. This gives the Board space to see how the conflict plays out and the response of

 Australian households and businesses to the shock. The Board remains focused on returning inflation

 to target. The Board will continue to be driven by the incoming data. We will monitor the situation

 overseas and how it’s affecting the Australian economy. We’ll also continue to monitor the

 incoming Australian data and assess the implications for the outlook for domestic spending and

 inflation. Thank you. And I’m happy to take your questions.
Swati Pandey
Thanks, Governor, Swati Pandey from Bloomberg News. Just wanted to understand based on what you just

 said, are you on a wait and watch mode from here on? Because you tried to imply that current policy

 settings seem to be appropriate to bring inflation to target?
Michele Bullock
So wait and watch is probably the wrong term but I think the Board now feels that the initial

 conditions that we were trying to address before the war started – which was a space of excess

 demand, where we needed to get demand to slow so that it was putting less pressure on inflation

 – we feel we’re now in a position where we’ve got space to be alert now to both sides

 of the risks: inflation and the potential risks to the downside if the war continues.
Matt Cranston
Matt Cranston from The Australian. The Australian newspaper today reported that the government is

 going to inject a big bunch of stimulus into the economy. Other governments have also got similar

 policies on different things. And in your statement on monetary policy today you sort of raised this

 point. You said, governments may consider policies to support households and businesses. So my

 question is, I’m not looking for your advice to government. I know not to ask you for that. But

 can I explain to Australians how these sort of policies may help or hinder your fight against

 inflation? And, more importantly, your fight against inflation expectations.
Michele Bullock
Yeah, sure. Taking off where I finished with Swati, we have a situation in Australia prior to the war

 where we had demand above supply. The ability of the economy to supply the goods and services that

 were being demanded in total, including by government and by the private sector, that was

 outstripping the ability of the economy to supply it. That’s why inflation was rising. By

 definition, if we are increasing interest rates what we are trying to do is slow growth in demand and

 that hits the private sector typically: consumption, investment, those sorts of things. To the extent

 that the government is demanding goods and services of the economy, so in the variety of ways that

 they do, whether it’s direct expenditure or giving money to households to spend on goods and

 services in the private sector, that adds to demand. Now, if we’re sitting at a position where

 we are constrained – the economy and productivity aren’t growing very quickly, we think

 the potential growth is around about 2 per cent a year – that means that in order to

 close that gap we have to have demand growing by less than 2 per cent. And both private

 sector and public sector have to contribute to that. So all I’m saying is that the extent to

 which government make up the shortfalls for households by giving them more money, it makes it harder

 to dampen demand. The bottom line though on all of this is this shock has – it’s a real

 income shock for Australia and the world. Australians are poorer because of this shock to oil prices

 and energy prices and all the other commodity prices that are being impacted. We are poorer and there

 is no way out of that. The trade-off is much worse.
David Chau
Hi Governor, David Chau from ABC News. With each successive interest rate hike comes the higher risk

 of a recession. So how will you know if you’ve gone too far?
Michele Bullock
I don’t know what specifically - specifically what definition of recession that you’re

 referring to but if you look at our forecasts you’ll see that we have growth going down to about

 1.3 per cent. That is pretty anaemic growth. I would say that in those circumstances

 it’s not a great outcome for Australia but as I said earlier, we’ve had this shock which

 has lowered our real income. So, yes, we are all feeling poorer. That’s what this has done. This

 war on the other side of the world. So, yes, it’s possible that we have given too much weight to

 the inflationary risks and we haven’t given enough weight to the possibility that consumption

 will pull back quite a lot. At the moment, we think in our baseline scenario that that’s not

 going to happen, that growth is going to be anaemic but the economy will still grow. But there’s

 always that risk. We’ll be doing what we always do, which is we’ll be looking at the

 forward indicators to the extent we’ve got them, our liaison programs, our surveys and the hard

 data so we know where we’re standing at the moment and we’ll be making assessments. If

 things change, we will change.
Shane Wright
Shane Wright from The Herald and The Age. 48 mentions of the word ‘uncertain’ today.

 50 per cent up on the last quarter. In the November SMP you had a forecast dwelling

 investment of about 2.5 per cent by the end of 2027. February that was down to 0.3, now

 it’s at −0.3 with a −1.1 and you’ve also got falling business investment. How

 do you think that plays out in a rental market, in the property market and for productivity if you

 were hoping or expecting businesses to keep investing but they’re clearly, on your own

 forecasts, ebbing away?
Michele Bullock
Well, this is the challenge. Monetary policy does work partly through the housing market. That’s

 partly what it does. And, as you point out, we already have a lack of supply in housing. In fact,

 building costs are such that you often hear from builders that – particularly for high rise

 – that it’s just not worth building because they can’t sell the properties for the

 cost it takes to build them. This is making it worse. It’s not us, I think, that’s driving

 this. I think there’s an essential problem with supply and the inflation in building costs,

 which is going to be worse out of this shock. Quite frankly it is going to make the situation worse.

 The only thing we can do is think more medium term and think about trying to bring inflation down so

 that we don’t have high cost growth in the construction industry. That gives certainty to

 builders. It gives certainty to home buyers and that is the thing that we can offer in the

 medium-term but it’s not something that we can offer in the next 12 months. This is a shock

 completely out of our control.
John Rolfe
Governor, John Rolfe from the Daily Telegraph and the Herald Sun. My question is about the non-war

 inflationary pressure in the economy and seeking to clarify some of your interesting opening remarks.

 If there was no conflict in Iran, do you think that you personally would have voted for an interest

 rate rise today?
Michele Bullock
That’s a double-edged question, isn’t it? You’re asking me what I voted for today. Let

 me put it this way, we already had a problem with inflation, as I said, because we had excess demand.

 Would we have had to have had three increases? I don’t know the answer to that but what I can

 say is that this oil shock that has been driven by what’s gone on in the Middle East, this has

 complicated things immensely. It’s made a trade-off for us much worse. For any given inflation

 rate now that means lower growth. It means higher unemployment. If you like, if you want to be

 technical, the Phillips Curve has short of shifted right a bit. So it’s quite possible that we

 wouldn’t have had to increase interest rates a third time if the shock hadn’t occurred, but

 the fact is the shock did occur. It occurred at a time when inflation was already too high. And we

 know that a very salient price, a price that sticks in people’s brains, is petrol. The problem

 then is, this is adding now to concern that people will just start to think, inflation now is just

 starting to become embedded. So it’s possible that – I mean, I don’t have a

 counterfactual, it’s possible but I would say certainly what this is – what the war has

 done is it’s made the trade-off much, much worse. And although we are looking through some of

 it, we can’t look through everything. We’ve got to be cognisant of the potential impact on

 inflation and expectations.
Lea Jurkovic
Hi Governor, Lea Jurkovic from The Financial Review. The SMP said that the pass-through of the energy

 price shock to the broader economy is quite fast, and perhaps faster than before. Does this

 complicate how much space you have to watch for the activity risks to play out and will the Board be

 more sensitive to inflation prints because of this?
Michele Bullock
A couple of points first worth making here. The first thing is that, as I said in the remarks, these

 interest rates rises are not going to do anything for inflation in the next six months. That’s

 done and dusted. We know those prices are coming through. The second point I would make is that

 it’s not unreasonable for firms, if they are seeing their cost bases rise because of what’s

 going on, whether it be fertilisers for farmers or fuel, diesel for transport costs, it’s not

 unreasonable for them to want to recover their costs because the alternative is if they can’t

 they might end up going bust and that’s not good either. There’s nothing unreasonable about

 that. What we’re trying to guard against is: we’re pretty sure we had excess demand in the

 system, which will make it easier for them to do it and easier to pass on perhaps more. And

 that’s the way that the inflation expectations get embedded. So I want to be absolutely clear,

 I’m not saying that businesses shouldn’t pass on costs. I think it’s reasonable that

 they should be doing so. What we’re trying to guard against is, once those new price levels are

 achieved, that people don’t think, well, it’s normal for things to go up by 4 or

 5 per cent. We’ll just continue to do that. That’s the challenge.
Patrick Commins
Thanks, Governor. Patrick Commins from Guardian Australia. I had a question about the adverse

 scenarios. The baseline scenario, which you consider setting your forecasts off, is reasonably

 optimistic. It suggests that the Strait of Hormuz opens pretty soon. So how likely do you think that

 we do end up in the more adverse scenarios, how are you thinking about that and relatedly if we do

 what does that mean for the path of monetary policy? Does that start to change how you’re

 weighing out the potential impact of growth versus inflation?
Michele Bullock
So let me just clarify quickly I don’t think we’re being optimistic but we’re taking

 the assumption of the futures price curve for Brent and some people are suggesting that that is

 optimistic. And it may well be. Certainly when I stood here at March I think the war was maybe a week

 or two old. Everyone was thinking it will be over in a couple of weeks. It isn’t. We’re

 still here. We still have no idea. So that’s why we do the scenarios. We’ve done the

 scenarios with a higher shock to oil prices and a more prolonged one. And that does, as I said

 earlier, that complicates things again because inflation peaks higher. You end up with unemployment

 possibly tracking higher. You end up with a much less favourable outcome than – again, the

 Phillips curve is shifting right again. So that’s the challenge. Is it optimistic? I

 wouldn’t like to say. I have no intelligence into how likely this thing is to be resolved. But

 even if it is resolved quite quickly, in terms of the actual conflict, the effects are going on for

 the rest of this year and the oil price does not get back to where it was pre-war. So we’re

 still in a worse position than we were, in terms of the cost to society. We still have a real income

 loss for Australia. The world’s got a real income loss. So that’s still what we’re

 facing. That’s why we do the scenarios.
Patrick Commins
Did you end up in the adverse … [inaudible]
Michele Bullock
Well, I wouldn’t know at this stage. If, for example, the adverse scenario turns out and that

 affects confidence and has a big impact on demand then that might mean that we close that excess

 demand gap more quickly. It might. I don’t know. We’re just going to have to be alert.
Chris Kohler
Afternoon, Governor. Chris Kohler from 9News. Now, you said you’re conscious of the difficulty

 for households. You also said the next six months are done and dusted so I might just ask you a

 little bit more directly on that. I mean, looking at the forecasts, inflation is going to get worse,

 prices will rise further and that’s despite three interest rate rises so far this year. So I

 mean, this is going to feel like very, very bad news for households. Can you just speak to how those

 households are likely to be looking down the barrel of 2026? I mean, is it as grim as it looks?
Michele Bullock
Well, it’s hard. Those households with mortgages and debt, yes, this is hurting them immensely.

 The thing is though, and I’ve said this before, inflation is actually hurting everyone,

 including those people. So they’ve got a double whammy. But the people who are most impacted by

 inflation are the most vulnerable. The people on the lowest incomes. They’re the ones who

 don’t have savings. They don’t have earnings from interest or anything like that so

 they’re not benefitting from that. They’re just getting hit by inflation. So, yes,

 it’s hard. The shock with oil prices, there’s nothing we can do about that. And as I said

 earlier, the interest rate rises will not do anything about that. That is going to happen. And

 we’re going to see over the next three to six months, inflation will peak probably in June. I

 think our forecast is about 4.8 per cent. It will then start to come down. As according to

 the baseline, if oil prices start to decline, it will start to come down but even if oil prices stay

 up there inflation will still ease a bit because at least oil prices won’t be increasing. But

 look, it is tough. We’re staring down the barrel. Not only here, many other countries are

 staring down a similar barrel. It is a very, very tough time.
Stella Qiu
Hi Governor, Stella Qiu from Reuters. I had a similar question about the adverse scenarios as well but

 I’m just going to pivot a little. Just interested in if there’s any discussions among the

 Board members on their view on the adverse scenarios, if that might happen, what’s their view on

 this and when do the concerns about demand construction overtake inflation?
Michele Bullock
Well, we did discuss the forecasts and we did discuss what the adverse scenarios might mean. The

 outcome of that discussion really was that it’s uncertain. We don’t know. One reason for

 deciding to increase interest rates to give ourselves space now to sit and see what happens, whether

 the baseline turns out or it’s an adverse scenario, that was part of the thinking, I think, in

 terms of increase now and then give yourself space.
Brandon How
Thanks, Governor. Brandon How from Capital Brief. In the latest RBA forecast it says the bank is

 expecting productivity growth to be effectively stagnant through to the end of the year. Should we be

 expecting there to be no recovery in productivity growth as long as the conflict in the Middle East

 persists? And how much additional difficulty is this putting on rectifying some of the capacity

 pressures in the economy?
Michele Bullock
Well, to the extent that high inflation and worries about fuel supply and so on are taking

 businesses’ eye off the ball of productivity improvement then, yes, that’s not good. I

 mean, there is another opposite force going on in the world economy at the moment, which of course is

 the big AI boom, and that’s actually – if you look at forecasts for world growth and major

 trading partner growth, that is actually giving something back. So even though you’ve got this

 big supply shock, on the other hand, you’ve actually got growth coming from this AI inspired

 investment boom and that’s impacting our major trading partners and so on. And that might also

 have some productivity benefits but that, I think, is something that’s out there. It’s not

 immediate. But I think this is another reason why high inflation and why our job of keeping inflation

 low and stable is so important because, you know, if you’ve got high inflation that’s what

 people are worrying about. They’re not thinking about how are ways to improve my business, what

 are the ways I can do things better. They’re worrying about cost. They’re worrying about

 inflation. So it’s not good news for that but we’ve just got to get inflation back down.
Juliette Saly
Governor, hi, Juliette Saly from Ausbiz TV. You were asked a question last time about whether or not

 Deputy Governor Hauser was guiding the markets, given that he gave that podcast and then money

 markets started to suggest that we would have a rate hike. The same happened with his fireside chat

 this time in New York. So, I guess, is the Deputy Governor somehow giving a little bit of an

 indication as to where the Board is thinking? And if so, are you or Deputy Governor Hauser happy to

 come on Ausbiz and give some forward guidance?
Michele Bullock
So the answer to the question is, no, he’s not out there giving guidance. I mean, I’ve said

 before that we can’t actually tell you what the Board is going to decide and, again, I will

 reassure you – or it may not be reassuring – but I can tell you that the discussion in

 the Board is vigorous and we had a lot of debate about this decision today, as we did about the last

 meeting. So he’s not guiding the market because he doesn’t actually know what the Board is

 going to say. Certainly this is a Board that I think contribute a lot, in terms of their own

 experiences. They all have different sorts of skills and experience to bear on this. And everyone

 listens to one another and everyone thinks deeply, I think, personally about their positions and then

 they make their decision.
Juliette Saly
[inaudible]
Michele Bullock
Oh, well thank you for the invitation.
Ingrid Willinge
Governor, Ingrid Willinge from Sky News. Just a question in regards to the dual mandate. Do you still

 believe in the narrow path to ease inflation gradually while maintaining full employment or are you

 seeing it as more urgent to address inflation at the moment?
Michele Bullock
So I think the narrow path was something that my predecessor talked about and it captured that idea

 that we had a dual mandate. But it’s also true that we don’t give equal weight to both and

 it depends a little bit on where we think the relative risks lie. So in early ‘25 when inflation

 was coming down, unemployment was drifting up, we thought, okay. Maybe we need to pay a little bit

 more attention to the downside. It became clear in late ‘25, early ‘26 that actually the

 risks had all shifted to the upside so we had to shift our focus and that’s why we’re

 ending up where we are today. Having said that, we still are conscious of the dual mandate. We are

 still conscious that we want to try and slow the economy enough to bring inflation back to target and

 we would rather not have unemployment or employment slow anymore than it has to. That’s still

 part of it. But we do have to pivot depending on where we think the risks are lying.
Cameron Micallef
Hi, Governor. Cameron Micallef from NewsWire. Are you concerned that lifting savings rates will

 actually increase spending for those people that have assets already at the expense of mortgage

 holders effectively?
Michele Bullock
So that’s one way it could work. The other way that it often works, and you observe this actually

 when you look at what mortgage holders do with their payments, higher interest rates actually

 encourage saving, as well as spending. So one way to look at it people often do is say, well,

 I’m getting more interest there so therefore I’ll spend more. But what higher interest

 rates do is encourage people to save more and save it up to spend later. That’s what they tend

 to do. And that’s one of the transmission mechanisms in monetary policy and where you see it

 often is in mortgage holders where we observe that, for example, when interest rates were coming down

 a lot of mortgage holders were opting – interest rates were still a little bit elevated –

 and they were opting not to spend that extra money. They were opting to continue to save it. So it

 could encourage some people to spend their interest earnings but another transmission mechanism is it

 actually encourages them to save.
Michael Janda
Governor, Michael Janda from ABC News. This is probably one a bit for the economics nerds out there

 but historically governments used fiscal policy to constrain inflation and address inflation

 break-outs. In the past three or four decades we’ve seen the pendulum swing very much to central

 banks having a lot of responsibility for constraining inflation. Do you feel that there’s now

 too much reliance placed on central banks to keep inflation under control?
Michele Bullock
I think that where we’ve got to on this worldwide is that cyclically it’s easier for central

 banks to respond. Because, as I’ve discussed before, fiscal policy is trying to address a lot

 more things than just inflation. It’s got tax, it’s got spending, it’s got

 infrastructure. So it’s not a very nimble way to address inflation. Having said that, yes,

 it’s true – and we talked about it in answer to Matt’s question – that when

 governments are spending a lot of money and we’re running up against capacity constraints, then

 they do need to think about whether or not there’s ways they can help the inflation problem by

 looking for ways to constrain demand. That’s one thing that they can do and I personally think

 that the Treasurer, privately and publicly, he is focusing on that. But it’s not just the

 Federal Government but it’s the State Governments as well. So, yes, I think they do need to be

 conscious of it. But I don’t think going back to fiscal policy being the swing factor in a

 cyclical sense – there’s automatic stabilisers that do some of it for it – but I

 don’t think actively using fiscal policy to try and address the cycle is necessarily the right

 way to go.
Daniel O’Leary
Daniel from MNI. What impact would a prolonged oil shock have on the bank’s neutral rate

 estimate?
Michele Bullock
That’s a good question. It depends on what happens really to savings and investment, I think,

 which is the ultimate reason why the neutral rate is what it is. It depends on the balance of savings

 and investment globally. I don’t know is the bottom line. If, for example, it resulted in a

 massive investment expenditure in renewables, so it super charged that, we could end up with a higher

 neutral rate because of investment taking off. If, on the other hand, it makes people uncertain,

 cautious, savings go up, it could lower the neutral rate. If we stay here I don’t know what it

 would necessarily be but ultimately it’s going to depend on whether or not in any long-term

 sense it has any impact on savings and investment profiles and I suspect other factors are going to

 be over the long run more important there.
Veronica Lenard
Thank you, Governor. Veronica Lenard from SBS. You spoke earlier about how those most impacted by

 inflation of vulnerable communities, many already stretching their budgets to accommodate higher

 costs. In this climate what are your concerns about the potential for unemployment to surge in the

 months ahead?
Michele Bullock
Well, I do worry about unemployment and I worry about it for the most vulnerable. I also worry about

 it for people who are paying mortgages, for example, because the best way for them to continue to

 meet their commitments is to have a job. But quite apart from that, having a job is just really

 important for people’s self-worth and their self-esteem. So there’s good reasons why we

 don’t want unemployment rising too much. But we think still, if you look at our forecast, we

 still see employment growing. The unemployment rate moves up a bit, but employment’s still

 growing. It just might mean that it’s taking a little longer for people to get a job. It might

 mean they get a little less hours. But if we can keep employment growing then I think that’s the

 most positive thing we can do. So it’s a little bit back to the narrow path question. I mean, we

 haven’t forgotten that that’s the other part of the dual mandate because it’s very

 important.
Sophia Rodrigues
Sophia Rodrigues from Central Bank Intel. If I have watched and listened to other central banks

 properly, I think they’re all looking for signs of second-round effects of higher oil prices and

 I think that the first central bank was saying that we are already seeing indications of the

 second-round effects. Now, is the second-round effect because of home grown inflation or is it

 because of the Middle East conflict?
Michele Bullock
So we might get into semantics about what’s first-round and what’s second-round and so on.

 So let’s just be clear. There’s clearly an impact on the Consumer Price Index on inflation

 from fuel prices. That’s number one. Then there’s the extent to which some of these other

 prices, fertilisers is another one you hear quite a lot about, feeds into the cost bases of –

 and fuel – feeds into the cost bases of businesses and they pass the costs on. Now, that could

 be it. In which case we’ve just reached a new high level of prices and if inflation expectations

 stay low and stable then we’ll go back to, basically, inflation more in the two to three, sort

 of, which is what we’re aiming at. I think what central banks are watching for is not

 necessarily that the cost – yes, you would expect to see the costs being passed through and

 that’s second-round –but I think more what they’re talking about, what they’re

 watching for is: are there other implications once that’s occurred, is that mindset getting set

 further into inflation expectations? I think that’s the worry that most central banks have. So

 when we say we look through it, we can look through the initial impact. The indirect impact, if you

 like, on the costs of other businesses. And then we’re looking for it to stop there. And any

 indications that it’s not stopping there is the worry.
Sophia Rodrigues
Just to clarify, so when you say second-round effect, do you actually mean indirect effect or -
Michele Bullock
Look, the terms get used interchangeably. There’s a first-round effect which is just the very

 direct effect of the fuel price. There’s a second-round effect which is the fuel price and other

 things feeding into costs and into there. You could call that the second-round effect. And then

 there’s the ongoing – making sure the ongoing effects are not so. I don’t know what

 the central banks are calling second-round effect. I suspect what they’re worrying about is

 making sure that there’s not ongoing impacts on inflation expectations. That’s what I

 suspect. But I think you’d be wrong, as I said earlier, to expect that businesses would not look

 to pass on some of the costs of doing business. Otherwise, if they can’t, then what’s going

 to happen to the businesses? Then you will end up in a recession.
Sophia Rodrigues
Thank you.
Millie Muroi
Hi Governor, Millie Muroi from the Sydney Morning Herald and The Age. The latest decision was not

 quite unanimous at eight to one for a rate hike. Can you outline some of the arguments made by the

 person who argued to hold and how any of the arguments might have influenced your thinking or the

 thinking of the Board?
Michele Bullock
So, it wasn’t just one person that made – we all considered all of the arguments. I think

 what was the difference for the one was that they put more weight on the risks that the oil shock was

 going to have a big impact on demand. They were less convinced that we had excess demand, as much

 excess demand as we thought, and they therefore were of the view that the inflationary risks –

 and we’d already increased twice – therefore they weren’t quite as concerned about

 the inflation risk. Everyone was thinking about that. We were all thinking also and discussing,

 what’s the potential implications for demand of this shock. We’ve seen a big drop in

 confidence, consumer confidence, business confidence. Is that going to have an impact over and above

 what we might have thought, according to history, on the way people and consumers and business are

 investing? And so I would say that what it was a matter of, for the one versus the eight, was the one

 sort of put more weight on those downside scenarios, those downside risks and worries, than the

 others. But having said that I think it’s also true that those who voted for a rise were also of

 the view that this, as I said earlier, this puts us now in a good space to just observe now

 what’s going to happen with the war and what’s going to happen with prices and with

 employment.
Cecile Lefort
Governor, Cecile Lefort from The Financial Review. The last time the cash rate was at

 4.35 per cent was two to three years ago. At that time the unemployment rate was a bit

 lower but the inflation rate was at 5.2 per cent. Is the inflation problem really as bad

 now as it was then?
Michele Bullock
Well, there’s a few things going on here. So I would say that what we’ve observed prior to

 the conflict was, in fact, that inflation was persistent. It was sitting above 3 per cent,

 3 point something and it didn’t look like it was going to be coming down to target very

 quickly. At the other end of the spectrum the cash rate isn’t the only determinant of how

 restrictive monetary policy is. Financial conditions more broadly are what influences demand. And I

 think what we’d observed was that for a similar cash rate, financial conditions weren’t

 quite as tight as they might have been in the past. There was a few things going on. I think

 we’ve highlighted in the past that margins on loans were narrower. So for a given cash rate you

 got looser financial conditions. There was certainly world financial conditions - risk premia were

 very low. Everyone seems very confident, I don’t know why. So it’s not just the level of

 the cash rate that’s the issue. It’s the financial conditions around it. The other thing

 that’s really important is that credit conditions seem very, very plentiful. There’s no

 problem getting loans from the banks. Credit is increasing quite strongly. More strongly than

 average. So there were signs that even though we’d lowered interest rates that, in fact, what we

 thought might have been restrictive it turned out maybe it wasn’t quite as restrictive as we

 thought. So I guess that’s a long way of saying that you can’t just say 4.35 then

 equals 4.35 now. Even if you look at our neutral rate estimates, and you’ll see that in the
Statement
, the neutral rate estimates have arisen a bit now. We’re not slavish to

 the neutral rate estimates but it’s just suggestive that 4.35 now might not be quite as

 restrictive as we thought it was back then, when it was 4.35 the first time.
Emilia Terzon
Emilia Terzon from the ABC. Many Australians right now feel like they’re being whacked on many

 fronts. We have petrol going up. We have supermarkets warning of higher food prices to come and now

 people’s mortgages will be going up today as a result of this. We just had someone comment to us

 that today’s rate rise means I’m skipping more meals to feed my kids. Is there a better way

 to deal with, largely oil shock-driven inflation than doing this to people?
Michele Bullock
So we’re not dealing - as I said earlier, the oil shock is not the sole reason why we are - we

 had an inflation problem before this. People often say to me, you must have a - well, you must have a

 better thing than the interest rate, we don’t. It’s all we have. And we know that it

 affects different people differently. We know that. But it’s the only thing we have to address

 inflation. And the more important thing in that comment was about the rising costs of all those

 things. That’s why we have to stop this happening. We have to stop inflation because that’s

 - yes, the mortgage cost is hurting them but it’s all those other things that are hurting

 people. The rise in prices of groceries, the rise in prices in fuel, all those sorts of things are

 hurting people. We’ve got to get the inflation rate down.
Emilia Terzon
As you’ve just acknowledged there you have that one tool. Is there another tool you could be

 given to deal with this?
Michele Bullock
Well, I’m not sure what that tool is. Fiscal policy has lots of tools, in a sense. Fiscal policy

 has many more things that it can do. But it has to be careful, I guess, in the sense that it needs to

 be targeting where it’s most needed. It can’t just - we talked about earlier we can’t

 just go out there and just add to demand. The interest rate is the tool that we’ve got.

 It’s blunt. It does affect people in different ways. But it’s the best way we’ve got

 of controlling inflation and that’s ultimately what we have to do.
Michael Pascoe
Michael Pascoe, Michael West Media. Governor, the SMP notes that business liaison as always says the

 labour market is a bit tight as the Reserve Bank tends to always say too. The
Statement
notes that unemployment 4.3 per cent. Broadly stable for the past year and quote low by

 historical standards. I’m wondering where the Bank draws the line between modern and ancient

 history? That unemployment has been around 4 per cent for going on five years now. Four and

 a half, will be five by the forecast. Isn’t unemployment around 4 per cent now the

 standard, and shouldn’t that have implications for what the Bank views as trends in the labour

 market, instead of continuing to think that, oh, this is low?
Michele Bullock
Well, I would hope that we can continue to have an unemployment rate in the 4’s. I think that

 would be - certainly back prior to COVID it was more in the 5’s and so when we got the

 unemployment rate down, particularly coming out of COVID, it was at 3.5 at one point. It was too

 tight then. And I don’t know. Anecdotally you’d walk around and there’d be restaurants

 and cafes that couldn’t get staff. Agriculture couldn’t get people to do their pickings. So

 there was shortages. The labour market was strained. I would hope we can still keep an unemployment

 rate in the 4’s. That is my hope. But ultimately we don’t control what the full employment

 number is. We can’t control that. We can only basically set monetary policy to keep inflation

 low and stable. That will hopefully mean that businesses have room to plan, not worry about

 inflation, makes it conducive to hire people, to invest. That’s what we can do to contribute to

 it. You can’t have low and full employment if you don’t have low and stable inflation. They

 just don’t go together in the long run.
Michael Pascoe
So if the forecast comes true and unemployment does go up to 4.7 per cent, that would be

 considered too high?
Michele Bullock
No, I’m not saying it’s too high. I’m saying that what we need is some slowing in

 demand at the moment to bring demand back into line with supply. We’ve got a supply problem.

 We’ve got hardly any productivity growth and until we can address that the bottom line is that

 we can’t get substantial growth in the economy without running out against capacity problems.

 And that also means that, just as an aside, that real wages can’t grow by very much as well.
John Kehoe
Thank you, Governor. John Kehoe from the Australian Financial Review and just picking up on that wages

 theme, your
Statement on Monetary Policy
, the 70 page document you released notes

 that in the business liaison program the RBA has done that businesses expect higher wage demands and

 potentially to be passed on as a result of workers responding to the higher headline inflation. Do

 you have a view whether businesses, governments who employ a lot of people, and also unions who make

 these demands, should or could be requesting for broad, above inflation wage increases at this time?

 Can the economy sustain that and cope with that?
Michele Bullock
So two points, I suppose. The first is, yes, I fully expect that people will try to make up their

 wages, real wages, the hit they’ve taken from inflation by asking for higher wages. The extent

 to which they can achieve them depends on the tightness of the labour market. So it depends on how

 much bargaining power they have and to the extent that we think the labour market is still a bit

 tight, there probably will be some success there. The only point I would make though is that as I

 said earlier, this shock from the conflict is a shock, it makes us poorer. It does affect the income

 of Australian people. Real income of Australian people. So I fully expect that that’s what will

 happen but what I don’t want is for it to become engrained in expectations going forward.

 Interestingly when we had the big inflation after COVID, what you saw was that real wages actually

 didn’t maintain. People got wage rises higher than they were getting but they weren’t

 keeping pace with inflation. So there were cuts in real income. And the other thing that was actually

 good about it - well, good in an expectations sense, was that to the extent that there were EBAs at

 the time, enterprise bargaining over, say, two and three years, you typically saw a larger increase

 in the first year and then smaller increases in the second and third year. So that was sort of

 positive because it showed that people were accepting that, yes, it’s probably not going to go

 on like this so I probably don’t need to have 5 per cent increases for the next five

 years. What worries me is that this is the second shock of this nature in so many years and they

 might not think quite the same this time. So that worries me, and with a tight labour market

 it’s possible that that will therefore be - that will be the outcome. That you will end up with

 higher wage increases and that will feed through into businesses and businesses think, well,

 that’s now the norm. That’s the inflation worry that - inflation expectations worry that I

 have. I’m not saying that’s happening. But that is a risk.
Thomas Henry
Thanks, Governor. Thomas Henry from the Australian. Both the baseline and the two adverse scenarios

 modelled by the Bank assume that supply of imported fuel products will continue to meet demand and

 still the growth forecasts look pretty bleak. How bad could economic conditions get should shortages

 hit Australia and should rationing be required?
Michele Bullock
Well, yes, it’s a very pertinent question and it could get very bad. I don’t know

 practically how that would be dealt with. But if that were to happen I think we’re in a very

 different world and we’d be looking very differently at the way things are panning out in the

 economy. That’s not what we’re seeing happening at the moment and it’s not the central

 expectations but if that event happened, we’re in a very different world and I think the Board

 would be looking very differently at things.
Thank you.
