BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Inflation and the Impact of the Middle East Conflict
DATE: 19/05/2026
SPEAKER: Sarah Hunter
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2026/sp-ag-2026-05-19.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Inflation and the Impact of the Middle East Conflict
Sarah Hunter
*
Assistant Governor (Economic)
Bloomberg Forum for Investment Managers
19 May 2026
–
Sydney
Audio
32MB
Q&A Transcript
Watch video: Speech delivered by Sarah Hunter, Assistant Governor (Economic), Bloomberg Forum for Investment Managers, Sydney
Introduction
Before I begin, I would like to acknowledge the Gadigal people, the Traditional Custodians of the land on

 which we are meeting today. We are very lucky in Australia that our First Nations people protect our land

 and culture to hand down to future generations, and I would like to pay my respects to Elders past and

 present and extend that respect to any First Nations people here with us today.
Today I’m going to talk about inflation and how the RBA has used our frameworks to think about the

 outlook in the context of the current Iran conflict.
What do we mean by inflation?
Let me start by clarifying what the RBA’s price stability objective means – and what it

 doesn’t. To be quite specific, the goal is to achieve
average
prices growth across a

 broad range of goods and services – that is, the CPI – of between
2–3 per cent
per year.
1
At any point in time, the price for a particular good or

 service might be rising faster or slower than others (Graph 1). But we are focused on what is

 happening, on average, across all goods and services in our economy.
This matters because factors outside a central bank’s control can shift the price of a good, or a

 small group of goods, relative to the rest. Examples include increases in the global price of oil, as we

 are experiencing now, or the long-run fall in the price of electronics; on a like-for-like basis,

 computers today are much cheaper than they were 10 or 20 years ago.
Monetary policy won’t target such relative price changes. Rather, our focus is making sure that these

 narrow, relative price changes don’t spread into sustained broader price changes pushing inflation

 consistently above or below our target.
2
Graph 1
How do we think about inflation?
When we think about the outlook for inflation, it’s important to have a clear framework for what

 drives prices.
3
This helps us understand how different economic conditions will show up in inflation.
Intuitively, in most of our frameworks, the key driver of what happens to prices is what happens to

 firms’ costs, which in turn reflects broader economic conditions.
4
But it’s hard to directly

 measure firms’ costs across the entire economy. So our models and frameworks generally capture the

 drivers of costs indirectly. In doing so, we tend to focus on two drivers: the extent of capacity

 pressures in the domestic economy, and other costs related to supply conditions, like import prices.
Domestic cost pressures
Domestic cost pressures include things like wages, rents, intermediate inputs and other costs that mainly

 reflect the balance of supply and demand in the domestic economy. In our frameworks, we capture domestic

 cost pressures using measures of spare capacity, such as the unemployment or output gap. These measures

 attempt to capture the extent to which aggregate demand is above or below the economy’s productive

 capacity. When activity outstrips capacity for a time, costs tend to increase as everyone is competing

 for the economy’s scarce resources. When this happens, monetary policy can bring inflation back to

 target by slowing demand momentum to bring it back into balance with the economy’s productive

 capacity – there is no trade-off between achieving sustainable full-employment and stable

 inflation.
5
This chart illustrates this point (Graph 2). It plots a measure of spare capacity, the labour

 underutilisation rate, against inflation – this depiction is often referred to as the Phillips

 Curve.
6
When the

 labour market is tight and the economy is operating beyond its productive capacity (i.e. a low

 underutilisation rate), inflation tends to be higher. This pick-up in inflation can be quite sharp when

 the labour market becomes very tight, and this non-linearity is something I’ll return to a bit

 later, and the RBA’s Deputy Governor will discuss in more detail in June.
Graph 2
Incorporating external costs
Not all cost pressures reflect domestic cost pressures. Businesses can also face higher costs if the price

 of imports rise, or if other factors disrupt production. In this case, inflation will be higher for any

 given level of spare capacity in the domestic economy. Economists typically refer to these as external

 supply shocks. Our standard models and frameworks try to capture these shocks by including the cost of

 imports, or other factors specific to the shock.
Increases in oil prices are a natural example. These directly increase costs for firms and households in

 the form of fuel and other refined oil products; in the CPI, spending on fuel for our cars is around

 3½ per cent of the total basket. They also have indirect effects, because fuel is used in the

 production and transport of other goods and services that firms use and consumers buy.
Pass-through of costs to prices and the role of expectations
In addition to the shock itself, a key question is how much of the cost shock will be passed through by

 firms to the prices of those other goods and services. The timing and extent of this pass-through is

 always uncertain. On average across history, estimated pass-through is typically gradual. Similarly, the

 recent Macquarie Business Outlook Scenario (BOSS) survey suggested that factors like long-term sale price

 contracts and the potentially temporary nature of the oil price increase may lessen pass-through into

 prices.
7
However, the starting point for the economy can matter. Recent research has shown that conditions in the

 economy affect the speed and size of pass-through of cost shocks. When capacity is constrained and

 inflation is already elevated, firms are more willing to adjust their prices, so the inflationary impulse

 is passed on more quickly and more fully.
8
Estimates from RBA research released today suggests that

 this type of dynamic accounted for between ½ and 1¼ percentage points of the pick-up in

 inflation observed in Australia over 2022 and 2023 (Graph 3).
9
Graph 3
And it’s not just current costs that matter, because firms tend to avoid changing their prices too

 frequently. This reflects the effort and cost it takes to change prices, like printing new price tags,

 long-term contracts, such as rental agreements, and other factors. The same RBA research I mentioned

 before found that in non-food retail (and outside sale periods), only around 10 per cent of

 prices change each month (Graph 4).
10
In most cases, it’s impossible or costly for

 firms to change prices every time input costs change. This means that they’ll try to account for

 future expected costs when setting prices today.
Graph 4
This highlights why it’s so important to keep expectations for future cost and price increases, and

 so inflation, anchored (Graph 5). If businesses and households expect high future inflation, this

 can become a self-fulfilling prophecy as these expectations get baked into contracts for goods, services

 and wages.
Central banks have long reiterated the importance of managing inflation expectations and the need for

 monetary policy to keep them anchored. If a supply shock leads to an increase in expectations, this can

 give rise to larger second round effects. This risk becomes more acute if medium-term inflation

 expectations begin to rise and are incorporated into longer-term decisions today.
Graph 5
Moreover, if expectations rise persistently, it becomes harder for the central bank to bring inflation

 back to target, as it must both bring expectations back down and restore the balance between supply and

 demand. Doing so may require a more substantial slowing of economic activity, as we saw during the early

 1990s recession (Graph 6). So it’s crucial for central banks to keep inflation expectations

 anchored around the inflation target.
Graph 6
How can we use this framework to think about the current outlook?
So with that framework in mind, how are we thinking about the outlook, including the impact of the

 conflict in the Middle East?
The starting point for Australia’s economy is that inflation was already above target before the

 conflict began, and we think domestic cost pressures partly explain this. A range of indicators point to

 conditions being tight in early 2026, including both the share of firms reporting labour constraints and

 non-mining capacity utilisation being above their historical average.
Our frameworks for modelling inflation that I discussed earlier indicate that capacity pressures have

 continued to put upward pressure on inflation. Prior to the conflict, growth in activity was expected to

 slow over 2026 and remain subdued in 2027, reflecting tighter financial conditions and the waning boost

 from factors that have supported growth recently. All else being equal, this easing in capacity pressures

 was expected to help bring inflation back down towards target.
But all else is not equal. The Middle East conflict is a clear external shock. While the duration of the

 conflict is uncertain, economists generally agree that the disruption in global oil and natural gas

 markets will lead to higher inflation here and overseas, working through several channels.
11
First, the increase in the cost of filling our cars with fuel is flowing
directly
through to

 higher headline inflation in Australia (and globally). Australian petrol prices rose by

 36 per cent at their peak, though they’ve fallen back in recent weeks reflecting both

 domestic lower refined oil prices and excise changes (Graph 7). Diesel prices rose by even more, and

 remain well above pre-conflict levels.
Graph 7
Largely via these direct effects, our May forecasts see headline inflation peaking at

 4.8 per cent in the June quarter, significantly higher than was expected in our February

 forecasts (Graph 8).
Graph 8
Second, higher fuel prices are also going to influence prices
indirectly
. Domestically, fuel

 accounts for around 2 to 2½ per cent of the cost of producing and distributing other goods

 and services in the CPI (Graph 9). Components that are more exposed to fuel prices include travel,

 transport and postal services, some groceries items and new dwelling construction. In addition, oil is

 also an input in global supply chains and will influence imported goods prices. For example, oil and gas

 are used in the manufacture of fertilisers and plastics, and the cost of these goods has started to rise.
Graph 9
Returning to the earlier framework I outlined, the effect of these input costs on the prices faced by

 consumers will depend on the degree to which firms pass cost increases on, the timing of when firms

 review their prices, and firms’ expectations for future costs and prices.
How quickly firms pass through higher costs is a key assumption embedded in our forecast – and we

 are assuming that this will occur relatively quickly, given the economy is already somewhat capacity

 constrained. Reports from our liaison program suggest that some firms have responded already, with fuel

 surcharges raised by firms at the start of supply chains that flow into a broad set of industries.

 Expectations for pass-through to consumer prices vary, but we are hearing from some firms that they plan

 to increase their retail prices. For example, some construction firms – who have been relatively

 highly exposed to transport and oil-derived raw materials cost increases – are reviewing prices for

 new contracts. This is particularly the case in regions where demand is still growing strongly and supply

 capacity is constrained, consistent with the findings of our recent research.
12
Putting this all together, our forecast for underlying inflation has been revised higher in the near term

 (Graph 10). The shock to oil prices puts upward pressure on inflation over the next year,

 contributing around 0.4 percentage points to underlying inflation in the March quarter 2027.

 Underlying inflation then eases, and headline inflation falls due to declines in oil and travel prices.
Graph 10
This baseline reflects several assumptions. First, the conflict in the Middle East gets resolved soon,

 causing some fallback in oil prices. Second, domestic capacity pressures in the economy ease. This is

 partly driven by the impact of higher prices on households’ budgets and spending; the increase in

 oil prices has made households poorer in real terms, and we expect this to weigh on household spending.

 It is also linked to the assumed cash rate increases, which help to further rebalance supply and demand

 in the economy. Altogether, this supports a decline in inflation to the middle of the target band by

 early 2028.
Risks to the outlook
While this is our central case, significant uncertainties remain.
Oil prices could stay elevated for longer than implied by market pricing, and the Iran conflict could lead

 to broader, more persistent supply disruptions, adding to inflation. Cost pass-through may also be

 stronger than assumed, and higher fuel prices could lift and embed higher inflation expectations, which

 RBA research shows are particularly sensitive to fuel, perpetuating the inflationary shock.
13
But inflation may be lower if households and businesses cut back on consumption and investment by more

 than we anticipate in response to cost-of-living pressures and uncertainty. And individuals may try to

 work more, increasing the economy’s productive capacity, as we observed over the post-pandemic

 inflation and hiking cycle.
14
Conclusion
At its recent meeting, the Monetary Policy Board weighed up pre-existing domestic conditions, the impact

 of the higher oil prices and the likelihood of the risks I noted materialising. The recent rise in oil

 prices is particularly challenging to navigate. Higher oil prices mean higher costs and higher consumer

 prices in the near term – that is a given. But this shock has come against a backdrop of elevated

 capacity constraints and domestic cost pressures. Given these starting conditions, our research suggests

 pass-through will be faster and more extensive, and the risk of inflation expectations drifting higher is

 elevated. On balance, the Board decided to raise the cash rate to 4.35 per cent, noting that

 they will remain attentive to the data and evolving assessment of the outlook and risks to the economy.
Endnotes
*
I would like to acknowledge and thank Michelle Bergmann,

 Fiona Georgiakakis, Jonathan Hambur and Kevin Lane who substantially contributed to the

 drafting of this speech. I would also like to thank Nicholas Dwyer, Samuel Evangelinos, Andrew Hauser,

 Suzanne Houweling, Brad Jones, Chris Kent and Michelle Wright for their comments on the

 speech. Any errors or omissions are my own. For data sourced from the Australian Bureau of

 Statistics BLADE database, see
BLADE Disclaimer

 Notice
.
1
The particular measure we target is the Consumer

 Price Index (CPI), which captures a basket of goods and services that households purchase. For

 more information on the CPI, see RBA (2025), ‘
Inflation and its

 Measurement
’, Explainer; RBA (2025), ‘
Australia’s

 Inflation Target
’, Explainer.
2
The RBA, of course, has a dual mandate, with the

 second being to maintain full employment.
3
For a more detailed discussion of our frameworks and

 models, see Cassidy N, E Rankin, M Read and C Seibold (2019), ‘
Explaining

 Low Inflation Using Models
’, RBA
Bulletin
, June.
4
We tend to think of prices as a firms’ costs

 plus a margin that firms charge. While these margins can vary over time, the key driver of

 inflation most of the time is going to be changes in costs, which in turn reflect economic

 conditions. For a broader discussion, see Davis K, J Hambur, K Lane, D Megow, S Rafter and H

 Sullivan (2026), ‘Margins, Mark-ups and Consumer Prices: Theory, Measurement and

 Implications’, forthcoming RBA
Bulletin
, May.
5
For a deeper discussion, see Bullock M (2025),

 ‘
The RBA’s Dual Mandate –

 Inflation and Employment
’, Speech at the Anika Foundation Fundraising Lunch,

 24 July.
6
The hours-based measure of underutilisation is the

 sum of hours of work sought by unemployed people and additional hours of work actively sought by

 underemployed workers, as a share of total hours worked and actively sought.
7
The April BOSS survey included a special module

 designed in collaboration with the RBA, to explore the effects of the conflict in the Middle

 East.
8
For some international evidence, see, for example,

 Cavallo A, F Lipp and K Miyahara (2024), ‘Large Shocks Travel Fast’,
American

 Economic Review: Insights
, 6(4), pp
558–574
.
9
Fink M and J Hambur (2026), ‘
Shifts in

 Australian Price-setting Behaviour Around Large Shocks
’, RBA Research Discussion Paper No

 2026-02.
10
Fink and Hambur, n 9.
11
RBA (2026), ‘
Chapter 3: Outlook
’,
Statement on Monetary Policy
, May
.
12
Fink and Hambur, n 9.
13
See Brassil A, Y Haidari, J Hambur, G Nolan and C

 Ryan (2024), ‘
How do Households Form Inflation and

 Wage Expectations?
’, RBA Research Discussion Paper No 2024-07. This combines

 Australian household survey data with the framework in Brassil A, C Gibbs and C Ryan (2025),

 ‘
Boundedly Rational Expectations and the Optimality of Flexible Average Inflation Targeting
’,

 RBA Research Discussion Paper No

 2025-02. These findings are in line with overseas evidence, such as Coibion O and Y Gorodnichenko

 (2015), ‘Is the Phillips Curve Alive and Well After All? Inflation Expectations and the

 Missing Deflation’,
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics
, 7(1), pp
197–232
. Consistent with the findings of these studies,

 we’ve seen short-term inflation expectations increase recently. See, for example, Melbourne

 Institute CASIE and Macquarie BOSS surveys for households and businesses, respectively.
14
See Das M, J Hambur, KP Hellwig and JA Spray

 (2026), ‘Labour Supply Effects of Monetary Policy: Evidence from Australian Mortgage

 Holders’, IMF Working Paper No WP/
26/71
.
Underlying data
This file contains all
underlying data
that are available for public release.
Some graphs in this speech were generated using Mathematica.
