BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: On the Safe-haven Status of the US Dollar
DATE: 07/03/2026
SPEAKER: Andrew Hauser
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2026/sp-dg-2026-03-07.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Panel participation
On the Safe-haven Status of the US Dollar
Andrew Hauser
*
Deputy Governor
2026 US Monetary Policy Forum
7 March 2026
(
6 March 2026, 1.30 pm EST
)
–
New York
The phrase ‘safe haven’ – or safe
harbour
in Old Norse – conjures up

 images of a peaceful idyll, far from the wilds of the open seas, furnishing comfort and replenishment for

 the weary sailor. But the reality can be rather different – as Captain Cook found when, heading

 home at the end of his famous voyage in 1770, he grounded his ship
HMS Endeavour
on the

 Great Barrier Reef (Slide 2).
1
In mortal danger, the crew found a promising river

 estuary – known as Waalumbaal Birri by the local Guugu Yimidhirr people – in which to conduct

 repairs. But the winds were so fierce, and the water so crocodile-infested, that it took them another

 week to stagger far enough inland to beach their leaking boat on a mudbank.
2
Defining a safe haven asset can be equally challenging.
Market participants typically identify three main characteristics of such assets (Slide 3): security

 (minimal credit risk); an inverse correlation with the value of risky assets; and liquidity. Those

 characteristics are said to flow, in turn, from a raft of more fundamental drivers including: economic

 stability; strong institutions; open markets for goods, services and capital; and deep financial

 markets.
3
The relative weight placed on these considerations varies across time, and by investor mandate. But if

 anything could have been said to meet these tests in recent decades, it is surely the US dollar.

 Whether that status may now be under threat is a topic of lively discussion, in Australia and beyond. But

 what does the evidence show?
Let’s start with security – something all investors need (Graph 1). The cost of insuring

 against a US default
did
pick up either side of ‘Liberation Day’ in April 2025,

 and again to a lesser degree around the government shutdown. Moody’s also cut their US credit rating

 from AAA in May 2025. But this only brought them into line with other rating agencies
4
– and

 sovereign CDS spreads, though an imperfect proxy, have since fallen back to their longer term average. So

 there is little sign yet of a
persistent
decline in perceived security.
Graph 1
The dollar’s hedging properties matter most to return-seeking investors. The US dollar has

 obviously not played what some claim to be its ‘usual’ role in key periods over the past
12–18
months – depreciating, rather than appreciating, in the face

 of widespread uncertainty over US policy, and a sharp fall in equity prices last April.
But in truth, the dollar has
never
been a perfect hedge for all risk-off events, appreciating

 most persistently during periods of funding stress associated with strong demand for the currency (Graph

 2 and Table 1).
5
As such,

 fund managers have long understood that the
optimal
currency hedge for US equity holdings

 switches frequently between dollar, yen, Swiss franc and other currencies, depending on the shock (Graph

 3).
6
So while the

 events of 2025
could
be a sign that things have changed, what we saw was far from unique. It

 is surely noteworthy that the dollar
did
appreciate following the recent attacks on Iran.
Graph 2
Table 1: US dollar safe-haven correlations
Event
USD as a safe-haven hedge
Great Financial Crisis (2008-2009)
Yes
European sovereign debt crisis (2011)
Yes
COVID-19 (March 2020)
Yes
Russia-Ukraine war (2022)
Yes
Iraq war (2003)
No
September 11 attacks (2001)
No
April 2025 tariff announcements
No
Graph 3
The feature that matters most for many, including us central bank reserves managers, is liquidity. The

 pre-eminent role of the US dollar in cross-border payments and invoicing, banking claims and debt

 issuance
7
has

 long allowed US sovereign assets to command a liquidity premium (or ‘convenience yield’). On

 some measures, that ‘specialness’ deteriorated in 2025 compared with earlier years, leading

 some commentators to make the eye-catching claim that it may presage the end of the dollar as a reserve

 currency.
8
Here too it is worth keeping our feet on the ground. The convenience yield is a slippery concept to

 measure – but neither of the proxies shown on Graph 4 suggest anything particularly dramatic

 happened last year relative to the longer term trends, which had been suggesting a declining

 ‘specialness’ for some years. Nonetheless, as a matter of sheer scale, US fx and treasuries

 remain
by far
the most liquid of the ‘traditional’ safe haven markets (Graph 5).

 The covid experience caused some to pose questions about the capacity of the US treasury market to trade

 efficiently through periods of extreme stress.
9
But the market weathered recent turbulence well,

 bolstered by confidence in the growing array of liquidity tools available from the Federal Reserve,

 including the Standing Repo Facility, the Discount Window, the Foreign and International Monetary

 Authorities (FIMA) repo facility and the standing swap lines.
Graph 4
Graph 5
Having summarised how the dollar’s safe haven characteristics have (or haven’t) changed,

 let’s look now at how market participants have responded.
In aggregate, official reserves
have
diversified away from the US dollar, principally

 towards gold and ‘non-traditional’ currencies, according to International Monetary Fund (IMF)

 data (Graph 6).
10
And reserve managers told last year’s OMFIF

 survey that that diversification could go further in the near term (Table 2), reporting geopolitics to

 be their top long-term investment challenge.
11
Graph 6
Table 2: OMFIF survey: reserve managers' plan for currency exposure
*
% of respondents
Increase
Maintain
Decrease
EUR
23
+6
70
−3
7
−3
RMB
20
+7
73
−2
7
−5
JPY
11
+8
88
−2
2
−5
AUD
9
+6
89
−6
2
0
CAD
7
+7
91
−9
2
+2
GBP
13
+8
79
−9
8
+1
USD
20
−9
64
+4
16
+5
CHF
4
+4
95
−3
2
0
* Over the next 12–24 months; brackets indicate change from last survey.
Source: Sanghani, N, A Sharan, A Correa and Y Aziz (2025), Global Public Investors Survey, OMFIF.
But once again these are pretty glacial moves (Slide 11). The dollar remains close to half of all

 reserves, similar to, or even a little higher, than in the early 1990s. Reserves managers still identify

 it as by far the safest and most liquid of the major currencies, according to the OMFIF survey. And there

 are a whole range of drivers behind the aggregate decline that do not reflect investment-based decisions

 to diversify out of dollars, including: growth in reserves pools that are structurally biased towards

 other currencies; decisions by some countries to shift part of their reserves pools to sovereign wealth

 funds, state or policy banks; a forced response to sanctions; and valuation effects.
12
An unknown

 amount of non-US dollar currency holdings may also be swapped back to dollars.
Indeed, despite all the press stories and commentary about foreigners withdrawing capital from the United

 States and seeking alternative homes elsewhere (including Australia), the data show that they remain

 large buyers of US assets in net terms (Graph 7). Meanwhile, capital flows into Australia have so far

 remained broadly similar to those seen in earlier years. (Graph 8)
Graph 7
Graph 8
There has been one important change, however. Predominantly all the pick-up in portfolio capital inflows

 into the United States over the past year reflects purchases of equity rather than debt (Graph 9).

 And the huge valuation gains in US equity prices relative to debt in recent years have

 dramatically changed the composition of US external liabilities, expressed as a share of nominal GDP

 (Graph 10).
Graph 9
Graph 10
This shift towards equity has at least two important implications.
First, it means foreign investors, particularly in the private sector, may be keener to protect

 themselves against signs of possible breakdown in what (rightly or wrongly) they see as the

 dollar’s historical risk-off properties. It is hard to know how far this has so far gone,

 because comprehensive data are not available. But some countries’ pension funds, including in

 Denmark – the country of my fellow panellist – have reported increasing their hedge

 ratios in 2025. Even Australian superannuation funds (which have historically relied heavily on the

 Australian dollar’s inherent risk-
on
properties) have increased their cover very

 slightly (Graph 11), with some funds saying they are likely to go further.
13
In as

 well-reported analytical piece, Deutsche Bank identified a parallel pivot from unhedged to hedged ETF

 inflows in 2025.
14
Ironically, of course, the very act of increasing

 hedges may have played some part in driving the dollar down at times last year.
15
Graph 11
Second, the shift to equity suggests at least the possibility that we might be moving on from the

 world of ‘exorbitant privilege’, in which the United States was able to run a persistent

 current account deficit without running up a particularly large negative Net International Investment

 Position (NIIP). The valuation differentials that enabled this – short low-yielding domestic

 debt, long high-yielding overseas equities
16
– have more recently run into reverse,

 contributing to a significant fall in the US NIIP (Graph 12).
17
Whether NIIP is a robust

 indicator of a currency’s safe haven status is of course a hotly debated topic.
18
But the

 role of the dollar and the future path of this variable seem likely to remain intimately linked.
Graph 12
Before closing, I want to leave you with two reflections from the United Kingdom, my country of birth.
The first is that even a temporary collapse in confidence in a safe haven asset, if significant in size,

 can leave lasting scars. In October 2022, the Bank of England was able to staunch a run on gilts caused

 by weaknesses in the business models of the Liability-Driven Investment (LDI) sector through a temporary

 and targeted liquidity intervention. But the cost of this crisis was a borrowing cost premium that

 arguably persists to this day (Graph 13).
Graph 13
The second is more of a reflection on time. For a century, or thereabouts, the pound sterling was the

 dominant global currency (Graph 14).
19
It is often thought that the dollar took over

 decisively following the Second World War, as an impoverished United Kingdom passed the mantle to a

 resurgent United States at Bretton Woods. But as Barry Eichengreen has reminded us, the truth is messier:

 the dollar first overtook sterling as the leading reserve currency in the mid-1920s, but it lost that

 status again following the devaluation of 1933. For much of the inter-war period, the two vied for

 supremacy – and gold too played a key, if not always helpful, role.
20
The lesson of this period, if

 there is one, is that change may come, not with a bang, but by degree, and with switchbacks along the

 way. None of the developments I have covered today – the temporary fluctuations in default

 probability, the shifts in correlations, the decline in the convenience yield, the shift in official

 reserves, or the patchy pick-up in hedging – are anything like as dramatic as some of the headlines

 would imply. But whether, like Captain Cook’s quest for safe harbour, they lead us ultimately back

 to safety, or leave us stuck on the Barrier Reef, remains to be seen.
Graph 14
With that, I look forward to our discussions today.
Endnotes
*
I am deeply grateful

 to George Tyler for his expert assistance in preparing these remarks, the slides and the analysis

 that underpins them. I also thank Susan Black, Jason Griffin, Jacob Harris, Jarkko Jaaskela,

 David Jacobs, Brad Jones, Jeremy Lawson, Jahan Mand, Tom van Florenstein Mulder and Morgan

 Spearritt for their comments and suggestions on an earlier draft.
1
References are to the

 accompanying
slide pack
.
2
See, for instance,

 ‘Captain Cook’s Epic Voyage: The Strange Quest for a Missing Continent’ by

 Geoffrey Blainey. The image of HMS Endeavour on Slide 2 is from National Museum of

 Australia, ‘A view of the Endeavour River on the coast of New Holland, by Ignaz Sebastian

 Klauber, 1795’, Australia’s Defining Moments Digital Classroom.
3
Although these

 foundations may seem somewhat obvious, researchers have struggled to find reliable empirical

 evidence to support them. One of the few that does appears to be a country’s net overseas

 asset position, a point I return to at the end of these remarks.
4
S&P cut from AAA

 in 2011, and Fitch in 2023.
5
Adolfsen JF, AM

 Grønlund and T Harr (2026), ‘The US Dollar: Not a Traditional Safe Haven’, CEPR,

 29 January
6
I am grateful to

 Stuart Simmons, head of Multi-Asset Solutions at Australia’s QIC, for the idea behind this

 ‘quilt’.
7
See Bertaut C, B von

 Beschwitz and S Curcuru (2025), ‘The International Role of the U.S. Dollar – 2025

 Edition’, FEDS Notes, 18 July.
8
See, for instance,

 Jiang Z, A Krishnamurthy, H Lustig and RJ Richmond (2026), ‘Dollar Erosion: Understanding

 the Loss of Reserve Currency Status’, 12 January; Atkeson A, J Heathcote and F Perri

 (2025), ‘The End of Privilege: A Reexamination of the Net Foreign Asset Position of the

 United States’,
American Economic Review
, 115(7), pp
2151–2206
; Acharya VV and Laarits T (2025), ‘Tariff War

 Shock and the Convenience Yield of US Treasuries – A Hedging Perspective’, December;

 Du W, R Keerati and J Schreger (2025), ‘Decoupling Dollar and Treasury Privilege’,

 October.
9
See, for instance,

 Group of Thirty (2021), ‘U.S. Treasury Markets: Steps Toward Increased Resilience’,

 Working Group on Treasury Market Liquidity; Duffie D (2025), ‘How US Treasuries Can Remain

 the World’s Safe Haven’,
Journal of Economic Perspectives
, 39(2), pp
195–214
; Liang N and H Zhu (2026), ‘Clearing the Path for

 Treasury Market Resilience’, Brookings, 17 February; Kashyap AK, JC Stein, JL Wallen

 and J Younger (2025), ‘Treasury Market Dysfunction and the Role of the Central Bank’,

 Brookings Papers on Economic Activity, BPEA Conference Draft,
27–28
March.
10
IMF Data (2026),

 ‘Currency Composition of Official Foreign Exchange Reserves (COFER)’.
11
Sanghani N (2025),

 ‘Central Banks Turn to Gold over the Dollar’, OMFIF, 24 June.
12
For a fuller

 discussion of these trends, see Goldberg LS and O Hannaoui (2026), ‘Drivers of Dollar Share

 in Foreign Exchange Reserves’, NBER Working Paper 34888; Arslanalp S, B Eichengreen and C

 Simpson-Bell (2024), ‘Dollar Dominance in the International Reserve System: An Update’,

 IMF Blog, 11 June; Arslanalp S, B Eichengreen, and C Simpson-Bell (2022), ‘The Stealth

 Erosion of Dollar Dominance: Active Diversifiers and the Rise of Nontraditional Reserve

 Currencies’, IMF, WP/
22/58
, March; Douglass P, LS Goldberg and

 OZ Hannaoui (2024), ‘Taking Stock: Dollar Assets, Gold, and Official Foreign Exchange

 Reserves’, Liberty Street Economics, 29 May; European Central Bank (2025), ‘The

 International Role of the Euro’; Bertaut
et al
, n 7; Setser BW (2023),

 ‘China Isn’t Shifting Away From the Dollar or Dollar Bonds’, Council on Foreign

 Relations, 3 October.
13
Murdoch S (2026),

 ‘Major Australian Pension Fund Trimming US Dollar Exposure on Weakening Outlook’,

 Reuters, 20 January. For more on this topic, see Hauser A (2025), ‘
A Hedge Between Keeps Friendship Green: Could

 Global Fragmentation Change the Way Australian Investors Think About Currency

 Risk?
’, Remarks for a function hosted by CLS Bank International and NAB, Sydney,

 16 September.
14
Smith I and E

 Herbert, (2025), ‘Foreign Investors in US Assets Rush for Protection Against Swings in

 Dollar’,
Financial Times
, 16 September.
15
Shin HS, P

 Wooldridge and D Xia (2025), ‘US dollar’s Slide in April 2025: The Role of FX

 Hedging’, BIS
Bulletin
, No 105.
16
Famously described

 in Gourinchas P-O and H Rey (2014), ‘External Adjustment, Global Imbalances, Valuation

 Effects’, in Gopinath G, E Helpman and K Rogoff (eds),
Handbook of International

 Economics
, vol 4, North Holland, pp
585–645
.
17
See Atkeson
et al
, n 8 for a description of this shift. I am grateful to Lachlan Dynan

 (Deutsche Bank) for the idea for the chart on Slide 15.
18
One paper arguing

 in favour is Habib MM and L Stracca (2011), ‘Getting Beyond Carry Trade: What Makes a Safe

 Haven Currency?’, ECB Working Paper Series No 1288.
19
See Vicquéry R

 (2022), ‘The Rise and Fall of Global Currencies over Two Centuries’, Banque de France

 Working Paper Series No 882.
20
For a detailed

 discussion of this period, see Eichengreen B and M Flandreau (2008), ‘The Rise and Fall of

 the Dollar, or When did the Dollar Replace Sterling as the Leading Reserve Currency?’.
Underlying data
This file contains all
underlying data
that are available for public release.
Some graphs in this speech were generated using Mathematica.
