BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Monetary Policy Decision
DATE: 17/03/2026
SPEAKER: Michele Bullock
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2026/mc-gov-2026-03-17.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Media conference
Monetary Policy Decision
Michele Bullock
Governor
17 March 2026
–
Sydney
Audio
41.6MB
Watch video: Media conference held on 17 March 2026, Sydney
Transcript
Michele Bullock
Thank you for coming. Today as you know, the Board decided to raise the cash rate by

 25 basis points to 4.1 per cent. The data we’ve seen since the February meeting has

 shown that the economy grew faster than its potential growth rate over the second half of last year. The

 labour market has tightened a little recently, rather than being stable as we’d expected, and

 underlying inflation remains high. Taken together, the data suggests there is slightly more excess demand

 in the economy than we thought in February, and inflationary pressures are therefore somewhat greater.
This is before considering what higher energy prices arising from the conflict in the Middle east could

 mean for our economy. Higher petrol prices will add to inflation, but they’re not the reason for

 today’s decision. Inflation was already too high, reflecting the fact that demand is outstripping

 supply. Higher fuel costs will not slow demand enough on their own to address this. If we do not act,

 these price pressures will spread and the eventual adjustment would be harder. This all suggests that the

 risks to inflation have tilted to the upside. We must also ensure that higher inflation does not result

 in inflation expectations drifting up. Short term expectations for inflation have moved up a bit, but we

 need to ensure that this does not translate into higher inflation expectations over the longer term.

 Longer run inflation expectations will only remain anchored if people are convinced that we will take

 action to bring inflation back to target.
The Board concluded that the cash rate was not at a level consistent with returning inflation to target

 within a reasonable time frame. If the Middle East conflicts get worse or are not resolved soon, higher

 fuel costs will push inflation here even higher. There’s also a risk that global growth slows, which

 could flow onto lower growth here. But even abstracting from the global environment, domestic inflation

 remains too high and high inflation hurts all Australians. We had a very robust conversation over the

 past two days about whether we should hold until May. This would have given us an opportunity to consider

 more data on inflation and the labour market. And it would also have perhaps provided a bit more clarity

 on the potential impact of the conflict in the Middle East. But the discussion was very much centred

 around the timing of a rate increase. All members agreed that another rate increase was needed to address

 domestic inflationary pressures.
Ultimately, with inflation that is already too high, the balance of risk tilted to the upside on

 inflation. The Board decided raising the cash rate was the right call. The Board will continue to be

 guided by incoming data and what it tells us about the economy and the outlook. Thank you and I’m

 happy now to take your questions.
Patrick Commins
Thanks Governor, Patrick Commins from Guardian Australia. There was obviously a split

 decision. Five voted in favour and then four voted in favour of a hold. The statement comes across as

 quite a united, almost vision of inflation and the need to hike the interest rates. But the split

 decision would suggest that it was a lot closer run than that. Can you tell us a little bit more about

 what the arguments were in favour of holding the cash rate? Were they worried about the growth outlook

 and the ultimate impact of the global energy shock? What were the main reasons?
Michele Bullock
So I mentioned it in my opening remarks. But it’s worth mentioning again. The things

 that all the members agreed on were that inflation is too high, that there are still inflationary

 pressures from excess demand in the economy and that inflation expectations, we need to make sure

 they’re anchored. Where the difference was, was in the timing. The members that voted to hold were

 voting to hold in a hawkish sense. They were still focused on the fact that there’d probably need to

 be another rate rise. The reason for holding, I think was twofold. One was that with all the things going

 on in the Middle East, it wasn’t quite certain what was going to happen there, and it could be quick

 and it could all be resolved, or if it wasn’t, what the potential implications of that might be for

 growth in the world economy and growth in Australia. And so maybe it was prudent just to wait for another

 seven weeks, which it is to the next meeting and just see. So the uncertainty was a big thing there. The

 second thing was again some more confirmation in data from labour market and inflation in particular that

 we are where we thought we would be. It harks back a little bit to the July decision last year where we

 had a split vote you’ll remember coming down, the minority wanted to go in July and the majority

 decided to wait. Similar concept. So the issue wasn’t the direction, the issue was really the timing

 and. And it came down, I think, to different judgements. Reasonable people can differ, I think, in the

 circumstances we’re in on where the risks lie and the relative weights they put on those risks. So

 I’d say they put more weight on the uncertainty and wanting a little bit more information and

 certainty before moving, but the direction wasn’t the issue.
Lea Jurkovic
Thanks Governor Lea Jurkovic from the Australian Financial Review. Given the options seem to

 be raise rates or a hawkish hold, was there all that much debate about how much the Board will continue

 to lean on the full employment side of the mandate? And did the Board discuss their tolerance at all for

 needing to generate some spare capacity in the domestic economy to offset these repeated inflation

 shocks?
Michele Bullock
So yes, the labour market always gets a good going over and I think there’s general

 agreement that the labour market is in a much better place than we thought it was, and that the risks now

 are more on the upside for inflation than they are on the downside for employment. That doesn’t mean

 there wasn’t a good debate about it. There was. And the Board’s strategy has still not changed.

 The Board’s strategy is still to try and bring inflation back without excess employment … try

 to maintain as many of the gains as we can employment. We don’t want to see a recession or a large rise

 in unemployment if we can avoid it. That’s part of our dual mandate. So it was considered. But at

 the moment the risks just tip more to the inflation side given the position that the labour market is

 currently in.
John Rolfe
Governor John Rolfe from the Telegraph and Herald Sun. Petrol is up about $40 a tank.

 Last month the Reserve pushed up the cost of the average mortgage by about $110 a month. Another

 $110 a month now. It’s difficult to give up the commute. It’s difficult, no one wants to

 give up their mortgage. What do you suggest that households cut?
Michele Bullock
Well, let me first say John, that I understand that this is tough news for people with

 mortgages. I understand that. And the fact that petrol prices are up so substantially as well is just

 another problem. My issue though is that, and the Board’s challenge, is that if we don’t raise

 interest rates and we’re going to see second round effects coming from petrol prices and fuel

 prices, they’ll get into supply chains. Obviously it’s going to go into businesses costs and so

 on. If we don’t bring the excess demand down, then businesses are just going to build that into

 their costs. So it’s going to be even worse for everyone. So I personally cannot tell people how to

 manage their finances but I do understand that it’s going to be tough for some people and this hit

 with fuel prices and this additional rise in mortgage rates is going to be hard for some people. I do

 understand that. But it will be much worse if inflation gets built into the fibres and then we will see

 the costs of everything going up and that will be a much worse outcome.
Chris Kohler
Governor Chris Kohler from Nine News. Following on from John’s question there, do you

 think the Reserve Bank has a communication issue or is there an understanding issue among Australians?

 Because millions of them will be saying this afternoon, ok, my fuel bill has gone up the cost of

 everything’s gone up and now keeping a roof over my head in the form of mortgage or rent goes up as

 well. Are they on Board with the plan here to get inflation under control or not?
Michele Bullock
So we have tried, I think, very hard to explain why it is that we only have one

 instrument and that is the interest rate. And the interest rate works through a few channels, and

 I’ll try to set them out in simple terms. The first is obviously what we call the cash flow channel.

 So that is those people that have mortgages pay more on interest and that means that they have less spare

 money. So that’s the cash flow channel. There’s two other channels. There’s one which is

 basically, if you put interest rates up, people are encouraged to save more and spend less now. So that

 puts a bit of downward pressure on demand. And the third and quite important channel is the exchange

 rate. And as the exchange rate rises, it puts downward pressure on inflation. It makes imports cheaper.

 People tend to buy imported goods rather than domestic, and so it puts less pressure on the domestic side

 of things. So that’s how I try to explain to people how the interest rate works its way through.

 Now, having said that, I understand that for people with mortgages, all they see is the cash flow and

 it’s tough. But as I’ve said, and I said in response to John, you know, if we don’t do

 what we think we need to do to bring inflation down, ultimately the outcome is worse for people. And

 people haven’t seen high inflation. Up until ‘22 or so, people hadn’t seen high inflation

 in decades. And that gave people a taste of what if you let inflation get a roll on how hard it will be

 continually for people. So it is hard, I understand that, but it is the only instrument we have and it is

 important that we get inflation down.
Edward Boyd
Governor Edward Boyd at Sky News. You mentioned the word recession just a minute ago. I mean,

 if the war in Iran continues indefinitely, Strait of Hormuz remains shut. I mean, how concerned is the

 RBA Board about this looming recession risk?
Michele Bullock
Well, we don’t know what’s going to happen in that context. And in fact,

 there’s been lots of predictions that the world economy would, particularly after the tariff

 problems in early ‘25, that the world would go into recession, that abated, and the world economy

 actually ended up doing ok, doing quite well in some cases. It’s still possible, if this resolves,

 that everything will turn out ok. Having said that, the Board is alert to risks of that nature and if

 circumstances change, and if it does look like the world economy is in big trouble, then that will have

 different implications for inflation and we will be looking very hard at what we need to do in those

 circumstances. That’s all by way of saying that the Board is going to be monitoring this stuff very

 closely and if we have to change tack, we will.
Matt Cranston
Matt Cranston from the Australian. Last week, well into the Iran war, UBS put out a note

 and said this direct quote. Australian government payments are booming 8 per cent year on year

 in an economy operating above potential. The RBA concedes this adds to capacity and inflation pressure.

 In the December quarter, we saw that public demand increased or grew more than twice that of private

 demand. And in your statement today you do make mention of the composition being a surprise in the

 December quarter. My question is this. How much more difficult has that really high rate of public

 demand

 made your decision today? And in your attempts to address excess demand, what would be better? A slight

 easing in private or public demand, or both?
Michele Bullock
You’re asking me to make a value judgment which I’m not going to make, Matt.

 You know as well as I do that aggregate demand is C plus I plus G plus X minus M. That’s what it

 is.

 And so therefore, if G goes up, then that adds to aggregate demand. If I goes up, that adds to aggregate

 demand. So we take that as given and we set policy appropriate for what we think will be enough to bring

 aggregate demand in line with aggregate supply. Value judgements on private versus public are not for me

 to make. They are for the government.
David Chau
Hi, Governor David Chau from ABC News. My question is, if necessary, would you be prepared to

 put Australia into recession if that’s what it takes to bring inflation much lower?
Michele Bullock
Well, we don’t want to do that, David. The strategy, as I said earlier, is still the

 same. We still want to bring the output gap down at the same time as we bring inflation down. And

 we’ve been trying to do that and we think we had some success, but inflation has sprung up again.

 And so I wouldn’t say we want to do that. But the bottom line is that in the end, if we don’t

 have low and stable inflation over time, we won’t have full employment. It doesn’t work like

 that. Best contribution we can make to full employment and in fact to things like investment and

 productivity and so on, is to have low and stable inflation. So we do need to keep our eye focused on

 that ball. We don’t want to have a recession, but if it’s hard to get inflation down, then you

 know we’re going to have to deal with that possibly.
Matt Wade
Thanks. Governor Matt Wade from the Sydney Morning Herald. Two parts to my question. One is

 what would be the effect on the economy if oil prices stay at $100 a barrel or indeed move higher

 to

 say $150? Has the Bank investigated or modelled that type of scenario, if it was to remain that way for

 an extended period and if so, what did you find? And my second part, sorry, I was also saying it was a

 split decision. My question is if the Bank has kind of got mixed views or the members of the committee

 have mixed views, how can borrowers have full confidence that it was the right decision?
Michele Bullock
On the second one, I think they should take a great deal of confidence in the fact that

 it was a split decision because it shows that the Board, unlike some people think, actually actively

 debates and challenges and we bring lots of different views to the Board. So I think that strengthens

 the

 decision making process, not weakens it. It’s actually a much better decision making process and I

 think that demonstrates it. We haven’t fully modelled, in answer your question, we’ve done

 some

 modelling on sort of just very first round pass throughs of petrol price rises to inflation. But we

 haven’t done any modelling on potential impacts if the war goes on and there’s

 continued … So that’s something obviously we’re looking at. I think Treasury

 is

 looking at as well, but we haven’t done anything on that yet.
Stella Qiu
Hi, Governor Stella Qiu from Reuters. Did the RBA recommend a rate hike to the Board at the

 meeting this week? Because it does feel like you and Deputy Governor, you’re pushing for the case

 to

 hike before the meeting. And if you can’t tell us that, are you defending a rate hike you

 didn’t personally vote for?
Michele Bullock
Okay, I’m going to answer neither of those. What I will say is no, I won’t tell

 you what the recommendation was. What I would say though is that you characterise the Deputy Governor

 and

 I of actually agitating for a hike in our comments. I would actually push back against that entirely.

 All

 I said in my remarks, my fireside chat, was that March is a live meeting. Every meeting is a live

 meeting. There is new information. That was what I said. Right. And the Deputy Governor, as far as I can

 tell reading his remarks, was that here is the arguments for holding, here are the arguments for

 raising.

 He did not express a view one way or the other. So I would push back against that. But I won’t tell

 you what the recommendation was. But again, I would go back to the point that this was an actively, very

 active discussion. The direction wasn’t the issue, it was the timing.
Tom Richardson
Hi, Governor Tom Richardson from The Nightly. You said in your comments earlier that the

 jobs market was perhaps tighter than you expected. You’ve lifted rates today which might push

 unemployment up a little. And your own forecasts don’t really have unemployment going above

 4.5 per cent, 4.6 per cent I think is the top in 2028. But recently we’ve seen

 a

 lot of job losses in the tech sector being linked to AI. You see these forecasts for a horrendous

 jobless

 rate, 5, 10, 15 per cent. I think I saw PwC saying 30 per cent of jobs could be

 automated by the mid-2020s. So those, you could call them doomsday forecasts or doom mongering forecasts

 don’t seem to be incorporated into the Bank’s own forecasts at the moment. Can you just

 comment

 on that? Thanks.
Michele Bullock
So yeah, I see lots of those anecdotes as well and lots of those doomsayers as well.

 But we’re not seeing it show up in the unemployment rate, the underemployment rate and we’re

 not

 seeing it show up in things like the forward-looking indicators like vacancies, job openings, layoffs,

 those sorts of things. So notwithstanding we hear a lot of these anecdotes. I don’t know the answer

 to that. But the only point I would make is that what you’re talking about in those circumstances,

 if those doomsday scenarios come to bear, is we’re talking about a structural issue in the

 employment market and that goes to what is the full employment that is consistent with low and stable

 inflation and in those circumstances with structural issues in the employment market, we can’t

 address those. That’s something that has to be addressed more by government policies and how to

 retrain people. So that impacts what is the unemployment rate, if you like, that can be sustained with

 low and stable inflation. But there’s nothing we can do about that.
Cecile Lefort
Governor Cecile Lefort from the Financial Review. Does today’s rate hike represent a

 front-loading of tightening and does it reduce the chances of further tightening? And I realise forward

 guidance, yes, markets are still pricing at least one rate hike for this year.
Michele Bullock
Yeah, look, it doesn’t say anything about the forward path at the moment. It was

 felt for the reasons we set out that because of the excess demand that’s still in the economy, the

 starting point that we’re in, we’ve now got an additional external inflation impulse which has

 the potential … We can’t do anything about the inflation rate that’s going to

 pop out in the next few quarters. If the current oil price is sustained, that will just be what will be.

 But

 what we might be able to do and what we’re hoping to do is bring the excess demand down so that as

 that

 washes through we’ll end up with less pressure on the second round effects. That’s what

 we’re hoping. So that’s the reason for it. Now what does it mean? I don’t know. It’s

 going to depend very much on what else happens because as we’ve already discussed, there could be

 some really bad outcomes for the world economy if the current conflict gets worse. So those are the

 sorts of things we’re going to have to consider. So I can’t give commitments one way or the

 other. I

 can’t say whether or not this has just ended up being a front loading or the first of many. But I

 would just highlight that what we are trying to address here is a domestic demand problem. It’s a

 domestic demand probably is the wrong way of putting it, domestic problem. It’s an issue to do with

 excess demand in the Australian economy relative to the supply. That’s what we’re trying to

 address.
Cameron Micallef
Hi Governor Cameron from Newswire. Consumer confidence data out today shows Australians

 are feeling as bad as they did at the start of the COVID pandemic. I guess, how would that impact the

 decisions you’re making moving forward?
Michele Bullock
Yes. So it all depends on how confidence flows through into what people actually do in

 terms of spending. Confidence has been low for some time but the consumers have been continuing to

 spend.

 So there’s this issue about the relationship between consumer confidence in these surveys and what

 people actually do. I think the consumer confidence numbers for some time have been reflecting basically

 concerns about how much things cost. How are people reacting? Well, we know that people are reacting

 often by looking for bargains. We hear this through our liaison that people are consuming but

 they’re looking to spend in smart ways. They’re looking for sales and discounts and so on. So

 yes, we look at consumer confidence but ultimately what matters is what people actually do and

 that’s what matters for demand.
Brandon How
Thanks Governor Brandon How from Capital Brief. To follow on an earlier question, market

 economists have been interpreting Deputy Governor Andrew Hauser’s podcast with The Conversation

 last

 week as a signal for what the Monetary Policy Board would decide today. Just wanted to confirm, do you

 think they were wrong to think that this was signalling from the RBA? And do you think it was

 potentially

 a misstep from the RBA to have the Deputy Governor speak so close to a policy meeting?
Michele Bullock
Yeah. Thanks, Brandon. So, yes, a misinterpretation. I think if you read what he said,

 you’ll see he was giving an argument on both sides. It would be entirely inappropriate, and

 I’ve said this before and he would agree with this, for either of us to front run the Board because

 you don’t know, the Board might disagree with you. So it wasn’t a signal that this was what

 the

 Board would decide, because we can’t say what the Board will decide until the Board sits and meets.

 That podcast had been scheduled for some weeks. It wasn’t sort of hurriedly scheduled just before

 the blackout and in the middle of the conflict. It wasn’t done like that. It was done weeks in

 advance. Although I believe it wasn’t clear to the market economists that this thing had been

 organised so far in advance. So maybe a learning for us is, make it clear a little bit more in advance

 that this is coming up and it doesn’t come as such a surprise.
Juliette Saly
Governor, hi, Juliette Saly from AusBiz TV. In one way, energy prices are a tool against

 inflation. They’re going to cause people to spend less, as other people have highlighted. With this

 rate hike coming so soon on the back of the February one, is there a concern you may have made a policy

 error or that your tool, which you continue to say you’ve only got one and it’s blunt, is

 structurally broken?
Michele Bullock
Thanks, Juliette. I don’t think it’s structurally broken because as I said

 earlier, it works through three channels, one of which is the cash flow. And the petrol price rise, that

 is also effectively affecting people’s cash flow. So it’s going to impact demand in some way to

 the extent that people have got constrained budgets and many people do. I know. So that is going to be

 hard. Some people might have to have to make tough decisions on what they do with transport, but

 basically it’s pretty inelastic. There’s not a lot of room to move I don’t think, on that.

 So that is going to have a cash flow impact. But the interest rate does have those impacts through those

 other channels. And I come back to the exchange rate channel again because it is very important. As it

 rises, it makes imports cheaper, it puts downward pressure on inflation and that helps. If we don’t

 raise interest rates, then we don’t get that impact because that works because of our interest

 differential between us and the rest of the world. So I wouldn’t say it’s broken because it

 works through these other channels. But I do understand the point you’re making and it’s hard

 because not only have you got this completely exogenous shock to the amount of money you’re spending

 on petrol, but now you have got, unfortunately, an interest rate increase on top of that. And I can tell

 you the Board did not make this decision lightly.
Juliette Saly
I just want to follow up. Because it’s also making the asset-rich richer, in terms of

 people that don’t have mortgages.
Michele Bullock
This is always the case that there are distributional changes and when interest rates

 are

 going down, I get lots of complaints from people who don’t want to earn less. And then when interest

 rates are going up, I get the reverse. This is just a fact that interest rates do have distributional

 consequences. But I come back again to the point that high inflation hurts absolutely everyone. And so

 that is why we need to focus on that. If that gets out of hand, then that is bad for everyone and

 particularly, I would say, for people who are on low and fixed incomes, and they typically don’t

 have mortgages at all. They’re in the renter bucket. They’re the ones who are particularly

 badly hit by inflation.
Sophia Rodrigues
Sophia Rodrigues from Central Bank Intel. A different take on the previous recession

 question. Given persistent inflation risk, how long will you wait before declaring a shift in your

 monetary policy strategy to just acknowledge that we need to create some spare capacity to get inflation

 to target? Perhaps this language could help manage expectations.
Michele Bullock
So this is a really interesting debate, Sophia. Do you need to create a negative

 output

 gap in order to get inflation back down? We have in our outlook, we think if we can bring the positive

 output gap, if you like, down to zero, then that will help to bring down the pressure and we will bring

 inflation down with it, provided inflation expectations stay anchored. So we still think that strategy

 can work, and that is still the strategy. I know that some people say you actually need to create a

 negative output gap, so you need to have some sense in which you get spare capacity to get it down.

 That’s sort of not our strategy. Our strategy continues to be to try and bring the output gap down

 from the positive and with anchored inflation expectations, which will only stay anchored if people think

 we will do what we need to do to get inflation down.
Swati Pandey
Governor Swati Pandey from Bloomberg News. RBA is one of eight major central banks which

 is holding its rate decision this week. All other major central banks, BoE, Fed, they’re all expected

 to leave interest rates unchanged, so RBA has been an outlier. Would you have hiked today if the Iran war

 had not broken out?
Michele Bullock
I couldn’t answer that sort of hypothetical question about what we would have

 done in the absence of the war. What I can say is that certainly it heightened our concerns about

 inflation on

 an ongoing sense. So as I said earlier, inflation is going to go up in the next few quarters if petrol

 prices stay where they are, if oil prices stay where they are, that’s a given. We can’t do

 anything about that. What we can watch for is the second round effects. It really is about the starting

 point for us relative to others. We started in a position of excess demand. Other countries didn’t.

 Having said that, if you look at what’s happened to interest rate expectations for those other

 central banks, they’re on holds. They were cuts. So the whole curve for most countries, Japan’s

 an exception, won’t go into it. But for most of those countries, they now have, Bank of England,

 for

 example, does not have a cut and I think might even have a small hike in there now. So the whole Middle

 Eastern situation has resulted in obviously concerns about inflation and as a result a lift in

 expectations for central bank interest rates.
Jacob Shteyman
Hi, Governor Jacob Shteyman from AAP. You mentioned earlier, households already doing it,

 tough petrol prices going up. This is only going to make it harder. The temptation for governments would

 be to put in place cost of living measures like cutting fuel excise or energy rebates. What impact would

 these measures have on underlying inflation?
Michele Bullock
Thanks, Jacob. So you’ll recall that what we’ve been doing is in recent year

 or

 so, focusing on underlying inflation. Not because that’s our target, our target is headline

 inflation. But headline inflation has been thrown around quite a lot by these, particularly the energy

 subsidies. So they bring inflation down a long way and then as they come up, inflation pops up. So

 it’s very volatile. So that’s the reason for focusing on underlying. But our target is

 headline, and ultimately they will come back together. I don’t know what governments are going to

 do, but if there are subsidies for certain things, then yes, that will have an impact on headline

 inflation, depending on how big those sorts of subsidies are. On underlying inflation, it depends because

 underlying inflation is about trimming out the sort of the edges, the very high ones that are increasing

 by a lot and ones that aren’t increasing by much or decreasing, and then taking the middle sliver if

 you like or the middle chunk. So if those subsidies, if they did do that, like they did with the petrol

 subsidies, they tended to get trimmed out and that was the focus for underlying. So underlying can be

 affected, but probably less so than headline.
Jonathan Shapiro
Governor Jonathan Shapiro from the Financial Review. The cash rate set, just one hike

 away from being at its previous peak and the market is forecasting that it will go above. Just wonder if

 you can give us some guidance as to the previous rate hiking cycle where interest rates got to. Given the

 current set of mixes, when rates were previously at 4.1 per cent and 4.35 per cent,

 whether it’s currency, household budgets, et cetera, for some guide about how much more tighter

 monetary policy needs to get to achieve its objective.
Michele Bullock
Yeah, look, I. So let me go back to history. So the hiking cycle, the increase in

 interest rates that occurred from sort of mid ‘22 up to ‘23, was very high and fast. But

 remember it was coming from zero and we were very, very accommodative. So we had to first of all remove

 all the accommodation and then we had to get into what might be restrictive territory. Now there

 isn’t one sort of individual cash rate that necessarily represents restrictive or non-restrictive.

 We do talk about neutral rates and we do watch those sorts of things, but they’re theoretical

 concepts and they’re difficult to measure. The way we’ve been thinking about it more is in

 terms of financial conditions and that’s more than just the cash rate. And one cash rate can be

 associated with slightly tighter financial conditions or slightly weaker financial conditions. So for

 example, we saw in terms of financial conditions, things tightening a little bit prior to this cash rate

 rise. So financial conditions were tightening a bit. We were seeing expectations rise, bond yields were

 rising. Short term, long term, things were … So in those circumstances, the cash rate didn’t

 change, but financial conditions were moving. Having said that, if the cash rate doesn’t change,

 ultimately financial conditions will probably settle back down to somewhere else. So, short answer, I

 can’t give you a particular cash rate which is restrictive or non-restrictive. In terms of neutral,

 we’re sort of in the middle of a range of estimates of neutral. Some are below, some are above. We

 are focusing also, but not just on the cash rate, as I said, on financial conditions. And some of the

 things there that we’re looking at are things like credit growth, we’re looking at what

 households are doing in terms of non-required payments on their mortgages, those sorts of things which

 are giving us a bit of a feel for how financial conditions are impacting the economy. So I’m sorry,

 it’s not a simple answer but, you know, at the moment we are not certain how restrictive financial

 conditions are. And part of that, as I said, is because inflation is high and unacceptably high. So

 that’s maybe telling us something about financial conditions.
Hannah Kwon
Hi, Governor Hannah Kwon, SBS World News. Would it make your decision making easier if the

 government was spending less?
Michele Bullock
It wouldn’t make … It’s a bit of an answer that I gave

 earlier. It is what it

 is. The government spending is what it is and our decision making is based on what’s happening with

 inflation. So the fact that we’re in excess demand means that we need to bring that excess demand

 down and we need to raise interest rates. So the combination of, you know, C plus I plus G, consumption,

 investment, government spending, whatever that combination is, isn’t as important as what the total

 is doing. And that’s what we’re trying to focus on. So I think it’s the same concept for

 us. We take it all as given and we work with that.
David Taylor
Governor David Taylor, ABC News. Inflation is nowhere near the target. We’re at

 3.8 according to your website. You know your target’s two and a half per cent. You’re

 nowhere near it.
Michele Bullock
No.
David Taylor
Why didn’t you hike by 50 basis points today and get the job done?
Michele Bullock
Because, David, there’s lots of uncertainty around and we think that we can get

 into restrictive territory and bring it down in a reasonable time. Critical to that, as I said earlier, is

 anchored inflation expectations and we still have them anchored and that’s what’s helped us

 bring inflation down from practically 8 per cent down to 3. And at one point, of course, it was

 in the band and it was down near two and a half. It’s popped back up again. And so we do need to do

 something to bring it back down, which we are doing. 50 is a lot. We’re trying to do this in a

 way, as I said, the strategy being bring the excess demand down without giving up a lot of the gains in

 the labour market, keeping a reasonably stable labour market. So that is still the strategy. And you

 know, added to that, the uncertainty of what’s going on in the Middle East, I think is just another

 reason to be a little bit cautious.
Luca Ittimani
Thanks Governor Luca Ittimani, from The Guardian. Thanks for giving us some perspective on

 the strategy today. It sounds like the Bank believes it can fine tune demand down to a specific point

 where industry won’t be able to pass on higher costs out of the conflict, limiting the second round

 effects. So could you give us some benchmark or some kind of benchmarks to measure the success of that?

 How much of a slowdown in consumer demand or private demand should we expect or is expected to be

 necessary to achieve that?
Michele Bullock
Thanks, Luca. Well, the best guide to what we’re thinking would be our forecasts

 from February and we’ll be revisiting those in May. We think we do need to see demand in total come

 off and some of that will be consumer demand. So I’m not going to give you numbers because I’m

 probably going to get the forecasts wrong. I haven’t got them tattooed in my head. But, but that is

 the best benchmark I think, to go and look at in terms of what we think is required to bring inflation

 back down. And I would highlight two things about those forecasts. The first is that it does incorporate

 an interest rate rise in it. It’s an assumption. It’s based on the cash rate path. And the

 second point is that inflation doesn’t get quite back down to the middle of the target band by the

 end of the forecasts. Now, we all know that forecasts are uncertain and what those forecasts say for two

 years hence is probably not going to turn out to be right. But it’s the best benchmark. It’s

 the best benchmark we’ve got.
Michael Janda
Governor Michael Janda from ABC News. The most recent private sector measures show

 household spending now falling and consumer confidence plunging to pandemic levels. Is there a risk

 you’re fighting last year’s battles and might crunch an already weakening economy with this

 rate rise?
Michele Bullock
Well, it’s possible, I suppose. It’s not our central forecast. And the

 reason I say it’s not our central forecast, a few of the factors that we watch, inflation is in fact the

 outcome of supply and demand. So remember, and we talked about this I think at the last press conference

 with the forecasts, demand can’t grow very quickly if supply isn’t growing very quickly. So

 the days of, you know, 2.5 per cent, 3 per cent growth rates of demand are very

 difficult where you’ve got a supply constrained economy. So our central forecast is not for that to happen.

 Our central forecast is that we will end up with inflation coming down and we will close the gap between

 demand and supply. And there are some areas in the inflation numbers which demonstrate where you’re

 seeing that supply-demand crunch. One is in market services where you continue to see elevated costs

 there, elevated prices, elevated inflation. New housing has been another one that went through a period

 where it was a bit lower, but it sprung back again, again demonstrating a demand-supply sort of

 imbalance. So again, it’s not the central forecast and we hope we don’t have to do that. But

 ultimately we’ve got to get inflation back down. That’s got to be the goal.
Michael Heath
Governor Michael Heath from Bloomberg. I just wanted to bring you back to the split

 decision that came out and something you mentioned earlier about neither you or the Deputy Governor

 wanting to front run the Board because I might disagree with you. There’s a bit of interest, I guess

 in the composition of the Board and the new mechanism and there’s a perception, at least among some

 people, that there’s an effort to put more doves on the Board to worry about employment a bit more

 than inflation. So I guess my question is if the RBA was to, the staff were to recommend a hike, you and

 the Deputy Governor and one or two other people support that view, but then you’re outvoted by the

 Board. How is that interpreted? Is that a vote of no confidence in you as chair of the Board? Is that how

 you would perceive it? Because I know previous governors have sort of had that view that they need to

 then rethink how that would work or is that just the reality of the situation you’re in and you take

 it with good grace?
Michele Bullock
The reality of our Board, as you have pointed out, it’s quite unusual in that

 respect in that the Bank representatives, there’s two and there’s seven non-bank

 representatives, that is very unusual. I’m not sure if there’s any other countries around the

 world that have that, most have a majority representation by the Bank staff if you like. So that’s

 just the way it is. And as I said earlier, particularly in circumstances like this where, you know,

 it’s very difficult, it’s uncertain, there are two very good arguments to do two different

 things, then reasonable people can differ and that’s a positive thing. The other point that the

 Review made was it did feel that the Bank was a little too insular. And so if we are being challenged by

 outside views, then I don’t take that personally. That is a positive thing. I don’t know if

 that is going to happen. But you know, my own view is that this is the structure we’ve got,

 we’ve got to work with it. And ultimately economics is, this is not a science. This is, you know,

 this is difficult stuff and reasonable people can hold different views very reasonably. And I think the

 meeting today, with its split decision and the process it went through, I thought was an excellent

 demonstration of how that can be very positive. Thank you. Thank you.
