BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Conditions
 and Prospects in the Housing
 Sector – Sydney

 and Prospects in the Housing

 Sector – Sydney

 and Prospects in the Housing

 Sector – Sydney

 and Prospects in the Housing

 Sector – Sydney

 and Prospects in the Housing

 Sector – Sydney

 and Prospects in the Housing

 Sector – Sydney

 and Prospects in the Housing

 Sector – Sydney

 and Prospects in the Housing

 Sector – Sydney

 and Prospects in the Housing

 Sector – Sydney

 and Prospects in the Housing

 Sector – Sydney
DATE: 09/03/2026
SPEAKER: Sydney
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/speeches/2009/sp-so-260309.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Speech
Conditions and Prospects in the Housing Sector
Anthony Richards
Head of Economic Analysis Department
Address to the 4th Annual Housing Congress
Sydney
–
26 March 2009
Audio
31.6
MB
There is always significant interest in Australia in questions relating to the housing

 market and housing industry. And, in recent years, housing-related factors

 have had a significant influence on the global economy. So this Congress will

 be covering issues of great interest to many of us.
In my talk today, I will discuss a number of issues concerning the Australian housing

 sector, including housing affordability, the supply and demand for housing,

 and the broader macroeconomic context. I will not be commenting on the current

 monetary policy situation.
Let me start by noting that the Australian housing market, like the broader economy,

 has softened somewhat recently. But it is a sector of the economy that demonstrates

 quite well the differences between the Australian economy and some of the larger

 economies such as the United States and the United Kingdom.
The recent weakness seen in Australian housing prices has been mainly at the higher

 end of the market (Graph 1). Property prices in more expensive suburbs,

 which had risen more over the prior few years, have recently fallen noticeably.

 This presumably reflects the greater exposure of people in higher-priced suburbs

 to financial developments. While our financial markets have continued to operate

 better than in many other countries, falls in Australian stock prices have

 been similar to those elsewhere, and the wealth effects of this are likely

 to have impacted most in higher-priced suburbs. However, in the other suburbs,

 which constitute a much larger share of the total housing stock, prices declined

 by much less in 2008.
Graph 1
Overall, housing prices in Australia softened over 2008 by around 3 per cent.

 There are only very limited data for Australian prices in early 2009, but we

 have a preliminary gauge of the market in the auction clearance rates for Sydney

 and Melbourne, which have shown a significant pick-up relative to late 2008.
The modest fall in Australian housing prices in 2008 was much smaller than the double-digit

 falls seen (with some variations across measures) in US and UK house prices.

 Similarly, the falls in housing approvals and in broader measures of economic

 activity in Australia have been smaller than the declines seen in many other

 countries. Furthermore, there are a number of reasons to think that outcomes

 here might remain better than elsewhere. These relate both to the role of policy

 in responding to the downturn and the consolidation of household finances that

 has occurred in Australia since our housing boom slowed earlier in this decade,

 around the end of 2003.
I will now turn to a specific aspect of the housing market, namely housing affordability.

 I am going to focus on affordability for current or potential home buyers rather

 than on measures of affordability for renters. But the owner-occupier and rental

 markets are clearly linked and some of the issues I discuss today have implications

 for the cost of housing for renters too.
There are many complications in measuring affordability and there is no single ideal

 measure. However, the measure shown here is a reasonably standard one, being

 an index of the ratio of average household disposable income to the principal

 and interest repayments on a new mortgage for a median-priced dwelling

 (Graph 2).
[1]
It should be noted that measures such as this one do not incorporate the effect

 of grants for first-home buyers which have recently been boosted by the federal

 government and some states. The data in this graph go up to the December quarter

 of 2008 and the dot shows an estimate of this measure based on the current

 level of mortgage rates. It is quite clear that purchase affordability has

 recently improved very significantly in Australia.
Graph 2
Standard affordability measures reflect the interaction of two factors: the mortgage

 interest rate, and the ratio of housing prices to household incomes (Graph 3).

 If interest rates fall, or if housing prices rise less rapidly than incomes,

 then affordability improves, and
vice versa
. The recent sharp improvement in affordability clearly

 mostly reflects the sharp fall in mortgage rates over the past half year.
Graph 3
The fall in interest rates reflects the adjustment of Australian monetary policy

 to the decline in the outlook for the global and domestic economies. As you

 know, there has been a dramatic weakening in the world economy over the past

 half year. Average GDP growth in our major trading partners was sharply negative

 in the December quarter of 2008, and the March quarter of 2009 is unlikely

 to have been much better. As a result, monetary and fiscal policies have both

 been eased significantly in Australia over the past six months or so.
While there are concerns in some other countries about whether the easings in monetary

 policy have been especially effective, there can be no such doubt in Australia.

 In Australia, the cash rate has now been cut by 400 basis points since September

 2008, and standard variable housing rates have fallen by 375 basis points (Graph 4).

 When we take an average of the interest rates paid on all housing loans (including

 fixed rate ones), the fall is around 265 basis points.
Graph 4
In contrast, central banks in other countries have also cut their policy rates by

 at least as much as the RBA, but have typically seen much smaller reductions

 in the actual rates paid by households and businesses.
The difference partly reflects the fact that a greater proportion of Australian borrowing

 is at variable interest rates than in most other countries. Furthermore, Australian

 banks are in healthier shape than those in most other developed economies,

 so they have been more able to pass through the reductions in their funding

 costs. The Bank's semi-annual
Financial Stability Review
released today provides further details

 on the health of the banking sector and the broader financial system.
So it is clear that monetary policy has been effective in lowering borrowing rates

 in the Australian economy. In aggregate terms, the fall in borrowing rates

 has reduced the debt-servicing burden of the household sector by approximately

 5 per cent of household disposable income (Graph 5). That implies

 a significant amount of cash flow relief, for spending on other goods and services

 or to save and/or pay down debt. Admittedly, the effect on the net interest

 payments of the household sector – that is after we take account of the

 effect on the interest receipts of savers – is smaller, but there is

 still a significant stimulatory effect from lower interest rates.
Graph 5
In addition to the effect on the cash flows of those who are currently making mortgage

 payments, the reduction in interest rates improves the accessibility of home

 ownership for potential home buyers, as illustrated by the earlier graph on

 affordability.
Of course, mortgage rates will fluctuate over time. At some point in the future –

 and here I am not making any comment about the current policy juncture, just

 making a statement about the cyclical nature of economies – interest

 rates will presumably be at more normal levels. So one question that we should

 ask is whether a period of quite low mortgage rates in Australia could lead

 to the type of problems that are being seen in the United States.
In the middle of this decade, the United States experienced a significant expansion

 of lending to higher-risk households who took out mortgages at low initial

 interest rates that were scheduled to reset a few years later at much higher

 rates. Much of this lending was premised on the expectation that housing prices

 would continue to rise so that the increase in equity would allow the borrower

 to refinance to a more conventional mortgage before the initial mortgage reset

 to the much higher interest rate. Of course, this type of lending was also

 facilitated by the ability of lenders to on-sell the mortgage to be securitised

 and sold into the capital markets where investors were not especially discriminating

 in what they would buy.
So the question arises whether a period of low interest rates in Australia (combined

 with the boost in grants to first-home buyers) could lead to an expansion of

 lending to riskier borrowers who will only be able to afford their mortgages

 as long as interest rates remain low. I think there are good reasons to think

 this is not a major risk.
Australian lending standards were never relaxed during the earlier boom as much as

 they were in the United States. We can illustrate this quite starkly by looking

 at the proportion of non-performing loans on bank balance sheets in the two

 countries (Graph 6). The US ratio is clearly far higher than in Australia

 now, but it was also significantly higher a few years ago when both economies

 were experiencing strong economic growth.
Graph 6
But in any case, many of the lenders that might have been most likely to write riskier

 loans have scaled back their activity. The past year and a half has seen lending

 standards tighten in Australia, with a significant shrinkage in the amount

 of low-doc and non-conforming lending. Most lending is now staying on balance

 sheet, and a greater share is being done by banks, which have tended to reduce

 their maximum loan-to-value ratios. Our discussions with banks indicate that

 they are indeed testing the ability of borrowers to continue servicing their

 loans if interest rates were to rise significantly.
No doubt, as at any time, some of the loans being written now will turn sour. However,

 overall, I suspect that the risk of non-performing loans increasing to the

 extent seen in the United States is low. Nevertheless, households that are

 considering entering into home ownership need to carefully consider their own

 circumstances, including whether they would be able to continue servicing their

 loans if mortgage rates were at some point to begin to return to more normal

 levels.
In addition to mortgage rates, the second determinant of standard affordability measures

 is the ratio of housing prices to income. At present, this ratio remains slightly

 above its average over the low-inflation period (Graph 3). Of course,

 there may be good reasons for it to have experienced a trend increase over

 recent decades as the economy adjusted to a structural shift to lower inflation.
But it is noteworthy that the housing price to income ratio has declined significantly

 since its peak in late 2003. Over the period since end 2003, nationwide house

 prices have grown on average by 4 per cent per annum, versus annual growth

 of 14 per cent in the prior five-year period. And the growth rate of house

 prices in the past five years has been well below the 8 per cent average

 annual nominal growth in household disposable incomes.
So the price-income ratio, a frequently used – but crude – measure of

 housing price valuation suggests that any overvaluation of housing prices has

 eased significantly since the Australian housing boom slowed significantly

 in late 2003. Since then, households have had significant income growth, but

 that growth has flowed only to a modest extent into housing prices.
Some other perspectives would also indicate some positive trends in household behaviour

 over the past five years.
In the period leading up to 2003, growth in household consumption spending ran ahead

 of growth in household income (Graph 7). As a result, the household saving

 rate declined significantly. But, since end 2003, this trend has been reversed.

 Households have seen strong income growth, but their growth in consumption

 spending has been lower. On average, annual growth in spending has run about

 2½ percentage points below income growth in this period. As a result,

 the saving rate has risen significantly and in trend terms (which will downplay

 the sharp rise in the December quarter) is back at levels seen in the mid 1990s

 before the start of the housing boom.
Graph 7
Another perspective on household behaviour can be gained from the data for housing

 equity injection (Graph 8). In aggregate, housing equity injection is

 a measure of the extent to which we have increased our net ownership of housing,

 abstracting from valuation effects. As we construct new housing, the dwelling

 stock grows. But if we increase our borrowing for housing, this reduces the

 amount by which we are building up equity in housing.
Graph 8
Historically, the community significantly increased its net equity in the housing

 stock each year. But from the mid 1990s this began to change, as the growth

 of housing-secured borrowing rose. This coincided with greater competition

 in the market for housing finance, including new products such as redraws and

 housing lines of credit. It was also the period when the share of investors

 (or buy-to-let purchasers) in new lending grew significantly. Indeed, early

 in this decade, growth in housing credit exceeded the value of new housing

 being built.
However, a reversal of this trend started around end 2003. Growth in housing credit

 gradually slowed over the past five years. Housing equity withdrawal gradually

 declined and we have now returned to the more normal state of affairs where

 we are again increasing our equity in the housing stock. And as the boom in

 the market cooled, the share of investors in approvals for housing finance

 has fallen from a peak of over 40 per cent in late 2003 to below 30 per

 cent now.
These trends in the housing price to income ratio, the household saving rate and

 housing equity injection illustrate some beneficial developments in household

 finances over the past five years. If the housing boom that was underway earlier

 this decade had continued, along with some of the behaviour that accompanied

 it, no doubt we would now be facing greater risks. But the housing boom here

 came to an end earlier than in many other countries, and household behaviour

 has changed significantly since then. As a result, our economy, and household

 and financial sectors have entered this global slowdown in far better shape

 than otherwise.
Of course, as I noted above, mortgage rates will fluctuate over time, so in the long

 run housing affordability will be mostly driven by the level of housing prices

 relative to household incomes. This brings me to the issue of supply- and demand-side

 factors in influencing housing prices and the broader question of supply and

 demand in the housing market.
I have previously suggested, as have many others, that the relatively high level

 of housing prices in Australia is to a large extent a reflection of demand

 and the collective decisions of households. That is, housing prices have not

 been set at high levels by some external force. They are at their current levels

 because buyers in aggregate – with their incomes, preferences, access

 to finance, and other influences – have been willing to pay those prices.
But it is also the case that supply-side factors matter, and here I define these

 broadly to include factors affecting the ability to build new housing on the

 city fringe, factors affecting the ability to expand supply closer to city

 centres, and factors such as community and transport infrastructure that influence

 the feasibility and desirability of living in different places.
The last two of these factors are hard to quantify, but one element influencing the

 first is the cost of raw land. We recently looked at the cost of low-priced

 land in new developments near the edges of our five largest cities (Graph 9).

 It is probably a good indicator of some of the supply issues there. Land prices

 are clearly still highest on the edges of Sydney and lowest on the edges of

 Melbourne and Adelaide.
[2]
Overall, prices still appear quite high given that this is supposed to be about

 the lowest-cost land available. It will be interesting to see whether it is

 possible to reduce these prices, or at least keep a lid on increases, in coming

 years.
Graph 9
The ability to expand the supply of housing will be one of the factors that influences

 housing affordability over the medium term. And the performance of the home-building

 sector will be an important influence on economic activity over the coming

 period when international factors may be restraining growth in Australia.
As you will know, home-building has recently been at relatively low levels, with

 commencements of around 147,000 dwellings in 2008 (Graph 10). And towards

 the end of the year, commencements and building approvals were running at significantly

 lower levels than that.
Graph 10
The recent weakness in housing approvals no doubt partly reflects the general slowing

 in the economy. When the economy is slowing and the outlook is uncertain, it

 would not be surprising if households and builders were more risk averse than

 usual. We have also seen significant weakness in purchases of motor vehicles,

 another large-ticket item where there is some discretion as to when purchases

 are made.
But within the total, approvals and commencements have slowed more for apartments

 than for houses. The particular weakness in apartments appears to reflect a

 tightening of financing. Financing for construction of apartments typically

 requires pre-sales of some proportion of the apartments. Banks have become

 more risk averse and have increased the proportion of pre-sales required. More

 generally, our liaison program has indicated that the tightening in the availability

 of business finance has been greater for firms in the property sector (especially

 commercial property) than in other sectors.
The recent weakness in building approvals will be reflected in further falls in construction

 activity over the first half of this year. Looking beyond that, there are several

 factors which should contribute to growth. Most importantly, the falls in interest

 rates and improvements in housing affordability that have occurred over the

 past six months have not really fed through into construction activity yet,

 but we can expect them to gradually boost home-building.
First-home buyer demand is also expanding following the boost to grants for these

 buyers. We can see this from the increase in the number of grant payments made

 in recent months and the rise in the share of first-home buyers in loan approvals

 to the highest on record (Graph 11). Much of this demand will be for existing

 dwellings, but we can also expect that it will gradually feed through into

 the data for building approvals and for building activity. We are seeing some

 evidence of this already in our liaison with home-builders.
Graph 11
Another factor that should support home-building over the medium term is that we

 are starting from a position of some undersupply in the housing market. Although

 there is some uncertainty as to how large the undersupply is, I suspect it

 may be less than some of the estimates in the public domain.
The largest estimates of the cumulative undersupply are based on comparisons of actual

 completions in recent years with estimates of ‘underlying demand’

 for housing. This figuring is essentially asking the following question: Given

 current population growth rates, if the decline in average household size and

 level of demand for second houses that has occurred over recent decades had

 been maintained in recent years, how many new homes would we need to build?

 Most calculations now put ‘underlying demand’ at something like

 180,000 to 200,000 dwellings per year, which means we would have needed to

 build significantly more homes than has actually occurred.
However, such figuring is based on simply extrapolating earlier trends and ignores

 the likely impact of prices on the demand for housing. Over recent decades,

 the cost of housing (including land) has grown faster than incomes and the

 cost of many other goods and services. This reflects both demand-side factors

 and supply-side ones. But we might expect that, at some point, the demand for

 housing will be affected by the higher cost of housing. For example, with housing

 – both owner-occupied and renter – more expensive than in

 the past, we might expect to see some young adults choosing to live with their

 parents for longer. We might expect some households to look for an extra flatmate

 rather than leaving a bedroom vacant. Some owners of holiday homes or second

 homes might have become more inclined to sell them, with those houses then

 occupied full-time.
So perhaps the longer-term run-up in the cost of housing is one of the reasons that

 we have built fewer homes in recent years than might have been expected. Now

 I am not saying that there is no undersupply of housing. At the very least,

 one can look at estimates that the aggregate nationwide rental vacancy rate

 is currently around 1½ per cent versus more normal levels of around

 3 per cent (Graph 12). Given a rental stock of around 2½ million

 dwellings, a simple calculation would imply the need for about 40,000 additional

 dwellings to get the rental market back closer to

 balance.
[3]
Graph 12
Whatever the true shortfall of dwellings, we can say with some confidence that our

 housing market is relatively tight. This can be contrasted with the US market

 which many observers characterise as having been subject to overbuilding during

 their housing boom. And the relative tightness of the Australian housing market

 is one factor that will support home-building in the period ahead.
A final influence supporting construction will be the measures that the federal government

 has taken to boost housing supply. Examples are the National Rental Affordability

 Scheme which aims to stimulate the supply of up to 50,000 new units of affordable

 rental housing, and the Housing Affordability Fund which will finance projects

 to reduce the cost of bringing new supply to market. State government measures

 may also help, such as the New South Wales government's reduction in

 infrastructure charges, especially in Western Sydney.
Policies such as these will help to support home-building activity at a time when

 activity in the broader economy will be subdued. They also offer the prospect

 of lowering the cost of housing in the medium term. Indeed, perhaps the best

 chance of boosting housing construction on a sustainable basis may be to seek

 to reduce impediments on the supply side that are either boosting the cost

 of building new housing on the fringes of our cities or are constraining the

 ability to build more housing closer to the centres of our major cities. Regardless

 of the broader economic factors that are currently influencing the housing

 market, it is important to keep thinking about medium- and longer-term reforms

 in the housing market that can improve the functioning of the market and potentially

 lower the cost of housing over the longer run, especially for lower-income

 groups. No doubt some of the other speakers in the Congress will speak more

 about these important structural issues.
So there are three main points that I would like to emphasise today.
First, the recent significant falls in the cash rate are having positive effects

 on the economy and the household sector, and have contributed to a significant

 improvement in household cash flows and in measures of housing affordability

 for people paying mortgages or contemplating home ownership. Second, although

 home-building is likely to remain weak in the near term, there are a number

 of factors which should support activity over the medium term, providing stimulus

 to the broader economy. Finally, when one looks at the behaviour of the household

 sector over the past five years – in particular the trends in housing

 prices, and household income, spending and borrowing – it is evident

 that there has been a significant degree of consolidation since the housing

 boom slowed in 2003. This will reduce the vulnerability of the household sector

 in the current slowdown.
Endnotes
Some other measures of affordability (for both home buyers and renters) are shown

 in my talk to the Melbourne Institute Conference in 2008.
[1]
Looking across the cities, the prices are typically for blocks averaging 400–450 square

 metres in size (a little smaller for Adelaide) and about 40 kilometres

 from the centre of the city (about 30 kilometres for Adelaide and Brisbane).
[2]
The recent National Housing Supply Council ‘State of Supply Report’ uses

 a similar approach to estimate undersupply, to which it adds an estimate

 of the number of dwellings required for the homeless and marginal residents

 of caravan parks. The overall estimated shortfall was around 85,000.
[3]
