BANK: FED
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Opening Remarks
DATE: 29/11/2021
SPEAKER: Jerome H. Powell
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/powell20211129a.htm
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Skip to main content
An official website of the United States Government
Here's how you know
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Back to Home
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Stay Connected
Federal Reserve Facebook Page
Federal Reserve Instagram Page
Federal Reserve YouTube Page
Federal Reserve Flickr Page
Federal Reserve LinkedIn Page
Federal Reserve Threads Page
Federal Reserve X Page
Federal Reserve Bluesky Page
Subscribe to RSS
Subscribe to Email
Recent Postings
Calendar
Publications
Site Map
A-Z index
Careers
FAQs
Videos
Contact
Search
Submit Search Button
Advanced
Toggle Dropdown Menu
Main Menu Toggle Button
Sections
Search Toggle Button
Search
Search Submit Button
Submit
Home
News & Events
Speeches
Speech
PDF
Please enable JavaScript if it is disabled in your browser or access the information through the links provided below.
November 29, 2021
Opening Remarks
Chair Jerome H. Powell
At the Introducing the New York Innovation Center Event, Washington, D.C. (via webcast)
Share
Watch Live
Accessible Keys for Video
[Space Bar]
toggles play/pause;
[Right/Left Arrows]
seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec );
[Up/Down Arrows]
increase/decrease volume;
[M]
toggles mute on/off;
[F]
toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11);
The
[Tab]
key may be used in combination with the
[Enter/Return]
key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off.
Good afternoon. It is a pleasure to welcome everyone, including colleagues from the Bank for International Settlements (BIS) and in particular from the BIS Innovation Hub, to the opening of the New York Innovation Center.
The pace of technological change and innovation over the last decade has led some to argue that we are on the brink of a fourth industrial revolution—a digital revolution. Certainly, rapid innovation, including through the application of advanced digital technologies, machine learning, artificial intelligence, and big data, is revolutionizing the financial sector. The Federal Reserve has a mandate to understand and, in some cases, manage these changes, but it also has a responsibility to be at the forefront of change to deliver to the American people—and the international community—a reliable, efficient, and inclusive monetary and financial system.
Furthering the efforts around the Federal Reserve System to harness the power of innovation, I am delighted to welcome the opening of the New York Innovation Center. Located at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, in the heart of the most important financial center in the world, this Innovation Center will draw on the expertise at the bank, in the Federal Reserve System, and from the broader financial community, as well as experts around the world to analyze and bring technology to bear on improving the global financial system.
Increasing the synergies of the New York Innovation Center will be its strategic partnership with the BIS Innovation Hub, recently established to foster dialogue, collaboration and knowledge-sharing among central banks and other authorities and institutions. In particular, the partnership will support our analysis of digital currencies—including central bank digital currencies; help to improve our current payment system—with a particular focus on making cross-border payments faster and less expensive; and it will provide new tools to aid our supervision of the financial system.
Linking up with the BIS in this way will enhance our ability to collaborate with central banks around the world and will ensure that the best and most up-to-date information, research, and practices are flowing freely. Since its inception in January 2020, I have served as head of the BIS Innovation Hub Advisory Committee and am very pleased that the Federal Reserve will be able to partner with the Hub in this important way.
So I want to extend my thanks to President Williams, Agustin Carstens, and all those that worked on the establishment of this center. And I look forward to the advances of both these institutions in supporting innovation in service to the safety and soundness of the financial system.
Thank you.
Last Update:

 

 November 29, 2021
Back to Top
