BANK: FED
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Welcoming Remarks
DATE: 18/03/2022
SPEAKER: Welcoming Remarks
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bowman20220318a.htm
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Skip to main content
An official website of the United States Government
Here's how you know
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Back to Home
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Stay Connected
Federal Reserve Facebook Page
Federal Reserve Instagram Page
Federal Reserve YouTube Page
Federal Reserve Flickr Page
Federal Reserve LinkedIn Page
Federal Reserve Threads Page
Federal Reserve X Page
Federal Reserve Bluesky Page
Subscribe to RSS
Subscribe to Email
Recent Postings
Calendar
Publications
Site Map
A-Z index
Careers
FAQs
Videos
Contact
Search
Submit Search Button
Advanced
Toggle Dropdown Menu
Main Menu Toggle Button
Sections
Search Toggle Button
Search
Search Submit Button
Submit
Home
News & Events
Speeches
Speech
PDF
Please enable JavaScript if it is disabled in your browser or access the information through the links provided below.
March 18, 2022
Welcoming Remarks
Governor Michelle W. Bowman
At Fed Listens: Helping Youth Thrive—A Discussion with Leaders, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland, Cleveland, Ohio (via livestream)
Share
Watch Live
When we started the
Fed Listens
initiative, we wanted input from the public on one big decision that the Fed faced, which was making changes to our goals and strategy for monetary policy. After holding a number of public meetings in communities across the country, and after issuing a new statement on our goals and strategy that was enriched by what we heard, we decided that this kind of input could continue to inform and enrich the other important decisions we face. So the listening has continued, and the agenda has evolved to include pressing issues in the wake of the COVID-19 pandemic, such as today's conversation on education and work opportunities for young people.
I am pleased to continue the
Fed Listens
process for the Board of Governors because I believe that providing the public with greater access to policymakers and gathering a diverse set of perspectives will help us better understand how our decisions affect individuals, families, and businesses. It will help us better understand the challenges people face and consider how we can help address those challenges in our work promoting a healthy economy and financial system.
One thing I know is that America can't thrive economically or financially unless young people thrive. I have school-age kids, and like many other families, we have faced challenges the past couple of years, dealing with the impact of the pandemic, trying to make sure that our kids have every opportunity to succeed and that they don't miss out on experiences outside of school to learn and grow. I know that this has been a very difficult period for young people and for parents, many of whom were forced to choose between work and caring for their children. I am hopeful that these difficult choices are behind us, and that the end of the pandemic will allow us to focus intently on what young people need most to succeed.
Their success is directly connected to the Fed's mission. Educating young people and preparing them for the demands made on the 21st century workforce will have a huge impact on the productivity of the U.S. economy. Rising productivity allows living standards to rise without contributing to inflation. So the Fed's goals for monetary policy—to promote maximum, inclusive employment and price stability—are closely related to the topics that we will be discussing today. The decisions that we at the Fed face on interest rates and other matters must be, and will be, informed by the perspectives that all of you bring to the table today about how to help young people thrive. Those decisions will be better decisions after we have heard you and gained a better understanding of the challenges and possible solutions.
Thank you again for the opportunity to hear your views, and I am really looking forward to our discussion.
Last Update:

 

 March 18, 2022
Back to Top
