BANK: FED
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Brief Remarks
DATE: 29/03/2023
SPEAKER: Brief Remarks
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/barr20230329a.htm
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Skip to main content
An official website of the United States Government
Here's how you know
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Back to Home
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Stay Connected
Federal Reserve Facebook Page
Federal Reserve Instagram Page
Federal Reserve YouTube Page
Federal Reserve Flickr Page
Federal Reserve LinkedIn Page
Federal Reserve Threads Page
Federal Reserve X Page
Federal Reserve Bluesky Page
Subscribe to RSS
Subscribe to Email
Recent Postings
Calendar
Publications
Site Map
A-Z index
Careers
FAQs
Videos
Contact
Search
Submit Search Button
Advanced
Toggle Dropdown Menu
Main Menu Toggle Button
Sections
Search Toggle Button
Search
Search Submit Button
Submit
Home
News & Events
Speeches
Speech
PDF
Please enable JavaScript if it is disabled in your browser or access the information through the links provided below.
March 29, 2023
Brief Remarks
Vice Chair for Supervision Michael S. Barr
At the National Community Reinvestment Coalition Just Economy Conference, Washington, D.C. (via prerecorded video)
Share
Accessible Keys for Video
[Space Bar]
toggles play/pause;
[Right/Left Arrows]
seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec );
[Up/Down Arrows]
increase/decrease volume;
[M]
toggles mute on/off;
[F]
toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11);
The
[Tab]
key may be used in combination with the
[Enter/Return]
key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off.
Good morning. Thank you to the National Community Reinvestment Coalition (NCRC) for the invitation to speak with you today. I regret that I cannot be there in person, but I can imagine the energy and excitement in a room full of so many dedicated community development professionals. I appreciate all the work that NCRC members and partner organizations do to advance economic opportunities for people and communities throughout the country, and the role you play in helping to inform public policy. For these brief remarks, I was asked to share my thoughts on the Community Reinvestment Act (CRA), a topic of great interest to all of you and to me as well.
As you are well aware, the Federal Reserve is working in partnership with the Office of the Comptroller of the Currency (OCC) and the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation (FDIC) to release a final rule for the CRA. The CRA is one of the seminal laws enacted to address systemic inequities in access to credit and one of the best tools that we, as regulators, have to help ensure banks meet their affirmative obligation to serve the credit needs of the communities in which they do business, including low- and moderate-income communities.
CRA has been an area of focus for me for over 25 years. As many of you know, I have had the opportunity to research and write about the CRA and its impact long before joining the Federal Reserve Board. Therefore, I was pleased to be asked by Chair Powell to lead the Fed's efforts, taking the baton from Vice Chair Brainard, as the agencies work together to finalize much-needed updates to the CRA.
The three agencies have been inclusive and analytical in their approach to CRA reform. Extensive stakeholder engagement and policy deliberations directly informed our proposal last year. What I will lay out as priorities for CRA reform align with the priorities you have heard previously from the Federal Reserve, OCC, and FDIC.
First, a successful reform of CRA must advance the core purpose of the statute. The law was intended to address inequities in access to credit and promote community engagement and financial inclusion in low- and moderate-income communities.
Second, the new CRA rule should address the significant changes in the banking sector since the regulations were last substantially revised more than a quarter century ago. This involves evaluation of online and mobile banking, branchless banking, and hybrid models.
Third, the new CRA rule should provide greater clarity, consistency, and transparency so that everyone—the public, community groups, and banks—understands what counts for CRA consideration and how a bank's rating is determined. As you saw in the proposal, the agencies are working to develop a metrics-based approach to CRA evaluations for retail lending and community development financing to bring greater clarity and consistency to CRA examinations, while still ensuring that there is an opportunity to consider qualitative factors to encourage activities that are particularly impactful or responsive.
And fourth, the new CRA rule should align evaluations and data collection to bank size and type. One of the strengths of the banking sector is its diversity of institutions, so a modern CRA must accommodate banks of different sizes and business models and ensure that smaller banks do not have the same requirements as large banks with much greater capacity.
I know that many of you are eagerly awaiting the new CRA rule. Let me assure you that all three agencies are diligently working together to craft a final rule in light of the extensive public comments we received on our proposal. Once finalized, it is my hope and belief that this new CRA final rule will support more impactful bank lending, investing, and services in today's banking environment for the communities you faithfully serve.
I hope you have an excellent conference, and I look forward to interacting with many of you in person so I can learn from you what works to create economic opportunities for families and communities.
Last Update:

 

 March 29, 2023
Back to Top
