BANK: FED
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Using Economic Data to Understand the Economy
DATE: 07/11/2023
SPEAKER: Christopher J. Waller
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/waller20231107a.htm
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Skip to main content
An official website of the United States Government
Here's how you know
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Back to Home
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Stay Connected
Federal Reserve Facebook Page
Federal Reserve Instagram Page
Federal Reserve YouTube Page
Federal Reserve Flickr Page
Federal Reserve LinkedIn Page
Federal Reserve Threads Page
Federal Reserve X Page
Federal Reserve Bluesky Page
Subscribe to RSS
Subscribe to Email
Recent Postings
Calendar
Publications
Site Map
A-Z index
Careers
FAQs
Videos
Contact
Search
Submit Search Button
Advanced
Toggle Dropdown Menu
Main Menu Toggle Button
Sections
Search Toggle Button
Search
Search Submit Button
Submit
Home
News & Events
Speeches
Speech
PDF
Please enable JavaScript if it is disabled in your browser or access the information through the links provided below.
November 07, 2023
Using Economic Data to Understand the Economy
Governor Christopher J. Waller
At "Beyond the Numbers," a conference hosted by the Research Division of the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis, St. Louis, Missouri
Share
Watch Live
*
Thank you, Katrina, for inviting me here today.
1
As I hope you all know, the Federal Reserve uses monetary policy to achieve its dual mandate of maximum employment and price stability. One of my key roles as a policymaker is to help determine what stance of policy will move the economy closer to that reality. To do that, I need to try to understand where the economy stands and where it is headed. And to do that, I look at a variety of economic and financial data.
I have a team of advisers who help me compile and analyze data. But you don't need your own team of economists to get a good idea of what's happening in the U.S. economy. The staff here at the Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis has created an easy-to-use interactive tool that brings economic data to your fingertips. FRED (Federal Reserve Economic Data) allows the public to access, plot, and analyze thousands of economic data series. I often use FRED myself when I want to look up current and historical data.
In fact, I thought for today's talk, I could use FRED to show some of the data series I consult when thinking about the economy. I'll start with some slides on economic activity and then move on to the labor market and inflation. I'll tell you how I am interpreting these data, what they have meant for policy to date, and offer a few caveats we should all keep in mind when using data. I will not be discussing my expectations for future monetary policy.
Slide 1. Real Gross Domestic Product
Slide 2. Contributions to Real GDP
Slide 3. Change in Payroll Employment
Slide 4. Vacancy-to-Unemployment Ratio
Slide 5. Labor Force Participation Rate
Slide 6. Personal Consumption Expenditures Inflation
Slide 7. Personal Consumption Expenditures Core Inflation
Slide 8. Federal Funds Target Range
Slide 9. 10-year Treasury Yield
Slide 10. Treasury Yield Spread (10 Year to 2 Year)
Slide 11. Payroll Revisions
Slide 12. Consumer Price Index Inflation Revisions
Much of what I have shared today comes from an economic outlook speech I gave a few weeks back. If you would like to read the full remarks, you can look for those on the Board's website.
2
I hope you do. But even more so, I hope these slides today have helped show that you and your students don't have to wait for a speech from a Fed policymaker to get an update on the U.S. economy. You can use FRED to access and analyze the data yourselves. I hope that reviewing these data series has been as fun for you as it has been for me or that at least I've sparked some ideas for how you can use this tool in the classroom. Thank you.
1. The views expressed here are my own and not necessarily those of my colleagues on the Federal Open Market Committee or the Federal Reserve Board.
Return to text
2. See Christopher J. Waller (2023), "
Something's Got to Give
," speech delivered at the Distinguished Speaker Seminar, European Economics and Financial Center, London, United Kingdom, October 18.
Return to text
View speech charts and figures
Accessible Version
Last Update:

 

 November 07, 2023
Back to Top
