BANK: FED
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Closing Remarks
DATE: 28/09/2023
SPEAKER: Closing Remarks
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/cook20230928a.htm
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Skip to main content
An official website of the United States Government
Here's how you know
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Back to Home
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Stay Connected
Federal Reserve Facebook Page
Federal Reserve Instagram Page
Federal Reserve YouTube Page
Federal Reserve Flickr Page
Federal Reserve LinkedIn Page
Federal Reserve Threads Page
Federal Reserve X Page
Federal Reserve Bluesky Page
Subscribe to RSS
Subscribe to Email
Recent Postings
Calendar
Publications
Site Map
A-Z index
Careers
FAQs
Videos
Contact
Search
Submit Search Button
Advanced
Toggle Dropdown Menu
Main Menu Toggle Button
Sections
Search Toggle Button
Search
Search Submit Button
Submit
Home
News & Events
Speeches
Speech
PDF
Please enable JavaScript if it is disabled in your browser or access the information through the links provided below.
September 28, 2023
Closing Remarks
Governor Lisa D. Cook
At the Minorities in Banking Forum, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, Dallas, Texas
Share
Accessible Keys for Video
[Space Bar]
toggles play/pause;
[Right/Left Arrows]
seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec );
[Up/Down Arrows]
increase/decrease volume;
[M]
toggles mute on/off;
[F]
toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11);
The
[Tab]
key may be used in combination with the
[Enter/Return]
key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off.
Good afternoon! I am Governor Lisa D. Cook. And it is a privilege to be able to say a few words to close out this important forum, now in its eighth year.
1
I am disappointed I couldn't be with you in person. But I am glad to have this opportunity to say why I believe your discussion these past two days is so important to the goal of promoting a healthy economy that works for everyone.
The Minorities in Banking Forum was started in 2016 by the Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City but is now supported by all of the Federal Reserve's regional Reserve Banks because of a recognition of its important mission, which is to nurture the professional development of bankers and help ensure that the leaders of banks are representative of the communities they serve.
If I tried to define the word "community," I would start with trust—neighbors trusting neighbors and working together for the common good. Successful banks also depend on trust—customers who believe their money will be safe, that they will be treated fairly, and that those making loan decisions and advising them understand their needs and their hopes. It is the same trust that drives economic decisionmaking throughout our economy. Banks help build that trust when they are led by people who are truly representative of those they serve.
The Fed created the forum with a few mutually beneficial goals in mind. First, leaders from middle management through the senior level would have an opportunity to come together in an environment focused on the industry and your own professional development. Secondly, we would do our best to connect you to the Federal Reserve and its work. And lastly, of particular importance to the Federal Reserve, this forum would help create and expand a pipeline and our network of diverse banking professionals.
As we conclude this year's forum, I encourage each of you to continue the conversations from these last few days and carry forward the inspiration we've gained here. I encourage everyone to reach out to other participants. Strong networks of peers and mentors will offer both support and advice as you advance in your career.
I challenge you to expand your network and engage with and support others to pursue careers with a sense of purpose and deep engagement with the communities you serve. Mentorship provides guidance and opportunities to the next generation of professionals. As you identify this kind of talent, I hope they will be joining you for next year's forum.
Thank you and enjoy the rest of the day!
1. These remarks represent my own views, which do not necessarily represent those of the Federal Reserve Board or the Federal Open Market Committee.
Return to text
Last Update:

 

 September 28, 2023
Back to Top
