BANK: FED
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Opening Remarks
DATE: 09/10/2025
SPEAKER: Opening Remarks
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/bowman20251009a.htm
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Skip to main content
An official website of the United States Government
Here's how you know
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Back to Home
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Stay Connected
Federal Reserve Facebook Page
Federal Reserve Instagram Page
Federal Reserve YouTube Page
Federal Reserve Flickr Page
Federal Reserve LinkedIn Page
Federal Reserve Threads Page
Federal Reserve X Page
Federal Reserve Bluesky Page
Subscribe to RSS
Subscribe to Email
Recent Postings
Calendar
Publications
Site Map
A-Z index
Careers
FAQs
Videos
Contact
Search
Submit Search Button
Advanced
Toggle Dropdown Menu
Main Menu Toggle Button
Sections
Search Toggle Button
Search
Search Submit Button
Submit
Home
News & Events
Speeches
Speech
PDF
Please enable JavaScript if it is disabled in your browser or access the information through the links provided below.
October 09, 2025
Opening Remarks
Vice Chair for Supervision Michelle W. Bowman
At the Community Bank Conference, hosted by the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, Washington, D.C.
Share
Watch Live
Accessible Keys for Video
[Space Bar]
toggles play/pause;
[Right/Left Arrows]
seeks the video forwards and back (5 sec );
[Up/Down Arrows]
increase/decrease volume;
[M]
toggles mute on/off;
[F]
toggles fullscreen on/off (Except IE 11);
The
[Tab]
key may be used in combination with the
[Enter/Return]
key to navigate and activate control buttons, such as caption on/off.
Good morning, everyone and welcome. It's a privilege to be here today at the Federal Reserve Board with so many of our nation's community bank CEOs. I want to start by thanking our bankers for the essential work you do every day—serving your communities, supporting small businesses and families and keeping local economies strong and growing. Today's event provides us an opportunity to come together and discuss the future of community banking.
This great nation hosts the largest and most effective financial system in the world, ensuring that capital flows to those who need it and can put it to productive use. I think of community banks as the foundation of our financial system. You are often the first call for small businesses seeking to grow, for families looking to buy homes, and for anyone seeking to achieve their financial goals. At a time of rapid technological change, a shifting regulatory landscape, and evolving consumer expectations, your work has never been more vital or more challenging.
The purpose of this conference is about
looking ahead
, at the opportunities, risks and innovations that will shape the future of community banking. It's also about
telling the community bank story
: not only the services you provide and impact you have in your communities but also the value of having strong, profitable and well-managed companies as the foundation of the banking system. There's a story to tell here and we want to ensure
community banks tell it and create their own their narrative
.
This conference brings together more than a hundred community bank CEOs in person and many more attending virtually. Our panels will include CEOs from across our diverse financial system. I look forward to hearing directly from these leaders to share what they are seeing—emerging trends, economic shifts and innovations that are shaping the financial system, including the impact of artificial intelligence and fraud, and which may affect your businesses. This conference also brings a broader perspective, from our Treasury Secretary Scott Bessent, to new technologies with Paxos CEO Chad Cascarilla to private credit and global outlook with Blackstone CEO Stephen Schwarzman, and consumer digital platforms with Robinhood CEO Vlad Tenev. These leaders will help us think more broadly about how economic and industry developments intersect with community banking.
Another special guest joining us today is CNBC host Jim Cramer, who will moderate a panel of experienced community bank CEOs who have a combined century of banking leadership. Today, we will showcase how community bankers have consistently adapted, innovated, and outperformed while staying true to their mission. These efforts do not necessarily make headlines on the front page of the business section, but they should. And there's no one better to help elevate the community bank narrative and amplify the value that community banks bring to America's economy than CNBC's Jim Cramer.
Finally, we will also host a traditional policy panel, featuring community bank CEOs discussing capital and liquidity regulation. This session will provide an opportunity for a thoughtful, candid discussion about how our regulatory frameworks affect your institutions and your ability to serve your communities. These conversations are essential to help shape our thinking and inform how we as regulators work to ensure that policies are effective, fair, and balanced.
The goal and the theme running through all of today's panels is clear: there is tremendous support from the public and private sector for a strong, resilient, thriving community banking industry
. Each of our sessions today reflects a shared belief in the importance of community banks to America's economic future.
Thank you for being with us today. Now I would like to thank our Treasury Secretary Scott Bessent for taking time from his busy schedule to be here to discuss community banking, and I will now invite him to share his insight with us.
Related Content
Community Bank Conference
Last Update:

 

 October 09, 2025
Back to Top
