BANK: FED
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Statement by Governor Christopher J. Waller
DATE: 21/03/2025
SPEAKER: Christopher J. Waller
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.federalreserve.gov/newsevents/speech/waller20250321a.htm
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Skip to main content
An official website of the United States Government
Here's how you know
Official websites use .gov
A
.gov
website belongs to an official government organization in the United States.
Secure .gov websites use HTTPS
A
lock
(
Lock
Locked padlock icon
) or
https://
means you've safely connected to the .gov website. Share sensitive information only on official, secure websites.
Back to Home
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
Stay Connected
Federal Reserve Facebook Page
Federal Reserve Instagram Page
Federal Reserve YouTube Page
Federal Reserve Flickr Page
Federal Reserve LinkedIn Page
Federal Reserve Threads Page
Federal Reserve X Page
Federal Reserve Bluesky Page
Subscribe to RSS
Subscribe to Email
Recent Postings
Calendar
Publications
Site Map
A-Z index
Careers
FAQs
Videos
Contact
Search
Submit Search Button
Advanced
Toggle Dropdown Menu
Main Menu Toggle Button
Sections
Search Toggle Button
Search
Search Submit Button
Submit
Home
News & Events
Speeches
Speech
PDF
Please enable JavaScript if it is disabled in your browser or access the information through the links provided below.
March 21, 2025
Statement by Governor Christopher J. Waller
Governor Christopher J. Waller
Share
At the most recent Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) meeting, I supported no change in the federal funds target range but preferred to continue the current pace of decline in securities holdings.
Reducing the Federal Reserve's balance sheet is an important part of normalizing monetary policy implementation and reducing unneeded reserves in the banking system. Slowing further or stopping redemptions of securities holdings will be appropriate as we get closer to an ample level of reserves. But in my view we are not there yet because reserve balances stand at over $3 trillion and this level is abundant. There is no evidence from money market indicators or my outreach conversations that the banking system is getting close to an ample level of reserves.
The Committee slowed the pace of redemptions in June 2024 to help ensure a smooth transition to the appropriate level of securities holdings needed to implement monetary policy efficiently and effectively. I believe that pace continues to be the right one.
If unanticipated disturbances to reserve demand emerge on the path to balance sheet normalization, the Federal Reserve System has a variety of tools to address such a development. Rather than changing our current pace of balance sheet reduction, the Federal Reserve should rely on those tools and develop a plan for how to respond to short-run strains if they emerge. Such a plan could be implemented swiftly in the event more reserves need to be injected into the banking system. Even with the decision to slow the pace of runoff at this meeting, a plan is still required should a disturbance occur in the future. While this is a procedural matter, good process leads to good outcomes, and good contingency planning helps avoid disruptions to markets and to the FOMC's efforts to achieve our economic objectives.
Last Update:

 

 March 21, 2025
Back to Top
