BANK: FED
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: FOMC statement
DATE: 27/07/2022
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/monetary20220727a1.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

For release at 2 p.m. EDT  
 
 
 
 
 
July 27, 2022 
Recent indicators of spending and production have softened.  Nonetheless, job 
gains have been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained 
low.  Inflation remains elevated, reflecting supply and demand imbalances related to 
the pandemic, higher food and energy prices, and broader price pressures.  
Russia’s war against Ukraine is causing tremendous human and economic 
hardship.  The war and related events are creating additional upward pressure on 
inflation and are weighing on global economic activity.  The Committee is highly 
attentive to inflation risks.  
The Committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate 
of 2 percent over the longer run.  In support of these goals, the Committee decided to 
raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percent and 
anticipates that ongoing increases in the target range will be appropriate.  In addition, 
the Committee will continue reducing its holdings of Treasury securities and agency 
debt and agency mortgage-backed securities, as described in the Plans for Reducing 
the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet that were issued in May.  The 
Committee is strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent objective.  
In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will 
continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic 
outlook.  The Committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy 
as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s 
goals.  The Committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of 
information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions,  
(more) 


 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
For release at 2 p.m. EDT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
July 27, 2022 
-2- 
inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international 
developments. 
Voting for the monetary policy action were Jerome H. Powell, Chair; John C. 
Williams, Vice Chair; Michael S. Barr; Michelle W. Bowman; Lael Brainard; James 
Bullard; Susan M. Collins; Lisa D. Cook; Esther L. George; Philip N. Jefferson; 
Loretta J. Mester; and Christopher J. Waller.   
-0- 
 


 
 
 
 
For release at 2 p.m. EDT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
July 27, 2022 
 
Decisions Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation 
The Federal Reserve has made the following decisions to implement the monetary policy 
stance announced by the Federal Open Market Committee in its statement on July 27, 
2022: 
• The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted unanimously to raise 
the interest rate paid on reserve balances to 2.4 percent, effective July 28, 2022. 
• As part of its policy decision, the Federal Open Market Committee voted to 
authorize and direct the Open Market Desk at the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the System Open Market 
Account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 
“Effective July 28, 2022, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to: 
o Undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the 
federal funds rate in a target range of 2-1/4 to 2-1/2 percent. 
o Conduct overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum 
bid rate of 2.5 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of 
$500 billion; the aggregate operation limit can be temporarily 
increased at the discretion of the Chair. 
o Conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an 
offering rate of 2.3 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of 
$160 billion per day; the per-counterparty limit can be temporarily 
increased at the discretion of the Chair. 
o Roll over at auction the amount of principal payments from the 
Federal Reserve's holdings of Treasury securities maturing in the 
calendar months of July and August that exceeds a cap of $30 billion 
per month.  Redeem Treasury coupon securities up to this monthly 
cap and Treasury bills to the extent that coupon principal payments 
are less than the monthly cap.  
o Starting in the calendar month of September, roll over at auction the 
amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve's holdings of 
Treasury securities maturing in each calendar month that exceeds a 
cap of $60 billion per month.  Redeem Treasury coupon securities up 
to this monthly cap and Treasury bills to the extent that coupon 
principal payments are less than the monthly cap.  
o Reinvest into agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) the amount 
of principal payments from the Federal Reserve's holdings of agency 
debt and agency MBS received in the calendar months of July and 
August that exceeds a cap of $17.5 billion per month. 
 
(more) 
 
 


 
 
 
 
For release at 2 p.m. EDT 
 
 
 
 
 
July 27, 2022 
-2- 
 
o Starting in the calendar month of September, reinvest into agency 
MBS the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve's 
holdings of agency debt and agency MBS received in each calendar 
month that exceeds a cap of $35 billion per month. 
o Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if 
needed for operational reasons. 
o Engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to 
facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve's agency MBS 
transactions.” 
• In a related action, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted 
unanimously to approve a 3/4 percentage point increase in the primary credit rate to 
2.5 percent, effective July 28, 2022.  In taking this action, the Board approved 
requests to establish that rate submitted by the Boards of Directors of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, 
Chicago, Dallas, and San Francisco. 
This information will be updated as appropriate to reflect decisions of the Federal Open 
Market Committee or the Board of Governors regarding details of the Federal Reserve’s 
operational tools and approach used to implement monetary policy. 
More information regarding open market operations and reinvestments may be found on 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s website.
