BANK: FED
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: FOMC statement
DATE: 26/01/2022
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/monetary20220126a1.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

For release at 2 p.m. EST  
 
 
 
 
January 26, 2022 
Indicators of economic activity and employment have continued to strengthen.  
The sectors most adversely affected by the pandemic have improved in recent months 
but are being affected by the recent sharp rise in COVID-19 cases.  Job gains have 
been solid in recent months, and the unemployment rate has declined substantially.  
Supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic and the reopening of the 
economy have continued to contribute to elevated levels of inflation.  Overall 
financial conditions remain accommodative, in part reflecting policy measures to 
support the economy and the flow of credit to U.S. households and businesses. 
The path of the economy continues to depend on the course of the virus.  Progress 
on vaccinations and an easing of supply constraints are expected to support continued 
gains in economic activity and employment as well as a reduction in inflation.  Risks 
to the economic outlook remain, including from new variants of the virus. 
The Committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate 
of 2 percent over the longer run.  In support of these goals, the Committee decided to 
keep the target range for the federal funds rate at 0 to 1/4 percent.  With inflation well 
above 2 percent and a strong labor market, the Committee expects it will soon be 
appropriate to raise the target range for the federal funds rate.  The Committee 
decided to continue to reduce the monthly pace of its net asset purchases, bringing 
them to an end in early March.  Beginning in February, the Committee will increase 
its holdings of Treasury securities by at least $20 billion per month and of agency 
mortgage‑backed securities by at least $10 billion per month.  The Federal Reserve’s 
ongoing purchases and holdings of securities will continue to foster smooth market 
functioning and accommodative financial conditions, thereby supporting the flow of 
credit to households and businesses. 
(more) 


 
 
  
 
 
 
For release at 2 p.m. EST 
 
 
 
 
 
January 26, 2022 
-2- 
In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will 
continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic 
outlook.  The Committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy 
as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s 
goals.  The Committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of 
information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation 
pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. 
 
Voting for the monetary policy action were Jerome H. Powell, Chair; John C. 
Williams, Vice Chair; Michelle W. Bowman; Lael Brainard; James Bullard; Esther 
L. George; Patrick Harker; Loretta J. Mester; and Christopher J. Waller.  Patrick 
Harker voted as an alternate member at this meeting. 
-0- 
 


 
For release at 2 p.m. EST 
 
 
 
 
 
January 26, 2022 
 
Decisions Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation 
The Federal Reserve has made the following decisions to implement the monetary policy 
stance announced by the Federal Open Market Committee in its statement on January 26, 
2022: 
• The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted unanimously to 
maintain the interest rate paid on reserve balances at 0.15 percent, effective January 
27, 2022. 
• As part of its policy decision, the Federal Open Market Committee voted to 
authorize and direct the Open Market Desk at the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the System Open Market 
Account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 
“Effective January 27, 2022, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the 
Desk to: 
o Undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the 
federal funds rate in a target range of 0 to 1/4 percent. 
o Complete the increase in System Open Market Account (SOMA) 
holdings of Treasury securities by $40 billion and of agency 
mortgage-backed securities (MBS) by $20 billion, as indicated in the 
monthly purchase plans released in mid-January. 
o Increase the SOMA holdings of Treasury securities by $20 billion and 
of agency MBS by $10 billion, during the monthly purchase period 
beginning in mid-February. 
o Increase holdings of Treasury securities and agency MBS by 
additional amounts as needed to sustain smooth functioning of 
markets for these securities. 
o Conduct overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum 
bid rate of 0.25 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of $500 
billion; the aggregate operation limit can be temporarily increased at 
the discretion of the Chair. 
o Conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an 
offering rate of 0.05 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 
billion per day; the per-counterparty limit can be temporarily 
increased at the discretion of the Chair. 
o Roll over at auction all principal payments from the Federal Reserve's 
holdings of Treasury securities and reinvest all principal payments 
from the Federal Reserve's holdings of agency debt and agency MBS 
in agency MBS. 
o Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for purchases and 
reinvestments, if needed for operational reasons. 
 
(more) 
 


 
For release at 2 p.m. EST 
 
 
 
 
 
January 26, 2022 
-2- 
 
 
o Engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to 
facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve's agency MBS transactions.” 
• In a related action, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted  
unanimously to approve the establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing 
level of 0.25 percent. 
This information will be updated as appropriate to reflect decisions of the Federal Open 
Market Committee or the Board of Governors regarding details of the Federal Reserve’s 
operational tools and approach used to implement monetary policy. 
More information regarding open market operations and reinvestments may be found on 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s website.
