BANK: FED
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: FOMC statement
DATE: 04/05/2022
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/monetary20220504a1.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

For release at 2 p.m. EDT  
 
 
 
 
 
May 4, 2022 
Although overall economic activity edged down in the first quarter, household 
spending and business fixed investment remained strong.  Job gains have been robust 
in recent months, and the unemployment rate has declined substantially.  Inflation 
remains elevated, reflecting supply and demand imbalances related to the pandemic, 
higher energy prices, and broader price pressures. 
The invasion of Ukraine by Russia is causing tremendous human and economic 
hardship.  The implications for the U.S. economy are highly uncertain.  The invasion 
and related events are creating additional upward pressure on inflation and are likely 
to weigh on economic activity.  In addition, COVID-related lockdowns in China are 
likely to exacerbate supply chain disruptions.  The Committee is highly attentive to 
inflation risks. 
The Committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate 
of 2 percent over the longer run.  With appropriate firming in the stance of monetary 
policy, the Committee expects inflation to return to its 2 percent objective and the 
labor market to remain strong.  In support of these goals, the Committee decided to 
raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 3/4 to 1 percent and anticipates that 
ongoing increases in the target range will be appropriate.  In addition, the Committee 
decided to begin reducing its holdings of Treasury securities and agency debt and 
agency mortgage-backed securities on June 1, as described in the Plans for Reducing 
the Size of the Federal Reserve’s Balance Sheet that were issued in conjunction with 
this statement. 
In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will 
continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic  
(more) 


 
 
  
 
 
 
 
For release at 2 p.m. EDT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
May 4, 2022 
-2- 
outlook.  The Committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy 
as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s 
goals.  The Committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of 
information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation 
pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. 
Voting for the monetary policy action were Jerome H. Powell, Chair; John C. 
Williams, Vice Chair; Michelle W. Bowman; Lael Brainard; James Bullard; Esther L. 
George; Patrick Harker; Loretta J. Mester; and Christopher J. Waller.  Patrick Harker 
voted as an alternate member at this meeting. 
-0- 
 


 
 
 
 
For release at 2 p.m. EDT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
May 4, 2022 
 
Decisions Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation 
The Federal Reserve has made the following decisions to implement the monetary policy 
stance announced by the Federal Open Market Committee in its statement on May 4, 
2022: 
• The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted unanimously to raise 
the interest rate paid on reserve balances to 0.9 percent, effective May 5, 2022. 
• As part of its policy decision, the Federal Open Market Committee voted to 
authorize and direct the Open Market Desk at the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the System Open Market 
Account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 
“Effective May 5, 2022, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to: 
o Undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal 
funds rate in a target range of 3/4 to 1 percent. 
o Conduct overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid 
rate of 1.0 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion; 
the aggregate operation limit can be temporarily increased at the 
discretion of the Chair. 
o Conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an offering 
rate of 0.8 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per 
day; the per-counterparty limit can be temporarily increased at the 
discretion of the Chair. 
o Roll over at auction the amount of principal payments from the Federal 
Reserve's holdings of Treasury securities maturing in the calendar month 
of June that exceeds a monthly cap of $30 billion.  Redeem Treasury 
coupon securities up to this monthly cap and Treasury bills to the extent 
that coupon principal payments are less than the monthly cap.  
o Reinvest into agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) the amount of 
principal payments from the Federal Reserve's holdings of agency debt 
and agency MBS received in the calendar month of June that exceeds a 
monthly cap of $17.5 billion. 
o Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if 
needed for operational reasons. 
o Engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to 
facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve's agency MBS transactions.” 
 
(more) 
 
 


 
 
 
 
For release at 2 p.m. EDT 
 
 
 
 
 
 
May 4, 2022 
-2- 
 
• 
In a related action, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted 
unanimously to approve a 1/2 percentage point increase in the primary credit rate to 
1 percent, effective May 5, 2022.  In taking this action, the Board approved requests 
to establish that rate submitted by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve 
Banks of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, 
St. Louis, Minneapolis, Kansas City, Dallas, and San Francisco. 
This information will be updated as appropriate to reflect decisions of the Federal Open 
Market Committee or the Board of Governors regarding details of the Federal Reserve’s 
operational tools and approach used to implement monetary policy. 
More information regarding open market operations and reinvestments may be found on 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s website.
