BANK: FED
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: FOMC statement
DATE: 29/10/2025
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/monetary20251029a1.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

For release at 2:00 p.m. EDT  
 
 
 
 
                 October 29, 2025 
 
 
Available indicators suggest that economic activity has been expanding at a moderate 
pace. Job gains have slowed this year, and the unemployment rate has edged up but remained 
low through August; more recent indicators are consistent with these developments. Inflation has 
moved up since earlier in the year and remains somewhat elevated. 
 
The Committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 
2 percent over the longer run. Uncertainty about the economic outlook remains elevated. The 
Committee is attentive to the risks to both sides of its dual mandate and judges that downside 
risks to employment rose in recent months. 
In support of its goals and in light of the shift in the balance of risks, the Committee 
decided to lower the target range for the federal funds rate by 1/4 percentage point to 3-3/4 to 
4 percent. In considering additional adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the 
Committee will carefully assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. 
The Committee decided to conclude the reduction of its aggregate securities holdings on 
December 1. The Committee is strongly committed to supporting maximum employment and 
returning inflation to its 2 percent objective.  
In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to 
monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. The Committee 
would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that 
 
(more) 


-2- 
could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s assessments will take 
into account a wide range of information, including readings on labor market conditions, 
inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.  
Voting for the monetary policy action were Jerome H. Powell, Chair; John C. Williams, 
Vice Chair; Michael S. Barr; Michelle W. Bowman; Susan M. Collins; Lisa D. Cook; Austan D. 
Goolsbee; Philip N. Jefferson; Alberto G. Musalem; and Christopher J. Waller. Voting against 
this action were Stephen I. Miran, who preferred to lower the target range for the federal funds 
rate by 1/2 percentage point at this meeting, and Jeffrey R. Schmid, who preferred no change to 
the target range for the federal funds rate at this meeting. 
-0- 
Attachment 
For media inquiries, please email media@frb.gov or call 202-452-2955. 


For release at 2:00 p.m. EDT  
 
 
 
 
                    October 29, 2025  
 
Decisions Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation 
The Federal Reserve has made the following decisions to implement the monetary policy stance 
announced by the Federal Open Market Committee in its statement on October 29, 2025: 
• 
The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted unanimously to lower the 
interest rate paid on reserve balances to 3.90 percent, effective October 30, 2025. 
• 
As part of its policy decision, the Federal Open Market Committee voted to direct the Open 
Market Desk at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to 
execute transactions in the System Open Market Account in accordance with the following 
domestic policy directive: 
"Effective October 30, 2025, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to: 
o Undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate 
in a target range of 3-3/4 to 4 percent. 
o Conduct standing overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid 
rate of 4.0 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion. 
o Conduct standing overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an 
offering rate of 3.75 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per 
day. 
o Roll over at auction the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve's 
holdings of Treasury securities maturing in October and November that exceeds a 
cap of $5 billion per month. Redeem Treasury coupon securities up to this 
monthly cap and Treasury bills to the extent that coupon principal payments are 
less than the monthly cap. Beginning on December 1, roll over at auction all 
principal payments from the Federal Reserve’s holdings of Treasury securities. 
o Reinvest the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve's holdings of 
agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) received in October 
and November that exceeds a cap of $35 billion per month into Treasury 
securities to roughly match the maturity composition of Treasury securities 
outstanding. Beginning on December 1, reinvest all principal payments from the 
Federal Reserve’s holdings of agency securities into Treasury bills. 
o Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if needed for 
operational reasons." 
 
• 
In a related action, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted 
unanimously to approve a 1/4 percentage point decrease in the primary credit rate to 4.0 
percent, effective October 30, 2025. In taking this action, the Board approved requests to 
establish that rate submitted by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of 
Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, Dallas, and San 
Francisco. 
(more) 


-2- 
This information will be updated as appropriate to reflect decisions of the Federal Open Market 
Committee or the Board of Governors regarding details of the Federal Reserve's operational tools 
and approach used to implement monetary policy. 
More information regarding open market operations and reinvestments may be found on the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York's website.
