BANK: FED
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: FOMC statement
DATE: 17/09/2025
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/monetary20250917a1.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

For release at 2:00 p.m. EDT  
 
 
 
 
             September 17, 2025 
 
 
 
Recent indicators suggest that growth of economic activity moderated in the first half of 
the year. Job gains have slowed, and the unemployment rate has edged up but remains low. 
Inflation has moved up and remains somewhat elevated. 
 
The Committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 
2 percent over the longer run. Uncertainty about the economic outlook remains elevated. The 
Committee is attentive to the risks to both sides of its dual mandate and judges that downside 
risks to employment have risen. 
 
In support of its goals and in light of the shift in the balance of risks, the Committee 
decided to lower the target range for the federal funds rate by 1/4 percentage point to 4 to 
4-1/4 percent. In considering additional adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, 
the Committee will carefully assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of 
risks. The Committee will continue reducing its holdings of Treasury securities and agency debt 
and agency mortgage‑backed securities. The Committee is strongly committed to supporting 
maximum employment and returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. 
 
In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to 
monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. The Committee 
would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that 
could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s assessments will take 
into account a wide range of information, including readings on labor market conditions, 
(more) 


 
-2- 
inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments.  
Voting for the monetary policy action were Jerome H. Powell, Chair; John C. Williams, 
Vice Chair; Michael S. Barr; Michelle W. Bowman; Susan M. Collins; Lisa D. Cook; Austan D. 
Goolsbee; Philip N. Jefferson; Alberto G. Musalem; Jeffrey R. Schmid; and Christopher J. 
Waller. Voting against this action was Stephen I. Miran, who preferred to lower the target range 
for the federal funds rate by 1/2 percentage point at this meeting. 
 
-0- 
Attachment 
For media inquiries, please email media@frb.gov or call 202-452-2955. 


For release at 2:00 p.m. EDT  
 
 
 
 
               September 17, 2025  
 
Decisions Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation 
The Federal Reserve has made the following decisions to implement the monetary policy stance 
announced by the Federal Open Market Committee in its statement on September 17, 2025: 
• 
The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted to lower the interest rate paid 
on reserve balances to 4.15 percent, effective September 18, 2025. 
• 
As part of its policy decision, the Federal Open Market Committee voted to direct the Open 
Market Desk at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to 
execute transactions in the System Open Market Account in accordance with the following 
domestic policy directive: 
"Effective September 18, 2025, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to: 
o Undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate 
in a target range of 4 to 4-1/4 percent. 
o Conduct standing overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid 
rate of 4.25 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion. 
o Conduct standing overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an 
offering rate of 4 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per 
day. 
o Roll over at auction the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve's 
holdings of Treasury securities maturing in each calendar month that exceeds a 
cap of $5 billion per month. Redeem Treasury coupon securities up to this 
monthly cap and Treasury bills to the extent that coupon principal payments are 
less than the monthly cap. 
o Reinvest the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve's holdings of 
agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) received in each 
calendar month that exceeds a cap of $35 billion per month into Treasury 
securities to roughly match the maturity composition of Treasury securities 
outstanding. 
o Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if needed for 
operational reasons." 
 
• 
In a related action, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted to 
approve a 1/4 percentage point decrease in the primary credit rate to 4.25 percent, 
effective September 18, 2025. In taking this action, the Board approved requests to 
establish that rate submitted by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of 
Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, Minneapolis, Kansas 
City, Dallas, and San Francisco. 
 
 
(more) 


 
-2- 
 
This information will be updated as appropriate to reflect decisions of the Federal Open Market 
Committee or the Board of Governors regarding details of the Federal Reserve's operational tools 
and approach used to implement monetary policy. 
More information regarding open market operations and reinvestments may be found on the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York's website.
