BANK: FED
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: FOMC statement
DATE: 07/05/2025
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/monetary20250507a1.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

For release at 2:00 p.m. EDT  
 
 
 
 
                       May 7, 2025 
 
 
 
Although swings in net exports have affected the data, recent indicators suggest that 
economic activity has continued to expand at a solid pace. The unemployment rate has stabilized 
at a low level in recent months, and labor market conditions remain solid. Inflation remains 
somewhat elevated. 
 
The Committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 
2 percent over the longer run. Uncertainty about the economic outlook has increased further. The 
Committee is attentive to the risks to both sides of its dual mandate and judges that the risks of 
higher unemployment and higher inflation have risen. 
 
In support of its goals, the Committee decided to maintain the target range for the federal 
funds rate at 4-1/4 to 4-1/2 percent. In considering the extent and timing of additional 
adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will carefully assess 
incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. The Committee will continue 
reducing its holdings of Treasury securities and agency debt and agency mortgage‑backed 
securities. The Committee is strongly committed to supporting maximum employment and 
returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. 
In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to 
monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. The Committee 
would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that 
could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s assessments will take 
(more) 


-2- 
into account a wide range of information, including readings on labor market conditions, 
inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. 
Voting for the monetary policy action were Jerome H. Powell, Chair; John C. Williams, 
Vice Chair; Michael S. Barr; Michelle W. Bowman; Susan M. Collins; Lisa D. Cook; Austan D. 
Goolsbee; Philip N. Jefferson; Neel Kashkari; Adriana D. Kugler; Alberto G. Musalem; and 
Christopher J. Waller. Neel Kashkari voted as an alternate member at this meeting. 
-0- 
Attachment 
For media inquiries, please email media@frb.gov or call 202-452-2955. 


For release at 2:00 p.m. EDT  
 
 
 
 
                          May 7, 2025  
 
Decisions Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation 
The Federal Reserve has made the following decisions to implement the monetary policy stance 
announced by the Federal Open Market Committee in its statement on May 7, 2025: 
• 
The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted unanimously to maintain the 
interest rate paid on reserve balances at 4.4 percent, effective May 8, 2025. 
• 
As part of its policy decision, the Federal Open Market Committee voted to direct the Open 
Market Desk at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to 
execute transactions in the System Open Market Account in accordance with the following 
domestic policy directive: 
"Effective May 8, 2025, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to: 
o Undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate 
in a target range of 4-1/4 to 4-1/2 percent. 
o Conduct standing overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid 
rate of 4.5 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion. 
o Conduct standing overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an 
offering rate of 4.25 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per 
day. 
o Roll over at auction the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve's 
holdings of Treasury securities maturing in each calendar month that exceeds a 
cap of $5 billion per month. Redeem Treasury coupon securities up to this 
monthly cap and Treasury bills to the extent that coupon principal payments are 
less than the monthly cap. 
o Reinvest the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve's holdings of 
agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) received in each 
calendar month that exceeds a cap of $35 billion per month into Treasury 
securities to roughly match the maturity composition of Treasury securities 
outstanding.  
o Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if needed for 
operational reasons." 
• 
In a related action, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted 
unanimously to approve the establishment of the primary credit rate at the existing level 
of 4.5 percent. 
 
 
 
 
 
(more) 


-2- 
This information will be updated as appropriate to reflect decisions of the Federal Open Market 
Committee or the Board of Governors regarding details of the Federal Reserve's operational tools 
and approach used to implement monetary policy. 
More information regarding open market operations and reinvestments may be found on the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York's website.
