BANK: BOE
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Inflation expectations, inflation persistence, and monetary policy strategy – speech by Catherine L. Mann
DATE: 01/06/2022
SPEAKER: Catherine L. Mann
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/speech/2022/september/catherine-l-mann-53rd-annual-conference-of-the-money-macro-and-finance-society
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Inflation expectations, inflation persistence, and monetary policy strategy – speech by Catherine L. Mann
Given at the 53rd Annual Conference of the Money Macro and Finance Society, University of Kent
Published on 

 05 September 2022
Catherine L. Mann describes how inflation expectations affect the Phillips curve. She then presents data on survey and financial market expectations about inflation in the short, medium, and long run. She analyses whether these are consistent with our 2% inflation target and what that implies for monetary policy strategy.
Speech
1: Introduction
At its meeting last month, the Monetary Policy Committee came together to deliver on its pledge that

 it would react forcefully in response to more persistent inflationary pressures. A large majority

 agreed that this condition had been met and that we were indeed seeing persistence so the hike by a

 half percentage point was the appropriate course of action at that meeting. This sends a strong

 signal that the MPC is committed to leaning against domestic inflation pressures becoming further

 entrenched.
Now, some commentators have pointed out that the MPC’s central forecast projects a pro-longed

 recession over the next quarters, and that this slack would yield inflation falling below the target

 in year three.
footnote
[1]
Therefore, they claim inflation to

 be vanquished already and indeed that monetary policy already has become contractionary. Further,

 since the shocks hitting the UK economy have come mostly from external sources – supply chain

 frictions, energy prices, war – they claim that the MPC need not tighten further, but rather can

 ‘look through’ these shocks, since they will mean-revert.
In this speech I’m going to argue that, while some elements of this line of argument might hold in

 normal times, it is based on an incomplete view of the inflation process and of the channels through

 which monetary policy can achieve our remit. Specifically, in today’s environment, inflation

 expectations take a central role, alongside the standard channel of aggregate demand and slack.

 Looking through the lens of inflation expectations, achieving the remit depends on ensuring that

 inflation expectations in the short-term do not become adaptive, and that medium-term inflation

 expectations do not drift, so that long-term expectations remain anchored.
What most people seem to have in mind when thinking about the determinants of inflation is a variant

 of the Phillips curve (Phillips, 1958), which relates inflation to some measure of slack in the

 economy. In the earliest version of this model, inflation today is determined by economic outcomes

 yesterday – inflation therefore will adjust slowly and with considerable lag. To bring inflation

 down, when the MPC raises interest rates, it increases borrowing costs for firms and households

 causing them to spend less, unemployment eventually rises and slack opens up. Only then do companies

 adjust prices in response to slowing demand for their goods and services. In Friedman’s (1961) story

 of “monetary policy having long and variable lags”, this is where the “long” comes from.

 Importantly, since lagged inflation is pre-determined, the only way to get inflation down from high

 levels is to depress aggregate demand for an extended period of time. In this formulation,

 disinflation is costly and necessarily so.
I do not dispute that this mechanism exists, but I hope that the MPC will not have to depend on it

 alone to bring inflation down to target. In the more nuanced formulation of the Phillips curve

 discussed below, inflation today does not simply depend on past inflation but depends as well on

 markets, firms, and household’s expectations, and crucially, how these expectations react to each

 other, are formed over time, and interact with our and others’ policy choices. The MPCs’ evaluation

 of inflation expectations therefore should take a central role in monetary policy decisions.
In this more complex and arguably more realistic and relevant version of the inflation model, a fast

 and forceful monetary tightening, potentially followed by a hold or reversal, is superior to the

 gradualist approach because doing so is more likely to promote the role that inflation expectations

 can play in bringing inflation back sustainably to 2% over the medium term. This policy strategy

 would reduce the risks of a more extended and costly tightening cycle later that depends primarily

 on shrinking aggregate demand.
2: Micro-foundations and expectations in the Phillips curve
The first expectations-augmented Phillips curve was a crucial innovation in understanding the

 inflation process. In this formulation, inflation expectations are not just backward-looking, but

 agents in the model are allowed to anticipate how policy choices today may shape macroeconomic

 outcomes tomorrow.
footnote
[2]
If we allow for both backward- and

 forward-looking expectations formation, we arrive at the hybrid Phillips curve (Clarida et al., 1999

 and Gali & Gertler, 1999). Here, the non-slack term in the equation becomes a weighted average

 of past and expected future inflation:
\[\pi_{t}=\left ( 1-\beta\right)\pi_{t-1}+\beta \pi_{t+1}^{e}+\lambda\bar{y}_{t}\]
(1)
Depending on the value of β, this model encompasses the accelerationist Phillips curve (as β → 0) but

 importantly also encompasses the so-called New Keynesian Phillips curve (as β → 1). In the latter

 model, inflation is entirely forward-looking and determined only by expectations of future

 inflation, which is a function of expected future slack or more precisely, to the discounted path of

 expected future real marginal costs. To see why that is interesting and potentially relevant to the

 current conjuncture, let me briefly walk through the foundations of the New Keynesian Phillips

 curve, which makes the bridge between microeconomic fundamentals and macroeconomic outcomes.
By virtue of being “micro-founded”, the New Keynesian model can connect all its macroeconomic

 equations to some microeconomic (i.e. firm- or household-level) optimisation problem. The key bridge

 between macro measures of inflation and the micro-foundations is the price-setting problem of the

 firm. To presage the conclusion: In their pricing strategy, firms face adjustment costs, consider

 trend inflation and competitor prices, and evidence downward wage and price rigidity. Collectively

 these yield a non-linear and potentially shifting Phillips Curve, with important implications for

 the role for monetary policy to influence expectations.
The first crucial point for the inflation model is that prices typically are not infinitely flexible.

 Firms will only choose to bear costs of changing prices once the adjustment is sufficiently

 large
footnote
[3]
or because prices are fixed

 through contractual arrangements (e.g. rent, utilities)
footnote
[4]
.

 Calvo (1983) formulates these various types of stickiness by assuming that a certain proportion of

 firms is allowed to reset its prices while the rest remain at last period’s. As shown in
Chart 1
(adapted from Werning, 2022), if the firm anticipates that prices will go

 up, it will optimally overshoot the current price level to ensure that it hits the correct price on

 average. Uncertainty about how long they will stay at the new price and how fast the frictionless

 price level is rising will create incentives to overshoot by even more to insure against

 exceptionally long spells or more rapid rises. Thus, the adjusting prices have momentum above, and

 can pull up, trend inflation.
Further, when we take seriously the way firms behave in the real world, there may be price

 coordination between firms. When a firm sees a competitor raise their price, they might be

 emboldened to do the same even if their marginal costs have not actually moved. If a series of large

 and salient shocks increase costs for some but not others, this “me-too-ism” would show up as a

 persistent rise in desired mark-ups, driving inflation upwards with seemingly no connection to cost

 or demand conditions.
footnote
[5]
Various firm-level behaviors affect the shape of the Phillips Curve. The optimal reset-price behavior

 along with me-too-ism induce an upward bias in inflation in the short term. On the disinflationary

 side, while firms are quick to raise prices when they can, prices rarely outright fall in aggregate.
Chart 1: Firm-price overshooting in sticky price models
Footnotes
Source: Werning (2022).
Notes: Adapted from
Ivan Werning’s slidepack
presented

 at the
NBER Summer Institute 2022
.
This downward nominal rigidity can be seen in deep recessions: Even during the Great Financial Crisis

 or the Covid lockdowns, consumer prices in the UK never actually fell in year-on-year terms. Firms

 facing bankruptcy may raise prices to generate revenues to pay debtors, even if reducing prices

 might make more sense in theory (Gilchrist et al., 2017). Nominal wage rigidity is well known and

 since labour is an important cost this will bolster the downward rigidity of prices (Daly &

 Hobijn, 2014). All told, for a given change in economic slack, prices will rise more in expansions

 than they would fall in contractions.
footnote
[6]
The Phillips curve is non-linear.
A second innovation, particularly important now, is that inflation expectations may change over time.

 In theoretical work, the change between the backward-looking, accelerationist and the

 forward-looking views often is modelled as a largely exogenous regime shift. However, it is

 plausible that there is a smoother transition between states, endogenously shaped by macroeconomic

 outcomes. For example, contemporaneous research from the 1970s suggested that the time away from

 target was an important determinant of the degree of backward-lookingness: Robert Gordon in 1970

 rejected that the US Phillips curve was accelerationist. By 1977 his updated estimates suggested

 inflation expectations were fully backward-looking.
One plausible mechanism for such endogenous regime shift – proposed by Cornea-Madeira et al.

 (2019)
footnote
[7]
– arises if we think of two types

 of firms and households in the economy: forward-looking “fundamentalists” and backward-looking

 “random-walkers”. These have different forecasting rules, and firms and households will switch

 between them when the one rule outperforms the other. If inflation varies modestly around its

 target, the fundamentalists dominate. This is akin to Alan Greenspan’s desired Central Bank outcome

 where firms and households ‘ignore’ inflation when making their decisions. The literature formalizes

 this behavior as ‘rational inattention’.
footnote
[8]
But, when shocks drive inflation away from target for extended periods and the fundamental rule

 produces larger forecast errors, more firms and households use the backward-looking rule to form

 adaptive expectations. In this case, experiences of past high inflation can become embedded in

 firms’ and households’ price-setting decisions and the aggregate Phillips curve becomes more

 accelerationist over time.
I find this framework useful because it is more nuanced than the discrete switching between

 “expectations are forever anchored” and “expectations are suddenly unanchored”. Even if long-term

 expectations remain stable and the central bank’s target is credible, such a model can generate

 different degrees of backward-lookingness and intrinsic inflation persistence. From the theoretical

 perspective, this time varying expectations formulation also represents a departure from the strict

 rational expectations formulation of the canonical New Keynesian Phillips curve. In this more

 complex formulation, monetary policy, by having an expected effect on macroeconomic outcomes, can

 feed back to affect the inflation expectations process and therefore current inflation outcomes.
To summarize the importance of this world for monetary policy: Monetary policy does not just focus on

 demand management, but also on coordinating firms and households to agree on some fundamental

 equilibrium,
footnote
[9]
in which prices and wages rise at

 target-consistent rates and the economy is growing at a sustainable pace and any shocks are expected

 to wash out quickly.
From the standpoint of monetary policy, these variations yield different implications for channels

 through which monetary policy can affect inflation. In the old, backward-looking, accelerationist

 version, inflation always
follows
economic slack. In the rational expectations model, when

 expectations are forward-looking, inflation can move
even before
changes in the monetary

 policy stance have affected real economic activity. And in the time-varying model, monetary policy

 can influence aggregate inflation expectations via the share of fundamentalists versus random

 walkers. It follows that, if monetary policy can act on inflation expectations, then the dependence

 on the aggregate demand channel to discipline firms’ price setting is reduced.
Collecting up the theories points to a Phillips Curve that is both non-linear and can shift.

 (
Chart 2
). When we think about it, the Phillips curve is actually a set of

 isoquants, which trace out all attainable combinations of inflation and slack given a value for

 expected inflation. When expectations change, so does the location of the curve.
Chart 2: Shifting Phillips curves due to changing

 inflation expectations
Modest shift
(a)
and acceleration
(b)
Here, let the blue line be the Phillips curve of the economy at the outset of any shocks or firm

 reactions. Given initial conditions for inflation expectations as well as desired mark-ups, there is

 a level of slack y* consistent with achieving the inflation target π* at the intersection of the

 horizontal dotted line and the blue curve. Small disturbances will push the economy away from that

 intersection but only by modest amounts and we can always – along the curve – travel back to the

 same equilibrium.
Now consider the case in which inflation expectations drift up: the newly attainable combinations of

 inflation and slack are shown by the red curve. Keeping inflation at target requires more slack in

 the economy, more unemployment, and lower growth (the intersection of the horizontal dotted line

 with the red curve). On the flipside, holding the level of slack constant at the old y* will lead to

 higher inflation (the intersection of the vertical dotted line with the red curve).
footnote
[10]
If we could be confident that any shift was short-lived and that the red curve would shift back in

 line with the blue curve by itself, this might be a situation in which MPC could choose to “look

 through” the shock and tolerate a temporary inflation overshoot. Our remit explicitly allows for

 this as long as medium-term price stability is not threatened.
If, however, there is a risk of further acceleration of inflation and further drift of expectations,

 to ‘look through’ the inflation changes, we have to be very confident that inflation does not

 becoming embedded in expectations and outcomes. If there are such shifts in inflation expectations,

 more economic pain is required to bring inflation back to target (red dashed curve on the right-hand

 side of
Chart 2
). Which situation are we in now? What do we know from the data

 about the slope and potential shifting of the Phillips Curve?
3: Taking these models to the data
A first observation is that the Phillips curve set ups above are not the same as the correlation

 between inflation and an output gap measure or unemployment (sometimes dubbed the “Phillips

 correlation”). Instead, they describe structural, causal relationships between inflation yesterday,

 today, and tomorrow along with associated economic conditions. This relationship may not be

 immediately visible from a simple scatterplot. Just as correlation does not imply causation,

 causation does not imply correlation.
In fact, if one were to simply fit a line through the scatter in
Chart 3
, which

 plots UK unemployment against CPI inflation in quarterly frequency, there would be no detectable

 relationship. However, if we trace out the time series underneath the point cloud, we can see some

 interesting patterns:
The first thing that jumps out is of course the high-inflation period of the 1970s and the subsequent

 moderation of the 80s (in light blue). This moderation in inflation did not come painlessly but

 instead was only achieved alongside high rates of unemployment. Then, the thirty years thereafter

 trace out a continuous downward trend in both inflation and unemployment and finally, variation

 becomes so small that it is barely visible compared to the first twenty years. Finally, compared to

 the recent history, the Covid period does not look like a particularly egregious outlier.
footnote
[11]
Chart 3: Unemployment rate
(a)
and CPI

 inflation
(b)
in the UK since 1971
Percent of labour force
(a)
and year-on-year percentage

 changes
(b)
Footnotes
Source: Office for National Statistics.
Notes: The chart shows combinations of CPI

 inflation and the unemployment in the UK at quarterly frequency. Inflation before 1989

 is based on the ONS’ historical series for UK CPI available at
‘Modelling a Back Series for the

 Consumer Price Index, 1950 – 2011
’.
Now consider the time from 2021 Q4 onwards. The configuration of the most recent data (the final red

 dot) with July inflation at double digits and unemployment at under 4% looks more like 1973 than any

 other time, as indeed does the importance of energy prices in both periods.
footnote
[12]
Of course, many things have

 changed since then – one of which is the recognition of the power of an independent central bank –

 but this configuration of the data should cause concern.
Strong, independent, and credible central banks may have contributed to why the Phillips correlation

 has ‘disappeared’ in recent periods across the world. Although, perhaps the Phillips curve never

 actually went away and it probably always had been relatively flat (Barnichon & Meesters, 2021).

 It just became more difficult to identify because monetary policy became more systematic and

 predictable. As McLeay and Tenreyro (2020) explain, if monetary policy were able to perfectly offset

 demand shocks, there would be no visible correlation in the data. It may even be the other way

 around as the central bank would seek to increase inflation in times of deficient demand and vice

 versa.
footnote
[13]
Additionally, to underline the importance of expectations in the inflation process, much of the

 apparent flattening in more recent samples can be attributed to a better anchoring in inflation

 expectations (Hazell et al., 2022). But it is probably best if Emi Nakamura explained this all

 herself tomorrow.
Arguably, this anchoring is what differentiates the 1970s and 80s from the rest of the data in
Chart 3
: Back then, shifting expectations made it impossible to achieve low

 inflation without generating a high degree of economic slack. Policymakers were too confident that

 inflation would eventually return back to target, for example due to the endogenous demand

 destruction caused by high oil prices. This miscalculation allowed inflation expectations to ratchet

 up to high levels. The required economic slack can be seen by the long and painful path from the top

 left to the bottom right in the chart. Between 1980 and 1985, inflation in the UK fell by about 10

 percentage points but at the cost of a more-than doubling in the unemployment rate from 5 to nearly

 12%.
This is of course put millions of people out of a job with millions of livelihoods ruined – a

 prospect we would very much like to avoid. There is another way: When inflation expectations are

 time-varying monetary policy can affect them directly, shifting the curve back towards the

 fundamental equilibrium π
*
and y* via both movements along the curve but also shifting

 it.
What data help us to evaluate how successful we are in keeping inflation expectations consistent with

 the fundamental equilibrium? I will argue first: Long-term inflation expectations remain relatively

 well anchored and the MPC has credibility to be able to fulfil its remit. This is unequivocally a

 good thing but survey measures do not tell us how we actually get to the objective of 2% – through

 aggregate demand compression or other ways. Second: Short-term inflation expectations are worryingly

 elevated but mostly reflect past inflation and are likely not a good guide for policy choices or

 outcomes in real time. Third, of significant concern: Medium-term measures of inflation expectations

 have drifted up alongside realized inflation, albeit not by as much. This may indicate a worrying

 shift in trend inflation, e.g. a shift in the Phillips Curve. A drift in medium-term inflation

 expectations is the development that monetary policy needs to firmly lean against and it should be a

 key yardstick for whether the MPC’s decisions are effective.
Going to the data on expectations. In general, we can partition different measures of inflation

 expectations as derived from surveys or financial market pricing in accordance with the distance to

 some shock that moves inflation off the target. In the very short run, roughly up to the 1-year

 horizon, they mostly reflect the direct impact of the shock on the economy. As people (and

 policymakers) observe macroeconomic outcomes in real time, they learn about the nature of the shock

 and form expectations about how it may play out in the immediate future.
Short-term expectations are, therefore, quite correlated with recent inflation outcomes as can be

 seen, for example, from price expectations of firms in the Decision Maker Panel. As
Chart

 4
shows, expectations of price changes over the next 12 months have increased by

 similar amounts as price changes over the past 12 months. This is certainly not good news and points

 to a more protracted inflation “hump” than would be implied by one-off shocks to the price level

 (Mann, 2022a) but it is also could be consistent with a relatively swift return to target

 thereafter, albeit tempered by downward stickiness.
A more nuanced view on inflation expectations comes from looking at expectations for the year after

 next; that is price changes between 12 and 24 months ahead (what in financial markets would be

 called 1-year-1-year inflation). At this would be a horizon, we would plausibly expect inflation to

 reflect policy choices.
Chart 5a
shows the time series of expectations from the

 Bank’s Inflation Attitudes Survey as well as financial market pricing of inflation at that 2-year

 mark.
Chart 4: Firms’ own-price outcomes and short-term

 expectations
Year-on-year percentage changes
Footnotes
Source:
Decision

 Maker Panel
and Bunn et al. (2022). Latest observation: August 2022.
Chart 5: Intermediate-term inflation expectations and

 financial market pricingYear-on-year percentage changes
(a)
and share of respondents
(b)
Footnotes
Source: Bloomberg and
Bank

 of England/Ipsos Inflation Attitudes Survey
.
Notes: Red line on the left-hand side shows monthly averages of financial market pricing for inflation extracted from inflation-linked swaps. Yellow line shows the median expectation for

 inflation 2 years ahead from the household survey, the right-hand side chart snapshots

 of its distribution. Latest observation: August 2022 for financial market pricing, May

 2022 for survey expectations (
August

 data for the BoE/Ipsos survey
will become available on 9 September 2022).
The two series’ levels are not directly comparable since the financial market instruments behind the

 red line are based on RPI and likely incorporate risk premia, i.e. they are not a clean measure of

 the underlying inflation expectation. Nonetheless, comparing each series to its recent history is

 still instructive. Both measures are somewhat elevated currently, but while household expectations

 have been on the rise for four quarters in a row now, financial market measures have come off their

 peak, albeit still holding well above historical average levels. What might be the reason for this

 difference in evolution of expectations 2 years out? Financial markets, being more forward looking,

 anticipate a worsening macro environment resulting from the massive energy price squeeze and also

 the tightening of financial conditions that they, to a degree, are responsible for.
While household price expectations do not reflect these macroeconomic prospects, we can observe a

 worrying increase in the risk of sustained inflation well in excess of target. Compare the red bars

 on the right-hand side of
Chart 5
with the blue, especially in the

 larger-than-five-percent bracket. In the latest survey round, more than a fifth of all respondents

 said that inflation in two years’ time would be higher than 5 percent, and another fifth see

 inflation higher 3%.
Moving now to the solidly medium term, roughly expectations of inflation between 3 and 5 years ahead.

 At that horizon, direct effects of shocks ought to have already played out. Therefore, expectations

 at that point mainly reflect possible second- and third-round effects as well as, importantly, the

 effects of current and anticipated policy choices. We need to pay significant attention to these

 measures since they can tell us something about the adequacy of our policy strategy.
Of concern is that the measures that we have for this horizon have been drifting up and have remained

 at levels inconsistent with the target. For example, the DMP introduced a new question in May of

 this year directly asking for firms’ expectations of aggregate consumer price inflation.
footnote
[14]
While their backward-looking

 perception of consumer price inflation has generally been in line with measured CPI on average (e.g.

 9.6 percent for July 2022 over July 2021 in the survey compared with 10.1 percent in the official

 data), their 3-year ahead expectation has held firmly at 4.2 percent, despite prospects for a

 significant slowdown in economic activity.
Chart 6
shows the distribution of responses to those questions. Backward-looking

 perceptions on the left-hand side have, as expected, moved rightward with actual inflation. However,

 the distribution of 3-year ahead inflation on the right is nearly indistinguishable from what it was

 in May.
Chart 6: DMP inflation perceptions
(a)
and

 medium-term expectations
(b)
Density
Footnotes
Source:
Decision

 Maker Panel
and Bank calculations.
Notes: The charts show kernel density estimates of the distribution of responses about CPI inflation over the past year (on the left-hand side) and about CPI inflation 3 years ahead (on the right-hand side).
Recall that those months saw a marked deterioration in consumer sentiment indicators, talk of an

 imminent recession in much of the Western world, and robust monetary tightening by many central

 banks. Typically, we would expect such an outlook to dampen measured price inflation which should be

 reflected in the DMP. However, these measures show no such move, neither in the central tendency nor

 in the tail. If anything, the right tail has even fattened in August – a worrying sign of

 embeddedness beyond the short term. Further, although we do not have a long time series of the

 question of 3-year ahead CPI expectations, that there is no apparent sensitivity to expected

 macroeconomic conditions should give us pause.
The observation of a firming drift in medium-term inflation expectations is consistent with Bank

 staff research of underlying trend inflation. One such piece of analysis, the Underlying Inflation

 Measure of Lam, Potjagailo, and Wanengkirtyo (2022), uses a dynamic factor model of item-level CPI

 data to extract a common factor of broad-based inflation. In
Chart 7
I plot this

 measure alongside actual CPI inflation and the volatility-based inflation measure from my speech at

 the start of the year (Mann, 2022a).
Chart 7: CPI inflation and measures of trend inflation
Year-on-year percentage changes
Footnotes
Source: Office for National Statistics, Lam, Potjagailo & Wanengkirtyo (2022), and

 Bank calculations.
Notes: The volatility-based measure is the average of inflation rates

 of the least volatile 20% of CPI components. See Mann (2022a) and Mann & Brandt

 (2022) for more details. The underlying inflation measure (UIM) is based on a dynamic

 factor model that statistically captures broad-based joint co-movement across 438 CPI

 item series. For more details on its construction, see Lam, Potjagailo &

 Wanengkirtyo (2022, forthcoming). Latest observation: July 2022.
Both series correlate quite well, indicating that they are measuring the same object: the underlying

 rate of inflation common to the entire basket. Over the past, this rate has been quite persistent so

 it could plausibly remain elevated even as headline inflation comes down.
I am worried about the drift in this component since, theoretically, this would be the eventual

 resting point of inflation once shocks have washed out. As I explained in that earlier speech, the

 ‘underlying’ rate does not have to equal 2 percent to be consistent with achieving the inflation

 target. But, if not, there need to be other persistent influences that keep headline inflation on

 target. Before the GFC, those might have been intensifying globalisation and falling goods prices,

 the question is what will it be now?
A tighter monetary policy stance, on average, would be one such factor, at least for as long as

 medium-term inflation expectations and measures of trend inflation are elevated. The financial

 markets’ evolving yield curve is one metric of how much they think the MPC will have to tighten.
Chart 8: Long-term inflation expectations and financial

 market pricing
Year-on-year percentage changes
(a)
and share of

 respondents
(b)
Footnotes
Source: Bloomberg and
Bank

 of England/Ipsos Inflation Attitudes Survey
.
Notes: Blue line on the left-hand side shows monthly averages of financial market pricing for inflation

 extracted from inflation-linked gilts. Yellow line shows the median expectation for

 long-term inflation from the household survey, the right-hand side chart snapshots of its distribution. Latest observation: August 2022 for

 financial market pricing, May 2022 for survey expectations (
August

 data for the BoE/Ipsos survey
will become available on 9 September 2022).
What about long-term inflation expectations?
Chart 8
shows these measures for

 average inflation starting five years ahead. The news is mixed. On the one hand, these measures are

 in line with their history, consistent with inflation being anchored, and consistent with

 credibility of the target.
However, the survey measure on the left-hand side masks underlying movements that warrant attention,

 particularly for households. Households matter because their buying habits either will discipline

 firms’ prices or will allow the me-too-ism that underlies aggregate inflation. For example, since

 mid-2020 we have seen a steady increase in respondents that say inflation in the long run will be 5%

 or more on average and a steady decrease in those that expect below-target inflation. Therefore, we

 need to be vigilant that these long-term expectations do not keep moving higher. Looking over the

 time-series, aggregate long-term expectations remain below where they were in 2019 and in 2014. So

 despite the increase in respondents in the larger-than-five-percent bucket, as of now, unanchoring

 does not appear in the median.
footnote
[15]
In addition to households, evidence from the corporate sector (specifically professional

 forecasters), corroborates this assessment: Longer-term expectations remain on target but there is

 some movement in the medium term.
Chart 9
shows average expectations from the

 Bank’s Survey of External Forecasters which usually do not exhibit large time-variation making the

 uptick in the 2-year-ahead measure even more noteworthy. However, the 3-year ahead measure, which

 could be interpreted as the most fundamentalist forecast available, shows no such movement. This is

 consistent with the Consensus panel of professional forecasters: There also, long-term expectations

 are consistent with achieving the inflation target in the long run while those at medium-term

 horizons have drifted.
Chart 9: External forecasters’ average expectations
Year-on-year percentage changes
Footnotes
Source: Bank of England Survey of External Forecasters. Latest observation: 2022 Q3.
So, people trust us to bring inflation in line with the target – the anchor is holding firm. But,

 credibility does not tell us how we will ensure that the anchor holds – through the aggregated

 demand channel alone or also through managing expectations. The worry is that expectations about the

 medium-term are drifting upwards – the anchor rope is fraying – and keeping the anchor firm with

 drifting expectations would require more compression of aggregate demand.
Therefore, coming back to monetary policy’s role to affect expectations in the Phillips curve. In the

 worst case, when facing completely backward-looking expectations formation, we would be stuck with

 only the aggregate demand channel to bring inflation down to target. If expectations are

 forward-looking, however, there may be scope for monetary policy to affect inflation expectations

 directly.
A forthcoming working paper by Bank researchers (Mangiante & Masolo, 2022) explores the effect of

 monetary policy action on price expectations in the DMP. They identify three instances over the

 recent past in which the DMP field work straddled an MPC decision. They then compare expectations of

 those firms which responded before the decision with those that responded after.
footnote
[16]
In all three instances they find a significant effect of the announcement on price expectations in

 line with theory: on 11 March 2020, when the MPC cut rates, inflation expectations increased within

 the survey round; conversely, in December 2021 and in March 2022, when the MPC hiked rates,

 expectations fell within the round. Additionally, in all three cases did price uncertainty decline.

 To me, this is powerful and plausible evidence for a direct monetary policy effect on the formation

 of forward-looking expectations.
footnote
[17]
To summarize: I do not believe we are in that worst-case world where monetary policy needs to rely

 only on the aggregate demand channel. Long-term expectations remain relatively well-anchored at

 target. The drift in medium-term expectations is the major cause of concern, and cutting-edge

 research indicates that monetary policy can directly influence expectations. The MPC has the tools

 and the independence to return inflation to target once energy prices have stopped rising. We will

 not tolerate a persistent overshoot and will stay vigilant even when headline rates start to come

 down. But it is also the case that the more we control medium-term inflation expectations now, the

 less tight for long monetary policy will need to be.
4: Monetary policy strategy
Turning now to monetary policy: The scale, timing, duration, and direction of the appropriate

 monetary policy is determined by both the nature of shocks as well as the inter-related channels

 through which monetary policy affects inflation. As we have seen, this includes both inflation

 expectations and aggregate demand conditions. Whereas monetary policy arguably can ‘look through’

 external shocks that leave expectations unchanged, it most definitely is responsible for leaning

 against domestic inflation pressures that threaten the objective of price stability.
In a previous speech I detailed why uncertainties about either the persistence of inflationary

 pressures or the underlying distribution of inflation expectations yielded the conclusion that

 monetary policy should be front-loaded and forceful (Mann, 2022b). On the first, the rationale was

 that if the shock is truly persistent, but is misperceived as transitory, the policymaker initially

 under-reacts, yielding an inflation overshoot both larger and more embedded than under full

 information. Second, if there is more upside risk to inflation, as judged by the distribution of

 inflation expectations, then a tighter monetary stance is warranted relative to the case where there

 is no such asymmetric tail risk.
Today, I deliberately have talked mostly about the medium-term outlook. Clearly, if current wholesale

 energy prices are allowed to be passed-on to households and firms, this will lead to enormous pain

 for millions of people over the winter months. And this will be true regardless of the path of Bank

 Rate. Monetary policy is a relatively blunt instrument and works mostly at the margin, it is

 ill-equipped and not intended to deal with large relative price movements like the one we’re seeing

 currently. We do not have in our toolkit the policies that can cushion the blow for those in need or

 that can spread the weight across time and across the income distribution.
Instead, the framework presented today is an exploration into the theory and data proxies that relate

 monetary policy to expectations and to aggregate demand where the focus is on the evolution of

 inflation expectations in the short, medium, and long-term. Recognising the potential for a shift in

 the Phillips curve shows how acting sooner and more forcefully can short-circuit the embedding of

 inflation by influencing the π
e
term.
Expectations are formed from inflation outcomes, central bank actions, and from credibility of the

 target and the institutional setup. To the extent that increases in π
e
are moderated

 through the expectations channel then the degree of monetary policy tightening needed to achieve the

 2% objective is consistent with less of a slowing in aggregate demand and less of a rise in

 unemployment. Yet, the data suggest that medium-term inflation expectations are drifting upwards. If

 inflation expectations were to become more backward-looking due to persistent misses of the target,

 this would require an increased dependence on an aggregate demand slowdown to achieve the 2%

 inflation target.
What is driving the drift in medium-term inflation expectations? The spikes in short-term inflation

 expectations matter for medium-term household inflation expectations due to the salience of surging

 energy and food price dynamics. The sequence of shocks matter, because collectively they extend the

 duration of time above the 2% target. In such a case, the share of backward-looking agents likely

 rises leading to more intrinsic inflation persistence. The broadening of categories that show

 higher-than-target inflation matters for medium-term expectations because of upward-bias to wage

 negotiations and me-too-ism associated with complementarity in firms’ pricing strategies. The

 ratcheting-up from short-term to medium-term expectations has been apparent for a while, and could

 portend a persistent drift higher. This has the potential to cement expectations inconsistent with

 the 2% target which would necessitate a persistently tighter stance of monetary policy that works

 through the aggregate demand channel.
When thinking about the tightening undertaken to date, my concern is that the gradual pace of

 increase in Bank Rate has not tempered expectations enough, allowing the embedding of the short-term

 inflation overshoot into the persistent drift in medium-term expectations. The stylized Phillips

 curve example shows why a shift outward of the curve implies that achieving the 2% target

 sustainably would be associated with permanently higher unemployment and lower aggregate demand. The

 1970s, with ratcheting-up and persistently high inflation, required a long duration of elevated

 unemployment to bring inflation back down. A tighter policy stance now working through expectations

 reduces the degree of restraint to aggregate demand in the future.
Like the self-fulfilling prophecy on recessions, if firms believe that monetary policy will keep the

 Phillips curve from shifting, then they will incorporate that into their price expectations.

 Complementarity in firms’ price setting generates lower macro inflation through firms’ micro

 decisions. On the other hand, if monetary policy does not affect expectations formation – either

 because it is not forceful enough or if the required path is not credible –the drift in medium-term

 expectations is more likely to yield that worrisome shift of the Phillips curve.
It is encouraging that long-term expectation metrics apparently remain anchored and consistent with

 the 2% target. It appears that the credibility of monetary policy is intact. However, just because

 credibility is intact does not say how the 2% will be achieved – it can be either through acting on

 expectations or through requiring a long period of slack. As noted, the drift in medium-term

 expectations is already apparent in the data. We cannot be complacent in the face of the short-term

 spikes and medium-term drift. Acting more forcefully now, to ensure that the drift does not become

 the norm, is designed to avoid depending on a deeper and longer contraction to return inflation to

 target.
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank in particular Lennart Brandt, as well as Andrew Bailey, Fabrizio Cadamagnani,

 Alan Castle, Maren Froemel, Harry Goodacre, Alex Haberis, Josh Martin, Riccardo Masolo, Michael

 McLeay, Ozgen Ozturk, Martin Seneca, Silvana Tenreyro, Boromeus Wanengkirtyo, and Ivan Yotzov for

 their comments and help with data and analysis.
References
Ascari, G. and A. Sbordone (2014). ‘
The Macroeconomics of Trend Inflation
’,
Journal of Economic Literature
, 52(3), pp. 679-739.
Barnichon, R. and G. Meesters (2021). ‘
The Phillips multiplier
’,
Journal of

 Monetary Economics
, 117, pp. 689-705.
Bunn, P., L. Anayi, N. Bloom, P. Mizen, G. Thwaites, and I. Yotzov (2022). ‘
Firming up

 price inflation
’, Bank of England Staff Working Paper No. 993.
Calvo, G. (1983). ‘
Staggered prices in a utility-maximizing framework
’,
Journal

 of Monetary Economics
, 12(3), pp. 383-398.
Cesa-Bianchi, A., G. Thwaites, and A. Vicondoa (2021). ‘
Monetary policy transmission in the United Kingdom: A high frequency

 identification approach
’,
European Economic Review
, 123.
Clarida, R., J. Gali, and M. Gertler (1999). ‘
The Science of Monetary Policy: A New Keynesian Perspective
’,
Journal of Economic Literature
, 37(4), pp. 1661-1707.
Cloyne, J. and P. Hürtgen (2016). ‘
The Macroeconomic Effects of Monetary Policy: A New

 Measure for the United Kingdom
’,
American Economic Journal: Macroeconomics
, 8(4),

 pp. 75-102.
Cogley, T. and T. Sargent (2002). ‘
Evolving Post-World War II U.S. Inflation Dynamics
’,
NBER

 Macroeconomics Annual
, 16.
Coibion, O. and Y. Gorodnichenko (2011). ‘
Monetary Policy, Trend Inflation, and the Great Moderation: An

 Alternative Interpretation
’,
American Economic Review
, 101(1), pp. 341-370.
Coibion, O. and Y. Gorodnichenko (2015). ‘
Information Rigidity and the Expectations Formation Process: A

 Simple Framework and New Facts
’,
American Economic Review
, 105(8), pp. 2644-2678.
Coibion, O., Y. Gorodnichenko, S. Kumar, and M. Pedemonte (2020). ‘
Inflation expectations as a policy tool?
’,
Journal of

 International Economics
, 124.
Cornea-Madeira, A., C. Hommes, and D. Massaro (2019). ‘
Behavioral
Heterogeneity in U.S. Inflation Dynamics
’,
Journal of

 Business and Economic Statistics
, 37(2), pp. 288-300.
Cornea-Madeira, A. and J. Madeira (2022). ‘
Econometric Analysis of Switching Expectations in UK

 Inflation
’,
Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics
, 84(3), pp. 651-673.
Daly, M. and B. Hobijn (2014). ‘
Downward Nominal Wage Rigidities Bend the Phillips Curve
’,
Journal of Money, Credit and Banking
, 46(S2), pp. 51-93.
Ellis, C., H. Mumtaaz, and P. Zabczyk (2014). ‘
What Lies Beneath? A Time-varying FAVAR Model for

 the UK Transmission Mechanism
’,
Economic Journal
, 124(576), pp. 668-699.
Fisher, S. (1977). ‘
Long-Term Contracts, Rational Expectations, and the Optimal Money

 Supply Rule
’,
Journal of Political Economy
, 85(1), pp. 191-205.
Friedman, M. (1961). ‘
The Lag in Effect of Monetary Policy
’,
Journal of Political

 Economy
, 69(5), pp. 447-466.
Gali, J. and M. Gertler (1999). ‘
Inflation dynamics: A structural econometric

 analysis
’,
Journal of Monetary Economics
, 44(2), pp. 195-222.
Gilchrist, S., R. Schoenle, J. Sim, and E. Zakrajšek (2017). ‘
Inflation Dynamics during the Financial Crisis
’,
American

 Economic Review
, 107(3), pp. 785-823.
Gordon, R. (1970). ‘
The Recent Acceleration of Inflation and Its Lessons

 for the Future
’,
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
, 1970(1).
Gordon, R. (1977). ‘
World Inflation and Monetary Accommodation in Eight

 Countries
’,
Brookings Papers on Economic Activity
, 1977(2).
Harding, M., J. Lindé, and M. Trabandt (2022). ‘
Resolving the missing deflation puzzle
’,
Journal of Monetary

 Economics
, 126, 15-34.
Hazell, J., J. Herreño, E. Nakamura, and J. Steinsson (2022). ‘
The Slope

 of the Phillips Curve: Evidence from US States
’,
Quarterly Journal of Economics
,

 137(3), 1299-1344.
Lam, J., G. Potjagailo and B. Wanengkirtyo (2022). ‘How broad-based is the increase in UK

 inflation?’, Bank Underground, forthcoming.
Lucas, R. (1972). ‘
Expectations and the neutrality of money
’,
Journal of

 Economic Theory
, 4(2), pp. 103-124.
Mangiante, G. and R. Masolo (2022). ‘Do Firm Expectations Respond to Monetary Policy?’, Bank of

 England Staff Working Paper, forthcoming.
Mankiw, G. and R. Reis (2003). ‘
Sticky Information versus Sticky Prices: A Proposal to Replace the

 New Keynesian Phillips Curve
’,
Quarterly Journal of Economics
, 117(4), pp.

 1295-1328.
Mann, C. L. (2022a). ‘
On

 returning inflation back to target
’.
Mann, C. L. (2022b). ‘
A

 monetary policymaker faces uncertainty
’.
Mann, C. L. and L. Brandt (2022). ‘
On Returning Inflation to Target
’,
Intereconomics
, 57, pp. 87-92.
Masolo, R. and F. Monti (2021). ‘
Ambiguity, Monetary Policy and Trend Inflation
’,
Journal of

 the European Economic Association
, 19(2), pp. 839-871.
McLeay, M. and S. Tenreyro (2020). ‘
Optimal Inflation and the Identification of the Phillips Curve
’,
NBER Macroeconomics Annual
, 34.
Phillips, A. W. (1958). ‘
The Relation between Unemployment and the Rate of Change of Money

 Wage Rates in the United Kingdom, 1861–1957
’,
Economica
, 25(100), pp. 283-299.
Rast, S. (2022). ‘
Central Bank Communication with the General Public: Survey Evidence

 from Germany
’, unpublished working paper.
Sargent, T. (1972). ‘
Anticipated Inflation and the Nominal Rate of Interest
’,
Quarterly Journal of Economics
, 86(2), pp. 212-225.
Sheshinski, E. and Y. Weiss (1977). ‘
Inflation and Costs of Price Adjustment
’,
Review of Economic

 Studies
, 44(2), pp. 287-303.
Taylor, J. B. (1980). ‘
Aggregate Dynamics and Staggered Contracts
’,
Journal of

 Political Economy
, 88(1), pp. 1-23.
Werning, I. (2022). ‘
Expectations and the Rate of Inflation
’, NBER Working Paper No.

 30260.
In the central projections of the
August

 2022 Monetary Policy Report
, inflation falls to 2 percent by the end of the

 second year. In the alternative scenario in which energy prices follow their futures

 curves at the time of forecast, inflation is already below target at that point with 0.9

 percent in 2024 Q3.
See for example Lucas (1972) and Sargent (1972).
So-called “menu costs” as introduced by Sheshinski & Weiss (1977).
See Fisher (1977) and Taylor (1980).
For how these “strategic complementarities” as well as downward nominal rigidities as

 the firm level affect aggregate inflation and the shape of the Phillips curve, see for

 example Harding et al. (2022).
Some recent evidence for this phenomenon has been documented by Bunn et al. (2022) who

 show that firms which faced negative effects from Covid on their sales decreased their

 prices by less than firms increased prices who faced positive effects.
For an application to UK inflation and inflation expectations, see Cornea-Madeira &

 Madeira (2022).
See for example Mankiw & Reis (2003) and Coibion & Gorodnichenko (2015).
This is related to the concept of determinacy in New Keynesian models and the “Taylor

 principle”. Traditionally, to ensure a stable equilibrium, the real rate needs to

 increase to bring inflation down (i.e. nominal interest rate needs to rise by more than

 the rate of inflation). Ascari & Sbordone (2014) show, however, that during times of

 high “trend” inflation, conditions for determinacy become more extreme and the central

 bank needs to increase the nominal rate by a lot more for a given increase in inflation

 than when trend inflation is low. This is consistent with Coibion & Gorodnichenko

 (2011), who find that the price level in the US was probably indeterminate in the 1970s,

 and with Cogley & Sargent (2002), who estimate an “activism coefficient” for the

 Federal Reserve which they find to be exceptionally low during that time.
During the Great Moderation, especially during the post-GFC period of deficient demand,

 and especially in the United States and the euro area, we might have seen a shift in the

 other direction. As inflation expectations became anchored at or even below the central

 banks’ targets, and interest rates were at the effective lower bound, it became much

 more difficult to stimulate the economy through the aggregate demand channel. For a

 given level of slack, we were stuck at the flatter end of the Phillips curve.
This is true even if accounting for the introduction of the furlough scheme which

 prevented the unemployment rate from rising in the UK. As Haskel (2021) shows, assuming

 that 10 percent of furloughed workers were in fact unemployed, the unemployment rate

 would not have exceeded 7 percent – which is in line with historical experience.
Chart 2.16 in the
August

 2022 Monetary Policy Report
shows that about 3 percentage points of current

 inflation can be directly attributed to energy prices. Their contribution is projected

 to increase to 7 percentage points by the end of the year. Similarly, in 1973, oil

 prices had roughly doubled from 2 to 4 US Dollars per barrel before jumping to 10 US

 Dollars per barrel in 1974 (see for example
ONS, 2022, “Consumer price inflation,

 historical estimates and recent trends”
). Thus, in both periods, inflationary

 supply shocks were pervasive.
As McLeay & Tenreyro state, this is because the Phillips curve is a supply curve and

 therefore, identification requires demand shifters. A world in which an institution

 deliberately seeks to offset any shift in demand (the central bank) is “the worst

 possible situation for identifying a supply curve” (
Rognlie, 2019
).
See
Monthly

 Decision Maker Panel data – May 2022
.
Strictly speaking, lack of evidence for unanchoring cannot be taken as proof for

 anchoring. As always, you cannot prove your null hypothesis, only fail to reject it.
A paper with a similar identification scheme is Rast (2022) who, using German time

 series data on inflation expectations and monetary policy announcements, also finds that

 announcements of rate changes significantly affect household expectations. On the other

 hand, announcements of asset purchases and forward guidance have a much reduced

 footprint.
These results are also consistent with a relatively fast monetary policy pass-through to

 inflation. Here, because expectations react immediately but activity is sluggish,

 inflation can adjust before the real economy. For the UK, for example, Cloyne &

 Hürtgen (2016) and Ellis et al. (2014) find relatively fast pass-through of monetary

 policy into inflation, especially in the post-1992 inflation targeting sample.

 Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2020) even find a jump in the price level which is inconsistent

 with a backward-looking, accelerationist Phillips curve. On the other hand, Coibion et

 al. (2020) call into question the ability of central banks to use inflation expectations

 for policy purposes. Plausibly, however, since their results rely on inattention of

 households to inflation and monetary policy, this may be different during periods of

 exceptionally high and salient inflation.
These results are also consistent with a relatively fast monetary policy pass-through to

 inflation. Here, because expectations react immediately but activity is sluggish,

 inflation can adjust before the real economy. For the UK, for example, Cloyne &

 Hürtgen (2016) and Ellis et al. (2014) find relatively fast pass-through of monetary

 policy into inflation, especially in the post-1992 inflation targeting sample.

 Cesa-Bianchi et al. (2020) even find a jump in the price level which is inconsistent

 with a backward-looking, accelerationist Phillips curve. On the other hand, Coibion et

 al. (2020) call into question the ability of central banks to use inflation expectations

 for policy purposes. Plausibly, however, since their results rely on inattention of

 households to inflation and monetary policy, this may be different during periods of

 exceptionally high and salient inflation.
Close
A paper with a similar identification scheme is Rast (2022) who, using German time

 series data on inflation expectations and monetary policy announcements, also finds that

 announcements of rate changes significantly affect household expectations. On the other

 hand, announcements of asset purchases and forward guidance have a much reduced

 footprint.
Close
Strictly speaking, lack of evidence for unanchoring cannot be taken as proof for

 anchoring. As always, you cannot prove your null hypothesis, only fail to reject it.
Close
See
Monthly

 Decision Maker Panel data – May 2022
.
Close
As McLeay & Tenreyro state, this is because the Phillips curve is a supply curve and

 therefore, identification requires demand shifters. A world in which an institution

 deliberately seeks to offset any shift in demand (the central bank) is “the worst

 possible situation for identifying a supply curve” (
Rognlie, 2019
).
Close
Chart 2.16 in the
August

 2022 Monetary Policy Report
shows that about 3 percentage points of current

 inflation can be directly attributed to energy prices. Their contribution is projected

 to increase to 7 percentage points by the end of the year. Similarly, in 1973, oil

 prices had roughly doubled from 2 to 4 US Dollars per barrel before jumping to 10 US

 Dollars per barrel in 1974 (see for example
ONS, 2022, “Consumer price inflation,

 historical estimates and recent trends”
). Thus, in both periods, inflationary

 supply shocks were pervasive.
Close
This is true even if accounting for the introduction of the furlough scheme which

 prevented the unemployment rate from rising in the UK. As Haskel (2021) shows, assuming

 that 10 percent of furloughed workers were in fact unemployed, the unemployment rate

 would not have exceeded 7 percent – which is in line with historical experience.
Close
During the Great Moderation, especially during the post-GFC period of deficient demand,

 and especially in the United States and the euro area, we might have seen a shift in the

 other direction. As inflation expectations became anchored at or even below the central

 banks’ targets, and interest rates were at the effective lower bound, it became much

 more difficult to stimulate the economy through the aggregate demand channel. For a

 given level of slack, we were stuck at the flatter end of the Phillips curve.
Close
This is related to the concept of determinacy in New Keynesian models and the “Taylor

 principle”. Traditionally, to ensure a stable equilibrium, the real rate needs to

 increase to bring inflation down (i.e. nominal interest rate needs to rise by more than

 the rate of inflation). Ascari & Sbordone (2014) show, however, that during times of

 high “trend” inflation, conditions for determinacy become more extreme and the central

 bank needs to increase the nominal rate by a lot more for a given increase in inflation

 than when trend inflation is low. This is consistent with Coibion & Gorodnichenko

 (2011), who find that the price level in the US was probably indeterminate in the 1970s,

 and with Cogley & Sargent (2002), who estimate an “activism coefficient” for the

 Federal Reserve which they find to be exceptionally low during that time.
Close
See for example Mankiw & Reis (2003) and Coibion & Gorodnichenko (2015).
Close
For an application to UK inflation and inflation expectations, see Cornea-Madeira &

 Madeira (2022).
Close
Some recent evidence for this phenomenon has been documented by Bunn et al. (2022) who

 show that firms which faced negative effects from Covid on their sales decreased their

 prices by less than firms increased prices who faced positive effects.
Close
For how these “strategic complementarities” as well as downward nominal rigidities as

 the firm level affect aggregate inflation and the shape of the Phillips curve, see for

 example Harding et al. (2022).
Close
See Fisher (1977) and Taylor (1980).
Close
So-called “menu costs” as introduced by Sheshinski & Weiss (1977).
Close
See for example Lucas (1972) and Sargent (1972).
Close
In the central projections of the
August

 2022 Monetary Policy Report
, inflation falls to 2 percent by the end of the

 second year. In the alternative scenario in which energy prices follow their futures

 curves at the time of forecast, inflation is already below target at that point with 0.9

 percent in 2024 Q3.
Close
Convert this page to PDF
Catherine L. Mann
Member of the Monetary Policy Committee
Other speeches
Speech // Andrew Bailey
29 May 2026
Remaining anchored: Monetary Policy in an...
Remaining anchored: Monetary Policy in an unpredictable world - speech by Andrew Bailey
Speech // Andrew Bailey
21 May 2026
Can AI make cutlery? - speech by Andrew...
Can AI make cutlery? - speech by Andrew Bailey
Speech // Sarah Breeden
19 May 2026
Modernising money and markets − speech by...
Modernising money and markets − speech by Sarah Breeden
Speech // Huw Pill
14 May 2026
Slides from Huw Pill’s fireside chat at NatWest
Slides from Huw Pill’s fireside chat at NatWest
View more
Other speeches
Back to top
