BANK: BOE
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: UK inflation since the pandemic: How did we get here and where are we going? − speech by Jonathan Haskel
DATE: 01/06/2023
SPEAKER: Jonathan Haskel
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/speech/2023/november/uk-inflation-since-the-pandemic-how-did-we-get-here-and-where-are-we-going-speech-by-jonathan-haskel.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Bank of England  
 
 Page 1 
 
 
 
UK inflation since the 
pandemic: How did we get 
here and where are we 
going? − speech by 
Jonathan Haskel 
Given at the University of Warwick  
28 November 2023 
 
 
 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 2 
 
Speech 
1. Introduction 
I am delighted to be back at the University of Warwick. My thanks to the students who run 
the Warwick Finance Society and the Economics Society for kindly inviting me. 
I want to take this occasion to pay tribute to Professor Nick Crafts, who passed away on 
October 6th, 2023. He was Professor here from 2005-2019 and was rightly described in his 
obituary in The Times as “the most distinguished British economic historian of his 
generation” and in the Financial Times as writing “the definitive account of Britain’s 
Industrial Revolution”.1 He was brilliant, generous and always good-natured. An example 
to us all. 
My subject tonight is UK inflation.  
UK inflation is now falling rapidly. From the 11.1% peak in October 2022, it is now 4.6% 
(annual CPI inflation in the year to October 2023). In this speech I try to set out (a) how I 
think we got here and (b) future prospects. 
I look backwards and forwards since I believe there are some misleading narratives that 
seem to have taken hold regarding UK inflation. One oft-stated backward-looking narrative 
holds that the Bank of England was wrong to treat rising inflation during the recovery from 
the pandemic over 2021 as transitory. One equally off-stated forward-looking narrative 
holds that with inflation falling interest rates can be cut sooner rather than later.  
I shall in this speech try to argue that neither of these narratives are true. In making this 
argument I try to bring some empirical evidence to the debate. I do so by reporting my 
interpretation of an estimated model of inflation applied originally to the US by Ben 
Bernanke and Olivier Blanchard (Bernanke and Blanchard, 2023).2 The details and 
 
1 The Times, 15 November 2023. Financial Times, 13 October 2023. 
2 I have been working with Bank of England colleagues Josh Martin and Lennart Brandt in recent months to 
apply Bernanke and Blanchard’s model to UK data. Other Bank of England researchers have also worked on 
this, notably Daniel Albuquerque and May Rostom, from whom I have learned a lot. Our work is part of a wider 
project comparing European economies, Japan, Canada and the US: likewise, we have learned a lot from Ben 
Bernanke, Olivier Blanchard and other colleagues on this project. I should be clear that this speech is my 
personal interpretation of the results we have obtained for the UK. For those interested who are unfamiliar with 
the people involved, Bernanke and Blanchard have had highly distinguished careers in academia and 
policymaking. Ben Bernanke has published extensively on macroeconomics, notably on the inter-war period. 
He was Chairman of the US Federal Reserve from February 2006 to January 2014 and was awarded the 
Nobel Prize in Economics in 2022. Olivier Blanchard has likewise published very widely, notably on 
unemployment and debt. He was Chief Economist at the IMF between September 2008 and September 2015. 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 3 
 
results are set out in a paper which accompanies this speech. Of course, we should be 
cautious of what models tell us, but we need some sort of model to get started at least. 
The Bernanke and Blanchard (henceforth BB) framework is simple and transparent and 
follows a rich tradition of evidence on wage-price interactions dating at least from Michael 
Bruno and Jeffrey Sachs, exemplified in work by, among many others, Richard Jackman, 
Richard Layard, Stephen Nickell, Andrew Newell and James Symons, all of which is well 
summarised by Charles Bean.3 The framework supposes that firms and workers bargain 
over wages and firms then set prices based on the bargained wage, and other costs, such 
as energy. It is straightforward that when unanticipated rising energy prices hit the 
economy, firm costs rise and hence they raise their prices and there is inflation. 
What happens next? Suppose there is no feedback to wage bargaining. In this case, the 
process stops there. The sudden increase in the price level in, say, April 2022 corresponds 
to a one-off burst in inflation. It is one-off because it lasts a year. This is because inflation 
is measured as an annual change. The new higher price level in the months after April 
2022 are compared with the lower price level before April 2022, but in April 2023, the 
comparison is relative to the higher price level at which point inflation ends. Conventional 
monetary policy “looks through” such inflation because it is powerless to stop it. Why? 
Monetary policy cannot create new energy supply to lower the energy price, so the price 
level of energy remains high, but changes in the price level, inflation, are temporary. In any 
case, since monetary policy takes more than a year to work through the economy, it is 
ineffective for such transitory shocks. 
Matters are more complicated if there are a series of shocks, and/or or changes in labour 
market conditions and/or the increase in prices feeds back to wage bargainers. A so-called 
“wage-price spiral”, or “second-round effects”, arise as wage increases chase price 
increases which feed back into further wage increases.  
Our purpose of estimating a model is then to examine the evidence on the strength of 
these various mechanisms. 
What do we find? Our estimates reveal three important properties of the modern UK 
economy which turn out to have important policy implications.  
1. Typical shocks to energy and food prices “wear off” quickly. The economy is flexible 
enough such that typical shocks cause one-off bursts of inflation that do not last 
much more than a year.  
2. By contrast, sustained rises in labour market “tightness”, that is, strong demand for 
labour relative to supply, does lead to sustained inflation.  
 
3 See the accompanying paper for references. 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 4 
 
3. Whilst inflation expectations have risen with headline inflation, they remained pretty 
well-anchored to the inflation target. 
I draw three policy conclusions from this evidence.  
1. Since the initial burst of inflation during the spring and summer of 2021 was from 
energy prices and shortages, it was perfectly reasonable, given what policymakers 
knew at the time, to regard these shocks as transitory. 
2. The subsequent inflation over 2022, largely again due to more energy price shocks, 
and latterly food prices, was also fuelled by increasing labour market tightness. The 
MPC raised policy rates over this period, and this was the correct response. 
3. What is the outlook? While it is right to think that the direct effect of these energy 
and food shocks will fade away, they have been so large and so concatenated that 
it will continue to take some time to work through the system, making inflation 
persistent. But the still-high degree of labour market tightness continues to impart 
inflationary pressure. This will need higher rates for longer to get inflation 
sustainably to target. This is why I have been voting for higher rates at recent 
meetings. 
In the rest of this speech, I describe briefly the Bernanke Blanchard framework, the drivers 
of the recent surge in UK inflation, and some thoughts on the future path of inflation and 
associated monetary policy. Much more on the empirical work is available in the 
accompanying paper. 
2. A framework 
A stylised representation of the BB framework is set out in Chart 1.  
Starting in the upper box, firms and workers settle on wages. Wage growth depends on  
(a) expected inflation, (b) labour market tightness and (c) the real wage workers aspire to, 
and (d) productivity growth. The outcome of this process determines wage inflation. 
Then, proceeding to the lower box, firms set prices as a mark-up over those wages and 
other costs, such as energy etc, taking account of productivity and a return on the capital 
firms have invested in. The outcome of this determines price inflation.4 
However, it is not a one-way relationship between wages and prices. As illustrated by the 
red line, for example, a shock to prices potentially changes both expected inflation and 
 
4 Some readers will prefer an account of inflation that includes the money supply. In the current conjuncture, 
the argument goes that a combination of QE and loose monetary policy fuelled inflation by excessive money 
growth, allied with abnormally high household bank deposits that were accumulated during lockdown. Money 
does not appear explicitly in the BB framework, but we can think of money and credit as influencing demand 
in the economy, and, in this framework, determining labour market tightness and/or inflation expectations. 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 5 
 
aspiration real wages and so changes wage settlements, which feeds back into pressure 
on prices. Inflation expectations (short- and long-run) are modelled as functions of (past 
and present) actual inflation and expectations. Wage-price dynamics arise via assumed 
lags in the system, including a possible adjustment of real aspiration wages to actual real 
(consumption) wages if, for example, workers attempt to “catch-up” their current real wage 
settlements to past real wage losses. Dynamics also arise as inflation expectations adjust 
to current inflation. 
Chart 1: Stylised representation of the Bernanke and Blanchard model of wages  
and prices (a) 
 
Source: Authors’ elaboration of Bernanke and Blanchard (2023). 
(a) The representation is stylised. Short-run and long-run inflation expectations are also determined in the 
model but not shown here. The price equation in the model does not include an explicit regressor for profits. 
Firms: price setting 

Wages  

Other costs: energy, food, shortages 

Capital/profits 

Productivity 
Workers/firms: wage bargaining 

Expected inflation 

Past inflation 

Labour market “tightness” 

Productivity 
Wage 
inflation 
Price 
inflation 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 6 
 
 
BB have two main findings on US quarterly data. First, estimates suggest that shocks to 
the system from, for example, energy or food prices, dissipate quite quickly, restoring 
inflation to previous rates. This is because there is little catch-up effect and inflation 
expectations, despite rising inflation, have remained quite anchored. Second, US inflation, 
after initially being due mostly to external shocks, is increasingly driven by a tight labour 
market. 
3. Inflation, wages and expectations: the facts  
The model suggests that to explain inflation we need to review the shocks to inflation, the 
labour market and expectations.  
Inflation 
Starting with inflation, Chart 2 shows annual inflation in CPI, food and energy in the UK 
between 1990 and 2023. The following points are worth noting.  
Chart 2: Annual inflation, CPI, food and energy, Jan 1990 to Oct 2023 (a) 
 
Source: ONS, authors’ calculations. 
(a) Series are annual percentage changes on monthly frequency (the model is fitted on quarter-on-quarter 
annualised natural log changes). Energy includes household gas and electricity bills, and fuels and lubricants 
used in personal transport equipment (i.e. petrol, diesel). Food includes non-alcoholic beverages. CPI and 
Food shown against left-hand side axis, Energy against right-hand side axis. Figures 1 and 2 in the 
accompanying paper shows this on a quarter-on-quarter annualised basis. 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 7 
 
First, the size of shocks to the economy. As is well known, UK inflation as recently been 
historically high. But Chart 2 also shows that the food and energy price changes have also 
been historically very high. This can be seen by comparing the standard deviation (a 
measure of the typical variability of data) of price shocks before the pandemic, with the 
maximum shock sizes over the last few years. Based on the same measures used in the 
model5, the shocks to energy prices, food prices, and shortages, during the pandemic and 
post-pandemic period, are 10.8, 3.4 and 36.1 times larger than typical pre-pandemic 
shocks respectively. 
Second, there has been much discussion of UK inflation relative to other countries (see, 
for instance, August 2023 MPR, Chart 2.2). The responsiveness of UK inflation to energy 
price shocks is both larger and has different lags due to, respectively, the structure of UK 
energy markets (the marginal source of supply is gas) and energy price regulation 
(Haskel, 2022).  
Third, on timing, annual CPI inflation started to rise through 2021, starting the year at 0.7% 
and finishing at 5.4%. Notice that energy prices started to rise in 2021 Q2, well before the 
outbreak of the Ukraine war in 2022 Q1. Food prices started to rise materially in 2021 Q4 
and rose strongly from 2022 Q2 and onwards.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 These are the relative price of energy to wages, the relative price of food to wages (both measured in 
quarter-on-quarter annualised log changes), and the shortages index. 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 8 
 
The labour market 
Turning to the labour market, Chart 3 shows nominal wage growth6 and a labour market 
tightness measure, namely the V/U ratio, that is, the ratio of vacancies to unemployment. 
You can think of this as a measure of how available jobs are relative to searchers: a higher 
number indicates more job availability relative to searchers. When V/U is high, more firms 
are competing over fewer workers, which tends to put upward pressure on wages. Indeed, 
as a rough correlation, the data show a strong rise in the V/U ratio in recent times along 
with a strong rise in wage inflation, although V/U has receded somewhat in the first half of 
2023.  
Chart 3: Wage growth and labour market tightness (vacancies-to-unemployment  
ratio), 1990 Q1 to 2023 Q2 (a) 
 
Source: ONS, Bank of England, authors’ calculations. 
(a) Wage growth is private sector regular pay (i.e. excluding bonuses etc.), from the Average Weekly 
Earnings, seasonally adjusted. It is adjusted for changes in composition of the workforce, and for the effect 
of furlough during the pandemic. Wage growth is quarter-on-quarter log changes, annualised by multiplying 
by four. The V/U ratio covers all vacancies and all unemployed (meeting standard definitions). Equivalent to 
Figure 3 in accompanying paper. 
 
 
6 Adjusted for furlough and composition effects.  


Bank of England  
 
 Page 9 
 
Expectations 
Turning to expectations, Chart 4 shows the series of short- and long-run inflation 
expectations we use. Both are amalgams of financial, professional forecaster and 
household inflation expectation survey data in a way that is as historically comparable as 
possible, and that avoid recent distortions in financial measures owing to a forthcoming 
change in the UK inflation measure used for some financial instruments. Both short- and 
long-run measures have risen somewhat in recent quarters and then fallen again. 
Chart 4: One-year and long-run inflation expectations, 1990 Q1 to 2023 Q2 (a) 
 
Source: Bank of England, authors’ calculations. 
(a) One-year inflation expectations is a composite series covering expectations of households and 
professional forecasters. Long-run inflation expectations is a composite series covering expectations of 
households, professional forecasters and financial markets, benchmarked to average inflation over the 
sample period. See accompanying paper for more details. Equivalent to Figure 4 in accompanying paper. 
 
Product market shocks 
As well as food and energy shocks, the product market has seen supply chain shocks 
especially during the recovery from the pandemic. Chart 5 shows two shortage measures: 
one derived from Google searches, and the other the Global Supply Chain Pressure Index 
(GSCPI) produced by the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. Note, the GSCPI is not a 
UK-specific measure. The Google search data starts in 2004, and the GSCPI in 1998. 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 10 
 
They behave similarly over the pandemic, rising strongly in 2021 Q1, just when UK 
inflation starts rising and strongly again in the last quarters of 2021 and into 2022 before 
easing back.  
Chart 5: Shortage measures, 1990 Q1 to 2023 Q2 (a) 
 
Source: Google, Federal Reserve Bank of New York, authors’ calculations. 
(a) GSCPI = Global Supply Chain Pressure Index, published by the New York Fed. Dashed line represent 
assumed backseries prior to the start of the series – GSCPI set to 0 in the backseries, and Google 
“shortage” set to 4 in the backseries, both approximate averages over observed pre-covid data. BB use 5 as 
assumed backseries for Google “shortage”. Series and axes aligned such that GSCPI=0 and Google=4 are 
aligned. Equivalent to Figure 5 in accompanying paper. 
 
Surprises and “catch-up” 
As the framework illustrates, workers might bid for higher wages both if they expect higher 
inflation and to restore previous real wage levels. One neat measure which summarises 
this, developed by Bernanke and Blanchard, is what they call the “catch-up” term. As they 
point out, this mechanism is more likely when inflation rises unexpectedly. To capture this, 
Chart 6 shows annual inflation in a given quarter, less what inflation was expected to be 
four quarters earlier, with the “catch-up” measure the difference between the two. The 
strong gap between actual and expected in recent quarters is notable. And so it will be 
important to estimate how important this tendency is for inflation. 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 11 
 
 
Chart 6: Annual inflation, one-year inflation expectations (advanced four  
quarters), and “catch-up” term, 1990 Q1 to 2023 Q2 (a) 
Catch-up = realised annual inflation less one-year inflation expectations one year ago 
 
Source: ONS, Bank of England, authors’ calculations. 
(a) Graph shows annual inflation, one-year inflation expectations one year ago, and catch-up term = annual 
inflation minus one-year inflation expectation one year ago. Equivalent to Figure 6 in accompanying paper. 
 
Summary 
Let us summarise this section. The key facts about inflation since the pandemic are these: 
a) The UK economy was subject to a series of historically large shocks to energy 
prices, food prices, and supply chains. 
b) At the same time, the labour market tightened sharply. 
c) Inflation expectations remained remarkably anchored around the target. 
d) These shocks were unexpected, creating a large gap between actual inflation and 
what inflation was expected to be. This has the potential to create conditions for 
“catch-up”. 
 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 12 
 
4. The model in action 
Given what happened, we now need to estimate how significant these effects all were. The 
estimates of the model are set out in detail in an accompanying paper (Haskel, Martin 
and Brandt, 2023). For now, let me summarise some of the key findings of the model. 
One key question is: how does the UK economy respond to “typical” shocks? That is, 
when a typical shock hits, how long does it take to percolate through the economy?  
This is as much a live issue as it was in the 1970s. At that time, the economy was also hit 
with a series of large shocks, notably to energy prices, and sustained high inflation was a 
result. What do our estimates say about the current day? 
Starting with shocks to relative food and energy prices, and shortages, let us define a 
typical pre-pandemic shock to be a one standard deviation in the variable in question 
between 1990 Q1 and 2019 Q4. These are one-period price shocks which are not 
reversed, so that the level of prices and shortage rises and stays higher than before the 
shock, but do not continue to rise. This seems a sensible experiment: energy and food 
prices, for example, have risen to higher levels but, at least in the case of energy, are not 
rising further. 
Chart 7 shows the effect of such typical pre-pandemic shocks on annual inflation and 
suggests an important conclusion. These typical shocks broadly support the view that 
policymakers should “look through” such price shocks, since the effect on inflation is 
short-lived.  
How does this conclusion follow? Start with shortages. The peak effect from shortages is 
after three quarters, which then unwinds towards zero fairly quickly, and settles at close to 
zero (though marginally positive) from around two years (eight quarters) onwards.  
Pre-covid shortages shocks in the UK were relatively small, adding just 0.04pp to annual 
inflation at peak. However, the shortages shock during 2021 was much larger. 
For energy prices, there is little impact on quarter-on-quarter inflation after the first quarter, 
such that the effect on annual inflation of a typical pre-covid shock to relative energy prices 
is little changed across the first four quarters at about 0.2pp. Then, by base effects, this 
effect reverses, and actually drags on annual inflation by a small amount thereafter. This 
may capture the volatile nature of UK energy prices, where increases are often followed by 
decreases.7 
 
7 Since gas is usually the marginal fuel for UK energy production (Haskel, 2022), and gas prices are largely 
determined on global markets, the price of energy faced by UK consumers is volatile, and increases are 
often followed by decreases. See Chart 2 for instance. Another way to see this is that the prices of energy 
products are not very persistent, as found by ONS (2023) – see their Table 1. 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 13 
 
The peak effect on annual inflation of a typical pre-covid shock to relative food prices is 
after four quarters, at which point it would add about 0.3pp to annual inflation. After this, 
the effect dissipates as the initial increase falls out of the annual calculation. However, it 
continues to push up on inflation for several years, adding close to 0.05pp to annual 
inflation four years after the shock. Food price shocks in the UK, it seems, are more 
persistent than other price shocks.8 
Chart 7: Impulse response functions of annual inflation to shocks to the relative  
price of energy, relative price of food, and shortages (a) 
 
Source: Haskel, Martin and Brandt (2023), Figure 12. 
(a) Shows the full-model response of quarter-on-same-quarter-a-year-ago inflation (i.e. annual inflation) to a 
one-quarter (i.e. one-off) positive shock to relative energy prices, relative food prices, and shortages. Shocks 
equal to the standard deviation of the exogenous variable over 1990 to 2019 (a typical pre-covid shock). 
 
What about the labour market? As Chart 3 showed, the V/U ratio has drifted upwards over 
the past decades. Chart 8 shows the response of annual inflation to a permanent increase 
in the V/U ratio. As it shows, a persistently tighter labour market (in levels terms) produces 
persistently faster wage growth and thus inflation. Whereas persistently higher levels of 
food prices only temporarily raise inflation but have a permanent effect on the price level. 
 
8 In a recent speech (Bailey, 2023), Andrew Bailey reviewed UK food price inflation in some detail. 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 14 
 
 
Chart 8: Impulse response function of annual inflation to a permanent increase 
in V/U (a) 
 
Source Haskel, Martin and Brandt (2023), Figure 13. 
(a) Shows the full-model response of annual inflation to a permanent one standard deviation rise in V/U. 
Standard deviation calculated over 1990 Q1 to 2019 Q4, such that is represents a typical pre-pandemic 
shock. 
 
5. What caused recent UK inflation? 
As we have seen, the model suggested the UK economy responds quickly and sharply to 
price shocks, and shows a persistent increase in inflation with a permanent rise in labour 
market tightness. But over the pandemic the magnitude of these shocks has been vastly 
greater than before, and a number of them have occurred in succession. So the finding 
that UK inflation disappears quickly with a typical shock, whilst reassuring in normal times, 
will not help us understand the most recent period. Indeed, this finding strongly suggests 
that there is something to the argument that the concatenation of shocks is important. 
So, what does the model say caused recent UK inflation? Chart 9 shows the 
decomposition of inflation when we take account of all the shocks in the model and the 
way that they are working through and interrelating. The chart shows inflation on a  
quarter-on-quarter annualised basis – that is, scaling the quarterly changes to annual rates 
by assuming that the same quarterly rate would prevail for four quarters. This measure is 
thus different to, and more volatile than, our usual headline measure of inflation. 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 15 
 
Chart 9: Decomposition of price inflation, 2020 Q1 to 2023 Q2 (a) 
 
Source: Haskel, Martin and Brandt (2023), authors’ calculations. 
(a) “Initial conditions” reflect the model response under hypothetical conditions where V/U remains at the 
level in 2019 Q4, relative food and energy price changes are 0, shortages remain at roughly their historic 
average, and productivity matches its 2012-2019 average; see text for interpretation of these conditions. This 
is an adaption of Figure 14 from Haskel, Martin and Brandt (2023), where I have removed the dynamic 
effects of two dummies for the pandemic period – see the paper for more details. 
 
Let us split the path of inflation into two. First, the underlying path reflecting the initial 
conditions at the start of the pandemic. Second, the additional path, reflecting the actual 
shocks that occurred over this. 
Let's start with the underlying path, which are the grey bars shown in Chart 9. This shows 
the inflation prediction in the model of labour market tightness maintained at its level in 
2019 Q4, the working through of food, energy and shortage shocks up to 2019 Q4, and no 
further price shocks thereafter. You should think of this as showing what inflation in the UK 
economy would have been if there had been no pandemic, and no change in economy 
conditions after the end of 2019.9 
That path shows gently rising inflation to around 4% at the end of the period. How do we 
interpret this? Since the various price shocks would all have worn away by now, it 
 
9 This is on the basis of the model estimated on data that includes the recent high inflation period. However, 
similar results for the initial conditions are obtained if using a pre-pandemic sample. See the accompanying 
paper for more details. 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 16 
 
suggests that the labour market in 2019 Q4 was in fact too tight, and the underlying wage 
dynamics that it would have set off would have raised inflation well above target by now. 
This should not come as too much for surprise. A glance at the Monetary Policy Reports 
written at that time (end of 2019 and start of 2020, before the pandemic had begun) all 
pointed out that the labour market was tight and the MPC was monitoring it closely. But 
they likewise noted that inflation at the time was below target. Had the pandemic not 
struck, and had the labour market remained so tight, the MPC would likely have taken 
action.10 
The story of inflation over the pandemic is then better understood from what happened in 
addition to those grey bars. Let us divide up the years. Starting in 2020 you can see from 
Chart 9 that quarterly inflation was volatile, with a pattern of sharp increases and 
decreases over the four quarters of the year. Clearly the once-in-a-century conditions of 
the pandemic – involving lockdowns, furlough, and shortages, amongst much else – are a 
challenge for pretty much any economic model. 
Let us move to 2021. As the black line in Chart 9 shows, and as the Bank’s critics have 
noted, inflation starts to increase through 2021. In 2021 Q2 there was sizable energy price 
increase (blue bars in Chart 9), associated with the Ofgem price cap increase in April 
2021, which pushed up inflation. And in 2021 Q3, a large shortage shock (yellow bars) 
pushed up inflation. A further energy price increase occurred in 2021 Q4, and shortages 
continued to be important. There was a moderate inflationary effect from labour market 
tightness (as measured by the V/U ratio, red bars) in 2021 Q4. 
Chart 9 offers an important lesson for why inflation rose over 2021. By far the most 
important contributors were energy prices and shortages. As we have seen from Chart 7, 
based on historical relationships, these shocks wear out quickly. This suggests that it was 
appropriate, based upon the knowledge at the time, for the MPC to “look through” these 
shocks and for monetary policy not to react. Once again, by the time monetary policy could 
have taken effect, those shocks, on the basis of historical experience would have worn 
away. 
Two things changed in 2021 Q4. First, the price shocks continued to roll in, while past 
shocks continued to work through the economy. Chart 8 shows the effect of a single price 
shock, which indeed fades quickly. But if there is a succession of shocks, each with a 
profile as in Chart 8, then they will cumulatively push up on inflation for an extended 
 
10 As set out in the November 2019 Monetary Policy Report, the MPC forecasted inflation to be rising over 
the subsequent three years, conditioned on a roughly flat path for interest rates based on the yield curve at 
the time. One reason the MPC gave for this was faster pay growth, consistent with a tight labour market. 
However, the outlook at that time was dominated by the uncertainty over the terms of the UK’s Exit from the 
EU. The MPC stated (p.14) that were a smooth Brexit to occur, rates would have to rise to return inflation to 
target.   


Bank of England  
 
 Page 17 
 
period. If inflation stays above target for longer, than has implications for second-round 
effects, as inflation expectations may increase, and “catch-up” dynamics may come into 
effect. 
Second, the labour market tightened rapidly, and started to push up on inflation. Returning 
to Chart 3, the speed of tightening of the labour market over this period is unprecedented. 
While tightness was still a small contributor to inflation in 2021 Q4 (the small red bar in this 
quarter in Chart 9), the MPC did raise rates at its December 2021 meeting. For the record, 
I note that the Bank of England was the first major central Bank to raise interest rates in 
the current hiking cycle, with the Federal Reserve increasing for the first time in March 
2022, and the ECB in July 2022. 
That said, it is worth recalling for a moment the extraordinary conditions of the time. The 
Omicron strain of covid-19 had struck the UK, and there was uncertainty about how 
infectious it would be, and even some discussion that it would evade the vaccine. Had that 
come to pass, we would be in a very different position today. Similarly, the labour market 
picture was obscured by the fact that the furlough scheme did not close until the end of 
September 2021, and the official labour market data lags real-time by around two months. 
We had to wait until mid-December to be sure that the closing of the furlough scheme 
would not lead to a huge spike in unemployment. 
Returning to Chart 9, what was the story in 2022? The key event in Q2 was the sharp 
increase in household energy prices, associated with the Ofgem price cap in April 2022, 
with energy prices of course shooting up at the time of the Russian invasion of Ukraine. 
Throughout 2022 there were still lingering effects from shortages, and food prices  
(light-blue bars) began to have a material effect on inflation from 2022 Q3 onwards. 
Labour market tightness also continued to push up on inflation. 
Finally, what is the picture for the first half of 2023? Energy prices are now falling, dragging 
on inflation (the negative blue bars in Chart 9). Food inflation is still a major contributor to 
inflation (light-blue bars), reflecting still-high (though reducing) food price inflation and the 
relatively more persistent effects of food price shocks in Chart 8. Shortages are still having 
some effect. A tight labour market is also contributing upwards to inflation (red bars). So, in 
the first half of this year, the supply shocks are still major movers of inflation, although with 
falling energy prices more or less outweighing rising food prices and shortage effects, 
leaving a tight labour market a positive net contributor.  
On the face of it, Chart 9 suggests that the role of labour market tightness in recent UK 
inflation has been small. However, there is a complication with this interpretation. Recall 
that the underling path (the grey bars in Chart 9) assumes that the V/U ratio would have 
stayed at its 2019 Q4 level indefinitely, which leads to a rising path for inflation. The rising 
underlying path thus embodies a persistently tight labour market, with the red V/U bars 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 18 
 
representing only the inflationary effects of labour market tightness above that underlying 
level. 
We would ideally show the effect of labour market tightness relative to a counterfactual 
where the pandemic did not occur, and the economy evolved in some ‘normal’ way. Of 
course, we cannot know what that counterfactual is. But if in that counterfactual world, the 
path for V/U was lower – if, for instance, the MPC would have acted to cool the economy 
to prevent a tight labour market from moving inflation so far above target – then the grey 
bars in chart 9 would be smaller, and the red bars larger. In short, a large degree of labour 
market tightness is buried in the grey bars in Chart 9, obscuring the narrative. 
This model also suggests that two channels, which some had been concerned about, may 
not have been very material. First, long-run inflation expectations are estimated not to be 
very responsive to current inflation. Thus, even the large inflation shock we have 
experienced has not seen inflation expectations become de-anchored. In fact, the model 
predicts that long-run inflation expectations would increase by more than they actually did, 
suggesting an unusual degree of anchoring. This is good news for policymakers. That 
said, this is a very unusual episode: on current projections, inflation will have been above 
target for at least four years, and possibly longer, by the time it returns to 2%. We do not 
yet know what the effects of that might be, and do not have a similar episode in our recent 
history with which to compare it to. 
Second, catch-up is estimated to have a near-zero role in determining wage growth (and 
thus inflation) in the long-run. However, it can have dynamic effects, as can be seen in the 
accompanying paper. The role of catch-up is hidden in Chart 9, since the method 
attributes the inflation via catch-up mechanics to the exogenous variable which caused the 
gap between actual and expected inflation to open up in the first place. For instance, the 
energy bars in Chart 9 reflect the direct effect of energy prices on CPI, indirect effects via 
supply chains, and second-round effects via inflation expectations and catch-up. 
Separating the effects of price shocks via the catch-up channel alone suggests that  
catch-up may have added a little over one percentage point to annual wage growth in the 
year to 2023 Q2, and around half a percent to price inflation in the same period. 
6. The future 
We can also use this model to make some predictions. To do this, we need to decide upon 
some paths for the exogenous variables. Data for energy and food prices for 2023 Q3 are 
already known from official statistics. For the subsequent two quarters we will match the 
paths in the November 2023 MPR. Thereafter, we’ll use a path for energy prices based on 
the market futures curve, and assume relative food price inflation reverts to its historic 
average. For the shortages measure we can take the latest Google trends up to November 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 19 
 
2023, and so fill in data for the second half of 2023. Thereafter is rather harder to predict, 
so we shall revert to the historic average. 
The path for V/U is most material for the path of inflation. A glance at Chart 3 suggests 
three options: (a) V/U stays at its elevated level in 2023 Q2, (b) it falls linearly over four 
quarters to its 2012-2019 average, and (c) it falls linearly over eight quarters to roughly its 
lowest level in recent times (that observed after the economic downturn in 2008/09). Paths 
(b) and (c) reflect declines at roughly the pace V/U is currently falling, for a year or two 
years respectively. 
A more formal approach would be to estimate the V/U consistent with the MPC’s 
November 2023 MPR forecast. The MPR contains a forecast for unemployment, but not 
for vacancies and not for V/U. We could assume that the current (post-pandemic) 
Beveridge curve (the relationship between vacancies and unemployment over time) 
remains stable, and thus project the rate of vacancies according to the rate of 
unemployment, and so derive an associated V/U ratio. I note that the current Beveridge 
curve (estimated on data over recent quarters) has shifted out relative to before the 
pandemic, likely reflect reduced matching efficiency (see a previous speech (Haskel, 
2023) for a discussion). 
This would impose the fairly strong assumption that the Beveridge curve will not shift 
further (either back in towards the pre-pandemic relationship, or further out), but gives at 
least a more empirically grounded approach for our projections. It turns out that this 
exercise gives a path for V/U that looks very much like path (b) described above. We can 
therefore think of path (b) as being broadly consistent with the evolution of the economy in 
the November 2023 MPR, applied to our BB model. 
Chart 10 shows the result of these projections. I should first be careful to stress that these 
are not intended as forecasts of inflation, but rather projections from our model conditional 
on a range of inputs and assumptions. I find it instructive to think about my policy decision 
but would not expect inflation to evolve precisely in the ways set out. 
The three coloured lines in Chart 10 reflect the three paths for V/U, with all sharing 
common assumptions regarding the other exogenous variables. All three lines decline 
sharply through the end of 2023, consistent with the observed sharp drop in annual 
inflation in the latest official data. However, from the start of 2024 all three lines show a 
marked slowing in their declines. I do not over-interpret the apparent pick-up in inflation in 
mid-2024, which is associated with the negative coefficients on lags of energy prices. 
Looking through this, however, is a clear slowing in the decline of inflation after the initial 
disinflationary effects of waning energy and food price inflation wash out. 
 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 20 
 
 
 
Chart 10: Model projections of annual inflation with different V/U ratios  
Annual inflation (i.e. quarter on same quarter a year ago percentage changes) (a) 
 
Source author’s calculation, based on Haskel, Martin and Brandt (2023). 
(a) Assumptions as described in text. See accompanying paper for more details. Note that the assumptions 
used here differ to those for Figure 20 in the paper. 
 
The top line, corresponding to V/U staying at its current level, sees little decline in 
inflation. This suggests that the current level of V/U is not consistent with a 2% inflation 
target, and indeed V/U is currently more than twice its historic average.  
The middle line has V/U fall to its 2012-2019 average – this reduces inflation, albeit quite 
slowly. By the end of 2026, inflation is still well above target in this scenario. 
The bottom line of the three embodies a fall in V/U to a level last seen around 2009-2013, 
when the labour market was very loose and wage growth was historically low (see Chart 
3). This scenario sees inflation fall more rapidly, approaching the 2% target by the end of 
2026. It is worth noting that this is still a relatively slow decline in inflation, and slower than 
that in the November 2023 MPR forecast (under both mode and mean forecasts). That is, 
the BB model finds UK inflation to be ‘stickier’ than the MPC forecast. 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
10
2023q1
2024q1
2025q1
2026q1
Data
V/U=0.72
V/U→0.43
V/U→0.2


Bank of England  
 
 Page 21 
 
 
7. Conclusion and policy 
We have used a simple and transparent model to ask and answer a number of pressing 
questions around UK inflation. Our questions and answers are as follows. 
First, regarding the past: 
• Was the MPC right to regard the shortages and energy price shocks of 2021 
as transitory? 
• Yes. The average shock to energy prices and shortages works quickly through the 
inflation process. Food price shocks are more persistent, but food price inflation 
only contributed meaningfully to CPI inflation in 2022. In the event, the repeated, 
co-incident and large shocks meant sustained high inflation. Crucially, nobody could 
have reasonably foreseen this historically unprecedented pattern of shocks. 
Second, turning to the future: 
• Does the current outlook suggest scope for moderation in rates anytime 
soon? 
• No. The labour market is still historically tight. At current rates of change it would 
take at least a year to fall back to average pre-pandemic tightness, with the precise 
time depending critically on the greater the degree to which matching in the labour 
market has been impaired. Rates will have to be held higher and longer than many 
seem to be expecting. 
Two final comments on past and the future. The first point above leads one to ask the 
question: was the MPC too late in tightening policy? The model cannot tell you about the 
optimal speed or timing of rate rises. But I would offer the following comment. What the 
model clearly suggests was that inflation started rising during mid-2021 not because of 
excessive demand, but because of supply: the energy and shortages shocks. Further, 
rising inflation gathered momentum because of the sequence of very large shocks.11 It was 
only in late 2021 that labour market pressures emerged, which was when the MPC started 
tightening.12 And it tightened well ahead of the Federal Reserve and the ECB. 
Finally, on the future, my thinking about the medium-term path of rates is informed by the 
framework above, which suggests some important signals of persistent inflation (which 
also have been stressed in recent MPC communications). First, the matching efficiency of 
 
11 Huw Pill has stressed the multiplicity of shocks hitting the economy.  
12 I base this remark on the evidence of a speech I gave in Glasgow in November 2021 (Haskel, 2021). I 
stated that if the labour market were to tighten, as shown for example by the V/U ratio, rates would have to 
rise. I think this helps explain my subsequent voting. 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 22 
 
the labour market appears to have been impaired since the pandemic, “tightening” the 
labour market.13 Second, productivity growth remains in the doldrums, putting upward 
pressure on costs. Third, if “catch-up” becomes more apparent, this would indicate 
continuing unexpected wage pressure. Finally, expectations are crucial, but are currently 
well-anchored. Monitoring these measures is, in my view, important in setting policy to 
return inflation sustainably to target. 
 
 
 
My thanks to Josh Martin for his help preparing this speech, and to Lennart Brandt who 
also co-authored the paper on which this speech is largely based. Thanks to  
Andrew Bailey, Ben Broadbent, Natalie Burr, Fabrizio Cadamagnani, Alan Castle, 
Catherine Mann and Huw Pill for very helpful comments. Any errors are my own. 
 
 
13 I discussed this in a recent speech (Haskel, 2023).
