BANK: BOE
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Competing for growth − speech by Sam Woods
DATE: 01/06/2024
SPEAKER: Sam Woods
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/speech/2024/october/competing-for-growth-speech-by-sam-woods.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Bank of England  
 
 Page 1 
 
 
Competing for growth − 
speech by Sam Woods 
Given at the Annual City Banquet, Mansion House 
17 October 2024 
 
 
 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 2 
 
 
Speech 
Regulation, competitiveness and growth 
A lot has been said about the UK financial regulators’ new secondary competitiveness and 
growth objective, so I hesitate to add to the chat.1 Our focus is on actions because they 
are said to speak louder than words. However, it is regularly reported to me that some 
stakeholders doubt that we are taking any meaningful action to deliver our new objective – 
and from this I have learned that sometimes in life it is necessary to tell people what 
actions you are taking, as well as taking them!    
I will also attempt a little myth-busting, because I have observed that the debate on 
regulation can be dominated by extremes.  On the one hand, it is surprisingly often 
asserted that the regulators are trying to remove all risk from the system and don't care 
about their impact on the wider economy. It is easy to demonstrate that this is nonsense. 
On the other hand, it’s simply not true that any change to our regulations will unleash 
financial mayhem, and there is plenty in our regime that can be improved without 
undermining stability.   
So if you take only two things from this speech, I hope they are these: 
• first, that we are strongly committed to our new objective, and are taking concrete steps 
to improve our regime’s contribution to UK growth and competitiveness;  
• and second, that we are going about this in a careful, balanced way – reducing 
bureaucratic processes and some excess conservatism while preserving financial 
stability.  
Before getting into this, I’d like to make a more personal point. It has occasionally been 
suggested that we regulators don’t like our new competitiveness and growth objective, are 
secretly opposed to it and will do as little as possible to deliver it while talking a good game 
in public. As it happens, in my own case – other than talking a good game in public, which 
I do regularly attempt with mixed results – this view is completely untrue. I have always 
thought it perfectly reasonable that if we take an activity – rule-making – which has for 
many decades in this country been largely done under direct political oversight because 
that is the way the EU system works, and give it instead to operationally independent 
regulators – then the regulators’ objectives need to be adjusted to take account of that 
 
1 To quote the statute: ‘The competitiveness and growth objective is: facilitating, subject to aligning with 
relevant international standards – (a) the international competitiveness of the economy of the United 
Kingdom (including in particular the financial services sector through the contribution of PRA-authorised 
persons), and (b) its growth in the medium to long term.’ 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 3 
 
 
change.2 That Parliament has done this, and the specific way in which Parliament chose to 
do it in 2023, both strike me as eminently sensible – and this view is shared by my 
colleagues at the PRA. 
But there is a deeper point here, which is often missed. Unelected officials should not have 
pet objectives of their own. The core policy agenda in the UK is set, thankfully in my view 
despite inevitable travails along the way, by elected officials who can be removed at the 
ballot box. The agenda for unelected officials is set either directly by the government, for 
those in the civil service, or through objectives set by both houses of Parliament, together 
with remit letters from government, for those who work for an institution such as the PRA.3 
The job of an unelected official is simply to deliver those objectives, to the best of their 
ability. Of course, in order to do that well they need to have an enthusiasm for their work, 
which I do feel on most days at least – but they should not have an agenda of their own 
somehow outside the objectives they have been set through the democratic process. If 
they find those objectives incompatible with their own beliefs, then they should say so and 
step aside.  
So coming back to our new objective, this much is simple – Parliament has spoken, and 
we will deliver. 
Taking action 
A new objective is no small thing for an independent regulator – everything we do flows 
from the statutory framework of objectives and ‘have regards’ set for us by Parliament.  
At the outset of delivering our new objective the PRA team has quite sensibly asked: how 
do we actually affect competitiveness and growth?  
The first and most obvious point is that we impact economic growth by maintaining 
financial stability.4  The 2008 crisis remains the biggest growth-destroying event in recent 
economic history, and avoiding a repeat of that is by far the most important contribution we 
can make to growth.  That’s why safety and soundness is our primary objective.5 
But beyond maintaining stability, we can have other (relatively smaller but still important) 
impacts on economic growth.  We think this happens primarily in three ways: we affect the 
allocation of capital in the economy; we affect how well UK financial services firms are 
 
2 I would note that the new objective – like our existing objectives – applies to all of our ‘general functions’, 
which includes rule-making and some other activities like the setting of standards, codes and general 
policies and principles.  
3 The Government makes recommendations to the PRA, to which is must have regard: Recommendations 
for the Prudential Regulation Committee: December 2022 - GOV.UK (www.gov.uk) 
4 My colleague Sarah Breeden recently spoke about our approach to financial stability, including its impact 
on growth: Financial stability at your service − speech by Sarah Breeden | Bank of England 
5 We also have a primary objective to protect insurance policyholders. 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 4 
 
 
equipped to compete overseas; and we affect how attractive the UK is as a location for 
financial services firms from other countries. How much we affect each of these three 
elements can be debated. But that we do affect all of them in some way is clear and I like 
this approach because it is simple, intuitive, and provides a straightforward way to test 
policy proposals for their impact on our new objective.  
Armed with this framework we have taken steps to re-wire the organisation in order to 
deliver the new objective. We’ve been pulling expertise and insights from the best minds 
around the globe – hosting a major conference with academics and industry, making  
fact-finding missions to places like Singapore, setting up an internal centre of expertise, 
hosting innovation discussions with industry, rolling out new training for staff, 
commissioning new research and hard-wiring the objective into all of our policy-making.6 
The Court of the Bank of England has also already put the PRA through the gruelling mill 
of an assessment by the Bank’s Independent Evaluation Office, who have published their 
report and provided some valuable steers about how we can lift our game. 
This is all vital work because it provides the basis for us delivering on growth and 
competitiveness in an enduring way. However, all the frameworks and training in the world 
won’t make a jot of difference without concrete actions being taken. Indeed, I can palpably 
sense some members of today’s audience thinking “blah, blah, blah” – in fact I think 
someone over there is actually saying it. You are only allowed to do that during Nikhil’s 
speech, and definitely not during the Lord Mayor’s comments. I have therefore been at 
great pains to ensure that we make concrete progress in the first period of our new 
objective – while we re-wire ourselves we need to be getting some early runs on the 
board.  
As I mentioned a moment ago, from time to time I hear it asserted that the PRA is not 
doing anything to advance its new objective. Let me be blunt: people who make that claim 
are simply not paying attention. Parliament foresaw this problem and required us to 
publish a report setting out what we are doing. We did this in July and it’s a real  
page-turner, perfect for reading on your sun-lounger on the beach. But just in case you 
had other things to read in August, or became a little drowsy before getting all the way 
through it, let me very briefly pick out a few things from the list of what’s been done so far.7 
I’ll start with our decision to scrap the bankers’ bonus cap. Believe you me, this was not 
an easy thing to get rid of and a wise member of the Treasury Select Committee was 
probably right to ask me if this was the single most unpopular thing the PRA might ever 
have done – to which my answer was yes! (This was in fact great news as it allowed me to 
pull ahead of Nikhil in our competition to be the most unpopular regulator in the land). But I 
was nonetheless keen to make this change early in the life of our new objective. We have 
 
6 In fact, it now appears on the front page of the advice that goes to our rule-making committees. 
7 Competitiveness and growth: embedding the PRA’s new secondary objective | Bank of England 
 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 5 
 
 
always seen this piece of regulation as being completely unnecessary for prudential 
purposes – in fact actively counterproductive, as it encouraged higher base salaries which 
were harder to adjust in response to shocks.  And it was clearly damaging for 
competitiveness across two of our three channels – it made the UK a less attractive 
location for global firms and talent, and gave UK firms a disadvantage in attracting talent in 
their foreign operations. More than this, precisely because scrapping the cap is unpopular 
getting rid of it was an important early signal of intent, that we are serious about changing 
regulations where they don’t do something useful and are bad for competitiveness and 
growth. And I can tell you that this move was noticed at the highest level in major 
international banks across the world. 
I will stick with the topic of bankers’ pay for a moment longer, at the risk of making myself 
even more unpopular. I am convinced that the pay systems we had in many of our banks 
before the global financial crisis, with bonuses often paid 100% in cash at year end with no 
further questions asked, was a very dangerous way to incentivise senior bankers and was 
an important factor in the collapse of our banking system at that time. It would therefore be 
a big mistake ever to go back to that system, and we should keep the safeguards we now 
have including deferral of bonuses so they can be cancelled if that trade which looked 
such a winner at year end turns out to be a loser in the longer-term.  
However, I would also observe that the UK has become something of an outlier in terms of 
the length of deferral that we require, and that this may well be damaging for 
competitiveness. And there is evidence that our deferral periods are longer than they need 
to be to create the right incentives for safety and soundness.8 We will therefore bring 
forward proposals to reduce deferral periods, while making sure they remain long enough 
to promote financial stability.  We will propose to move to a five-year deferral period for all 
senior managers, down from the eight years some are subject to at present, and to a  
four-year deferral for others captured by the regime.9 In addition, under the current rules, 
there is no vesting whatsoever for some senior managers until three years after a bonus 
award is made. We propose to allow vesting on a pro rata basis from year 1. (Chart 1 
illustrates how vesting schedules could look before and after our proposals.)  
 
 
 
8 There is a balance to be struck in the length of deferral periods. On the one hand PRA research 
(measuring the effects of bank remuneration rules: evidence for the UK) found evidence that long 
bonus deferral periods were associated with increases in fixed pay, which reduces the ability of firms to 
absorb losses in a downturn, potentially undermining safety and soundness. On the other hand, deferral 
periods need to allow sufficient time for adverse outcomes to crystalise so that remuneration incentives 
reflect the long-term performance of a firm. Our assessment is that while no cutoff will capture every single 
incident, a 5-year deferral window should capture the majority of incidents for the purposes of applying malus 
and to act as an effective deterrent to reckless behaviour. 
9 More precisely: at present the maximum deferral period is seven years for higher-paid senior managers, 
plus a 6-12 month retention period (which we propose to abolish as part of this reform). Higher-paid senior 
managers are individuals whose total remuneration exceeds £500,000, or who earn variable remuneration 
which exceeds 33% of their total remuneration. 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 6 
 
 
Chart 1: Proposed changes to remuneration rules 
Deferred variable remuneration on which malus could apply each year under different         
deferral policies (a) 
 
 
(a) 7-year deferral currently applies to higher-paid Senior Managers; in addition, variable remuneration 
awarded in the form of instruments is subject to a retention period of up to a year. 
These proposals will support growth and make our regime more competitive without 
undermining financial stability. I anticipate a lively reaction to them and look forward to it.  
Moving away from bankers’ pay, our major recent policy packages have all been tailored 
for competitiveness and growth. And more widely, we have been looking carefully at the 
vast corpus of existing regulation – much of which we’ve inherited from the EU – to see 
what opportunities exist to tailor and refine, removing redundant or unnecessary burdens 
while maintaining safety and soundness.  I expect that much of what we will do to deliver 
our new objective in coming years will be actions which come from looking afresh at rules 
we’ve made over the last decade or so, and asking ourselves whether there are 
adjustments we can make which would make our regulation more efficient and less 
burdensome without any negative effect on our primary objectives.10 
This would become an overly long speech if I listed everything we’ve done already on this 
score, which is all set out in our report to Parliament. I of course would love to give an 
enormously long speech but I am fearful of incurring the wrath of the Lord Mayor so 
instead I will just touch on a few elements. First, the big policy packages – Basel 3.1 and 
Solvency UK.  
 
10 I should say though, that we are very aware that change for change’s sake imposes costs on firms and 
makes doing international business more difficult. So where we do make adjustments, it will be for good 
reasons. We have set out our approach to reviewing rules in a policy statement: PS4/24 – PRA statement 
on the review of rules | Bank of England. 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 7 
 
 
Our Basel 3.1 package is in fact governed by competitiveness and growth “have regards” 
rather than our new objective, but we paid particular attention to those have regards given 
the objective which has now come into force. We have been clear that aligning with the 
Basel standard is important both for stability and competitiveness reasons, given our role 
hosting one of the largest international financial centres in the world.11 Our package 
achieves this alignment in the spirit and the letter without us having to make a material 
tightening in aggregate capital requirements.  
We have also made important changes to take on evidence provided in response to our 
consultation, and have used our discretion to take into account sensitive areas of lending 
such as infrastructure, SMEs and trade finance – all of this while remaining compliant with 
the standard. To be a bit blunt again – I’m not sure what’s got into me this evening Lord 
Mayor, I’m normally far more polite – I’m happy to challenge anyone who asserts that we 
have not taken competitiveness and growth very seriously in where we have landed on 
Basel 3.1.12 
On the Solvency UK reforms to insurance regulations, the perception of our work here 
has understandably been dominated by the quite colourful argument we had with parts of 
the life industry about the design of part of the regime called the “matching adjustment”. 
This spectacular row,13 which I think one or two politicians rather enjoyed and which the 
PRA lost hands-down, rather obscured the fact that the entire rest of the reform package 
we have delivered is focused on competitiveness and growth, stripping unnecessary 
bureaucracy out of the regime in numerous ways (for example, we have cut reporting 
requirements faced by insurers by around a third) and supporting insurers in making 
investments into the economy by widening the set of assets for which the matching 
adjustment applies.  
Aside from these two very large bits of work we are then implementing a range of reforms 
that advance competitiveness and growth across different parts of our regime. One of the 
most significant moves is our “Strong and Simple” framework, which will radically reduce 
the burden and complexity of regulations for smaller banks and building societies, while 
maintaining strong standards.  I see this simplification as primarily advancing our 
competition objective, but by improving competition it should contribute to growth.14  
Alongside all this we are taking actions to make the retail ring-fence work more efficiently 
without undermining it, will bring forward proposals to streamline some of the 
 
11 In that context it’s worth noting that our new objective is to facilitate growth and competitiveness, subject to 
alignment with international standards. 
12 Implementing Basel 3.1 in the UK − speech by Phil Evans | Bank of England 
13 The debate was so colourful it was even referenced in a TV debate between then-prime ministerial 
candidates Rishi Sunak and Liz Truss – surely a first for prudential regulation of insurers! 
14 In general, there is a strong complementarity between our new secondary objective, and our long-standing 
secondary objective to facilitate competition in the banking and insurance sectors.  


Bank of England  
 
 Page 8 
 
 
administrative aspects of the Senior Managers regime and are considering an approach to 
indexing thresholds in our regime in order to avoid “prudential drag” in which fixed 
thresholds become more biting over time as the economy grows.   
And it’s not just policy-making that is changing.  We’re on a mission to make our regulation 
as efficient as possible, by removing unnecessary frictions and inefficiencies so that we 
can achieve our objectives with minimal costs to the real economy.  In particular: we’ve 
improved the speed and efficiency of regulatory processes, with the timeliness of 
authorisation of new senior managers now running consistently at very close to 100%; 
we’re revamping our rule-book to make it easier to navigate; and we are reviewing the 
banking data we collect with the aim of streamlining reporting, ensuring we get the data we 
need, but no more than we need, at the lowest cost to firms. 
Now reasonable people can debate whether we are doing enough, too much, the right or 
the wrong things to advance the new objective given to us by Parliament. Unreasonable 
people are also welcome to debate those points, and I’m sure they will. But if you want to 
argue that the PRA is simply not doing much on competitiveness and growth, you are just 
straightforwardly wrong.  
Busting myths  
But while I’m focused on actions, I’m also aware that perceptions matter.  
We should be held to account for our support for growth and competitiveness, and so it’s 
important that people can see what we are doing. Part of that is about explaining what 
we’re doing, but another part is busting some persistent myths about our work. 
The first myth is that prudential regulation is fundamentally at odds with risk-taking.   
I’ve heard many versions of this in my 8 years in this job.  Strangely enough, it comes from 
both sides of the debate: 
• Those arguing for looser regulation often claim that prudential regulators have a 
technocratic focus on eliminating all risk, and fail to see the bigger picture.  Worse 
yet, we are sometimes accused of having infected the wider financial sector with a 
culture of ‘safetyism’ as a result, damaging investment and growth. 
• On the other hand, those arguing for tougher standards often seem to suggest that 
any crystallised risk – and in particular any failure of a regulated firm – represents a 
failure of prudential regulation. 
In response, I would make a number of points.   
First, if we have really been trying to reduce risks to zero, then we have unambiguously 
failed.  Consider these simple points: we run a banking system which is leveraged to a 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 9 
 
 
level of around 20 times; we have managed the demise of over 20 banks since the PRA 
was created, some very dramatic such as Silicon Valley Bank UK, others managed quietly; 
at the same time we have authorised another 38 banks and 28 insurers;15 and according 
to the IMF we are the world’s largest host jurisdiction to foreign financial firms, not least 
given the large number of international bank branches we welcome.16   
But more importantly, it is absolutely not the job of prudential regulators to reduce risks to 
zero.  We may have no appetite for causing a financial crisis.  But that doesn’t mean we 
have no appetite for risk. Risk is the lifeblood of a thriving capitalist economy, fuelling 
growth and innovation.  The whole point of having a strong financial system is to enable 
society to take risks: by providing capital to promising (but uncertain) opportunities, and 
allowing business and households to pool their risks via insurance and hedging products.17 
Our role as regulators is not to eliminate risk, but to ensure risks are properly managed, so 
that individual failures will not bring down the whole system. A mature debate on prudential 
regulation needs to recognise this basic fact – though of course people can and do differ 
on what good risk management looks like. 
As for “safetyism”, I recognise that there is a broader debate to be had about risk appetite 
in society, and whether we can rely more on caveat emptor especially in wholesale 
markets. But honestly if Parliament puts the word “safety” into our primary objectives, then 
you should expect us to be proud growth-oriented safetyists!  
The second myth is that enhancing competitiveness means a bonfire of regulations. 
Again, there are two versions of this myth: 
• One often hears from lobbyists and commentators that the ‘regulatory pendulum’ 
has swung too far, and it’s time for a re-balancing. The logic is that following the 
2008 crisis, zealous lawmakers and regulators over-corrected for past excesses, 
building an overly stringent regulatory regime that has hampered growth since. 
• On the other side of the debate, I sometimes detect a fear that any update to the 
post-crisis regime will unleash the dark forces of financial instability.  Some even 
worry that the mere presence of a secondary objective for competitiveness and 
growth represents unacceptable backsliding. 
The truth is more balanced. 
 
15 38 de novo UK-headquartered banks, and 28 new insurers (excluding Lloyds managing agents, ISPVs, 
and post-Brexit authorisations of new branches/subsidiaries for overseas insurers). 
16 The IMF’s 2022 FSAP report found that the UK ‘is the largest host jurisdiction to foreign financial firms as 
subsidiaries or branches’ and that the large size of our international branches ‘puts the United Kingdom in a 
category by itself as a large host of international activity’.  See United Kingdom: Financial Sector 
Assessment Program-Financial System Stability Assessment (imf.org) 
17 I would note that our statutory objectives are drafted so as to explicitly rule out a ‘zero failure’ regime. 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 10 
 
 
On the one hand, I don’t see any compelling evidence for the idea that the big planks of 
the post-crisis regulations – capital, liquidity, accountability and operational resilience 
measures – have been fundamentally mis-calibrated.  In retrospect the rapid build-up of 
bank credit growth before the GFC seems to have been unsustainable, culminating in a 
sharp deleveraging which brought the economy down with it. By contrast, bank lending in 
recent years seems to have been driven by the economic fundamentals rather than the 
other way round. More importantly, we now have a banking system which is sufficiently 
resilient to support rather than de-stabilise the economy through material shocks, such as 
Covid, the Russia-Ukraine war and the cost of living crisis. 
It’s true that general macroeconomic performance since the financial crisis has been 
disappointing, at least when compared with pre-crisis trends, and tackling this is rightly a 
top priority for public policy.  But I think it’s a bit of a stretch to attribute this to prudential 
regulation.  The Basel banking standards have been applied relatively consistently across 
advanced economies, but growth outcomes have diverged significantly.  In particular, the 
US has outperformed European economies despite holding its global banks to similar – 
indeed if anything, higher – capital standards. And in the UK’s case, it is difficult to see 
how our financial sector could remain quite so large and open without the protection that is 
afforded by strong global standards. 
Now, there is certainly room for a debate on the right calibration of the regulatory regime. 
In fact, researchers have tried a few times to calibrate what the economically-optimal level 
of bank capital is. These results are highly uncertain, and there is a wide range of 
calibrations that could be considered optimal.  But our current regime lies within this range, 
and generally towards the lower end.   Similarly, I’m not aware of any economy that has 
reshaped its fundamental growth prospects by slashing important prudential requirements.  
On the contrary, attempts to do so tend to end in disaster. 
So I don’t see much reason to think that the core elements of our regime are over-egged.  
On the other hand, it would be a major error to rule out scope to make our regime more 
efficient in support of competitiveness and growth. 
The post-crisis reforms were developed at speed in response to a once-in-a-generation 
disaster. They were developed at multiple levels (national, EU, and global) and by multiple 
institutions (governments, central banks, regulators of various stripes).  And all of us can 
see that the resulting regime is very voluminous and very complex. It is inevitable that, as 
we have learned more about operating the regime, we can discover redundancies, 
unintended consequences and areas where our risk appetite has proved too conservative.   
Beyond anything else, there is plenty of inherited bureaucracy in the regime, which we can 
usefully declutter. 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 11 
 
 
So while I don’t see a case for a fundamental re-calibration of the core planks of our 
regime, I do see plenty of scope for revising unhelpful regulations in a pro-growth fashion. 
This brings me to the third myth, which is to overestimate the costs – or the benefits – of 
regulation. 
Rigorous cost-benefit analysis is a vital foundation of regulatory policy. And that requires 
us to be realistic about both the costs and benefits of what we’re doing. 
But often the debate falls into one of two extremes. 
Some commentators seem to assume that all regulations are always costly, relative to 
some free market benchmark. Under this line of thinking, regulations make it more 
expensive for firms to do business. These costs are passed on to customers, and thus to 
the economy as a whole. And so, if we want to minimise costs, we should minimise 
regulations.  
This argument makes the basic mistake of confusing private and social costs.   
In a world without prudential regulation, costs would not be minimised – instead they would 
be borne by depositors, borrowers and ultimately taxpayers, who were left holding the bag 
when the system blew up in 2008. The social cost of that episode was vast. 
Regulations impose a cost on individual firms.  But by ensuring that risk-takers properly 
manage their own risks rather than leaving a mess for someone else to clean up, they can 
lower overall costs for society. 
That being said, it would be equally misguided to take the opposite extreme position: that 
any regulation that reduces the possibility of a financial crisis, even if only by a fraction of a 
fraction of a per cent, must be worth doing.  Taken to the limit that logic could actually lead 
us to remove too much risk from the system – and that way lies the stability of the 
graveyard. 
Moreover, badly-designed regulations can impose social costs.  And we should also have 
careful regard to the private costs of regulation, to ensure these are justified, proportionate 
and no bigger than they have to be to meet the public interest.  As I described earlier, we 
have a major programme of work underway to avoid unnecessary regulatory burdens 
across the sector. 
So it’s important to take a balanced view of costs and benefits and not to over-claim for 
either.  And going forward our efforts will I hope be very much aided by our new  
cost-benefit analysis panel, a group of independent experts who will bring considerably 
more weight to bear on this part of our work.  


Bank of England  
 
 Page 12 
 
 
The fourth myth is that regulators are unaccountable and don't listen. 
As unelected policy-makers, we take incredibly seriously our responsibility to be open, 
responsive and accountable.  Our legitimacy – and hence the long-term viability of our 
regulatory regime – relies on this. 
When we make policy, we consult widely and openly.  We set out our direction of travel 
early and often, using speeches and discussion papers to start debates, and host 
roundtables and bilateral policy discussions with industry and other stakeholders.    
We weigh carefully the feedback we get – including when we formally consult on new 
proposed rules. The data we receive from industry is vital, if we are to get our cost-benefit 
analyses right. It is a sign of strength, not weakness, when we change our approach in 
response to evidence. You can see this clearly in our Basel 3.1 rules, which evolved in 
many important respects from our consultation proposals, following industry and other 
stakeholder feedback. But it does take evidence to convince us. 
At the same time, we will sometimes have to disagree with industry – as our job is to 
represent the interests of the public, and in particular to pursue our statutory objectives. 
There will therefore be disagreements about our policy choices from time to time, and this 
a natural part of delivering our mandate – aiming to avoid any such disagreements would 
be dangerous.  
Our accountability is ultimately to Parliament, and in my experience Parliament plays this 
vital role very assiduously and vigorously. I can tell you that if you are grilled in Parliament 
as often and as thoroughly as I am you know that these claims that we are unaccountable 
are not well-founded. We will of course continue to engage proactively with any form of 
scrutiny Parliament considers appropriate for our work. And we will also continue to liaise 
closely with the government, in particular with Treasury ministers who have an important 
role in setting the wider agenda and expecting us to deliver our part of it. 
Looking ahead 
Let me finish with what I hope is a more substantive point.  
Financial regulation has been in something of an expansive mode since the global 
financial crisis in 2008. This is natural, both because the regulation which allowed that 
event to occur was clearly too weak and contributed to a huge hit to economic growth and 
welfare – and because this is generally what happens after financial crises. But I think it 
implausible that healthy business models, which are a fundamental foundation of a safe 
and sound financial sector, will thrive in an environment of ever-expanding regulation. 
Regulation always needs to develop and adapt to accommodate changes in markets and 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 13 
 
 
wider public policy priorities but it can’t be forever becoming more stringent, a race to the 
top if you like.  
The history of prudential regulation is more the other way round – that as memories of the 
last crisis fade, a race to the bottom sets in until the next blow-up. It’s important that efforts 
to improve regulation do not morph into a general backsliding on the system’s fundamental 
resilience: all our efforts to support growth and competitiveness would be wasted if we fail 
to maintain financial stability. 
It is possible, just possible, that the UK can find a sweet spot in financial regulation in the 
coming period: consolidating the gains for financial stability since the financial crisis while 
making regulation more efficient, evidence-based and effective in support of 
competitiveness and growth.  That is what we should aim for. 
My thanks to Hugh Burns and colleagues across the Bank and PRA for their help in 
preparing this speech.
