BANK: BOE
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: A rich vein or fool’s gold? Economic forecasts during large shocks − speech by Swati Dhingra
DATE: 01/06/2024
SPEAKER: Swati Dhingra
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/speech/2024/may/remarks-given-by-swati-dhingra-at-econdat-2024.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Bank of England  
 
 Page 1 
 
 
 
A Rich Vein or Fool’s Gold? 
Economic Forecasts During 
Large Shocks − speech by 
Swati Dhingra 
Given at ECONDAT 
10 May 2024 
 
 
 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 2 
 
Speech 
It is a pleasure to be here at Bush House. I could not agree more with the premise of the 
ECONDAT conference. Last summer, I gave a speech at Manchester Met University to 
argue that advances in our analytic toolkit, together with data innovations, are the vital 
route to a clearer and timelier understanding of the economy (Dhingra (2023)). As the 
Bank embarks on reforms in the light of the Bernanke Review, it is an appropriate time and 
place to reiterate this. 
Economic forecasting is an enterprise fraught with uncertainty, and even more so during 
turbulent times. Equally however, forecasts are indispensable to a forward-looking 
policymaker, so it is important to consider how we might improve them so that we are in a 
better position to face the shocks of the future. In my view, it is investments in 
measurement and analysis, and not tweaks to forecasting models or communications, that 
will advance our understanding of the economy and ultimately lead to better          
decision-making. Meaningful challenge cannot arise in policymaking unless there is 
compelling evidence to support it.  
ECONDAT is contributing to the progress in credible economics and policymaking, and I 
am therefore delighted to be giving the closing remarks at the conference. 
Fool’s gold1: model-based forecasts as a guide to policy 
during unprecedented times 
This inflationary episode has prompted a reappraisal of the evidence that is needed, both 
at the micro and macro levels, to support policymaking during large shocks to the 
economy. In what follows, I will offer my own reflections on recent forecast misses and on 
some tools that will enable central banks to better assess economic conditions. 
 
 
 
1   Fool’s gold, typically pyrite, is a yellow mineral that looks like gold but is not as valuable (Oxford 
Advanced Learner’s Dictionary). It has small amounts of real gold (Fougerouse (2021)).   


Bank of England  
 
 Page 3 
 
Forecast errors across central banks were large and relatively similar during this 
inflationary episode despite different forecasting models and tools. 
Chart 1: Central banks’ forecast errors, 2016-2023 
 
Source: Bernanke Review (2024). 
The UK was in the middle of the pack in terms of inflation misses across various central 
banks, each of which employed a different suite of forecasting tools. Whilst forecasting 
performance has been relatively similar over the recent inflationary episode (at least at the 
one-year horizon), the scale of the energy shock with which central banks have had to 
contend varied significantly across countries. Energy-exporting countries, such as Norway 
and the United States, faced a less dramatic surge in energy prices than importing 
countries, which may have been expected to simplify the task of anticipating price 
developments. However, when the peak energy price in each country is taken into 
account, the forecast misses continue to show a similar pattern, though the UK fares 
comparatively better in this context (see Appendix for details).  
 
 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 4 
 
While the shocks could not have been anticipated, the forecast errors of the 
models were persistent and systematic. 
Chart 2: UK CPI forecasts and outturns (a) 
 
Source: Kanngiesser and Willems (2024). 
(a) Light aqua line depicts the UK CPI inflation outturns. Dark aqua lines depict CPI modal inflation forecasts. 
The depicted outturns in the blue line refer to the outturns k = 12 quarters after the first data release. For the 
last 12 quarters, the latest available vintage is used.  
Forecast deviations are large when absolute changes in inflation are large. But errors tend 
to be systematically in one direction – either above the outturn or below it. In this inflation 
episode, all but one forecast under-predicted inflation. The only over-predictions were due 
to the introduction of the energy price guarantee on the way up and during the last quarter 
of 2023 after inflation had started to fall back rapidly. 
Judgements were placed to offset some of the systematic forecast errors, but 
they needed to be disciplined with late-cycle data outturns that are less 
forward-looking. 
To some extent, forecasting will always involve an element of judgement. By drawing on 
the rich and varied expertise across the Bank, judgement remains a valuable input to the 
forecast process. To monitor the direct impact of external shocks on the labour markets, 
and the extent of second-round effects, our judgments have relied on late-cycle indicators, 
such as wage growth and relatedly services price inflation (which contains a higher share 
of labour in costs than goods). As inflation has fallen back, judgement now represents a 
larger relative share of projected inflation and requires greater scrutiny of developments 
informing it. 
 
 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 5 
 
Chart 1:  Inflation projections and MPC judgement 
Judgement now constitutes a larger component of forecast inflation (a) 
 
(a) Projections and judgements are a four-quarter average. Judgement refers to the MPC’s judgement of 
inflation persistence. 
Statistical models can improve incrementally by learning from past forecast 
errors, but learning is confined to what is in the data. At turning points that lack 
historical precedent, these models remain liable to systematically over-predict 
or under-predict outcomes. 
The Bernanke-Blanchard model provided a useful approach for decomposing the drivers 
of post-pandemic inflation into the relative contributions from external shocks, labour 
market tightness, and the monetary policy response. While such models were successful 
in explaining the surge in inflation, they have tended to over-predict inflation as these 
pressures moderate (Chart 4). 
 
 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 6 
 
Chart 4: Statistical modelling over-predicted inflation on the way down (a) 
 
(a) The dashed lines show inflation projections with data until 2023 Q4. Solid lines show inflation projections 
with data until 2024 Q1. Inflation outturns are in solid yellow. 
Better data and research design can reduce forecast uncertainty by providing 
more accurate forward-looking measures and by enabling tests of different 
mechanisms driving inflation, as in the examples of mortgage contracts data, 
company dissolution registries and granular labour market analysis. 
Example 1. Mortgage contracts data is reducing forecast uncertainty through more 
accurate modelling of monetary policy transmission. 
 
Mortgage contracts data (Chart 5, first panel) shows most UK mortgages are fixed-rate 
and over a third of mortgages have still to come off their fixes since the end of 2021. 
Consistent with this, the latest shift in the OIS curve has only marginally affected estimates 
of aggregate mortgage repayments over the forecast (second panel), with around 63 
percent of the effects on mortgage repayments expected to come through by the end of 
the forecast horizon.  
 
 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 7 
 
Chart 5: Mortgage Contracts Data 
Roll Off from Fixes and Effects of Shifts in the OIS curve on Mortgage Payments (a) 
 
 
(a) The right hand panel depicts actual (teal line) and projected (dashed lined) cumulative mortgage payments 
(depending on the OIS curves at different points in time). 
Example 2. Company dissolution notices are providing a forward-looking indicator of 
reduced firm resilience. 
Using granular data from Companies House and the Insolvency Service, Barkema, 
Froemel, Piton (2024) document a set of facts about the rising number of corporate 
dissolutions. First, the increase in dissolutions that have already materialised reflected a 
catch-up following Covid and was concentrated among firms started during Covid. Second, 
while these firms were small and had a limited macroeconomic impact, firms currently in 
the process of dissolving are larger. Their exit might therefore be more material from a 
macroeconomic perspective. Finally, the recent economic environment could contribute to 
further rises in dissolutions and particularly insolvencies in the future that could have more 
material macroeconomic impact. 
We highlight some of these trends in Chart 6. This dataset indicates that registrations have 
been rising since 2019, primarily in retail and information and communications, and 
potentially due to technological changes since the pandemic. While dissolutions were 
suspended during the pandemic, they have now finished catching up, rising above their 
2019 average. Dissolution notices are rising faster and are now occurring among larger 
firms, suggesting a larger impact from dissolutions than has been seen so far. 
 
 
 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 8 
 
Chart 6: Company registries of entry and dissolutions 
Dissolutions have caught up with their pre-pandemic trend and are on the rise (a) 
 
Source: ONS  
(a) 
Registrations and dissolutions are cumulative (in deviation from trend). 
 
Example 3. Granular wage and inactivity data from local labour markets in the UK offers 
little evidence of positive correlation, suggesting rising inactivity was not a key driver of 
wage inflation during the current episode. 
Chart 7: Wage inflation and Rise in Inactivity (a) 
 
(a) Each dot in the scatter plot represents a Travel to Work Area in the UK. The x-axis is the rise in inactivity 
from 2013 to 2023 from APS data and the y-axis is the average growth rate in hourly wages from 2013 to 
2023 from ASHE data.  


Bank of England  
 
 Page 9 
 
Past publications (May 2022 MPR) have partially attributed labour market tightness to 
rising inactivity. Causal statements can be put to more rigorous empirical testing with 
granular data to overcome some of the limitations posed by short time series during large 
shocks.  
In this example, the correlation evident in aggregate wage and inactivity data does not 
hold up as a mechanism for wage inflation in more granular data from local labour markets 
across the country.  Travel to work areas that had higher inactivity did not experience 
higher wage inflation. This is also confirmed by a negative correlation between the change 
in gross monthly wages and the change in the inactivity rate over the recent period at a 
regional level (Machin and Wadsworth (2023)). While inactivity had not been a key driver 
of wage inflation, it is nonetheless contributing to lower productivity, especially in already 
lagging areas of the country (as highlighted in Machin and Wadsworth (2023) across 
broader regions of the UK and for different skill levels). Uncertainty over data in recent 
years makes it much harder to have a deeper understanding of the labour market forces 
driving inflation, and a joined-up effort to improve these statistics is an important 
undertaking for the future. 
 
Leveraging quasi and natural experiments with granular data and techniques to estimate 
policy impacts has already led to significant progress in various fields of economics and 
our understanding of critical public policy choices (Angrist and Pischke (2010) and Card 
(2023)). These well-identified granular effects are increasingly being incorporated into 
economic models to provide a macroeconomic view of the impacts. 
The real gold: forecasts bolstered by better data 
Building on these observations from the cost-of-living crisis, I will discuss key avenues that 
I think will strengthen policymaking during large shocks. These have been informed by my 
experience on the MPC since August 2022 and more broadly, by discussions on designing 
and implementing evidence-based policy, particularly those that involve difficult tradeoffs 
or polarising debates, including through the Economy 2030 Inquiry and the modelling 
review of Britain’s international economic policy (The Economy 2030 Inquiry (2023), 
Venables (2022)). 
King’s is the right place to discuss this - the book it has recently published has provided 
invaluable scrutiny through the responses of many economists to the Bernanke Review. I 
will reference these contributions from Aikman and Barwell (2024) – AB hereafter – as I 
discuss the key avenues.  
In my view, the main lesson from the last few years is that evidence-based policymaking 
needs to be our priority. And to state the obvious, the starting point cannot be anything 
other than evidence itself.  


Bank of England  
 
 Page 10 
 
To re-state a platitude, models are only as good as the data that is fed into them. 
Innovations are making data advances more achievable, including for example, through 
analytics companies and big data (such as contracts and shipping data), developments in 
national statistics (such as availability of scanner data and online collections) and 
mandatory data collection (such as tax records, value added transactions and detailed 
company accounts) (Dhingra (2023), Davies in AB (2024) has concrete suggestions).  
The Bank has played a pioneering role in data development before and this is going to be 
critical in the future, given the current state of affairs and the greater uncertainties in the 
world economy. As highlighted in the first example, the mechanical relationship obtained 
from mortgage contract data provides a much more accurate picture of monetary policy 
transmission than structured economic modelling of household behaviour. If we had similar 
energy contracts data, we would have had a much more precise picture of the impact of 
energy prices increases across firms and households. 
The imprecision of forecasting medium-term outcomes, particularly during large shocks, 
means investing in the data and analytical infrastructure would offer much better 
preparation for future uncertainties. Data uncertainty can be big enough during large 
shocks that the straitjacketed lens of forecast models is less informative. Even statistical 
models become wanting because they often miss turning points, as highlighted earlier. 
Once better data infrastructure is in place, it can be combined with a simplified modelling 
apparatus to maintain the discipline of a self-consistent economic framework. 
Simplification of the forecasting apparatus can help free up valuable expertise and 
resources that can be deployed in more effective avenues, and they would provide 
transparency and accountability. 
A central MPC forecast provides the discipline of an internally consistent narrative. But it 
comes at an enormous cost of committee and Staff time being devoted to adapting 
forecast errors into judgements that, in this inflationary episode, were small relative to the 
scale of the shock being experienced, as shown earlier.  
A Staff forecast offers a way of maintaining consistency and of ascertaining the risks 
without the incrementalism of a best collective judgement. It has the ability to empower 
Staff to experiment with different assumptions and risks, while taking ownership and credit 
for analysis that is theirs to begin with. Conducting regular, calendar-based internal 
reviews would further strengthen the modelling apparatus and provide transparency on 
forecast errors (Neiss in AB (2024)). Importantly, it would heighten the level of 
accountability for committee members when they choose to differ from the policy path 
implied by the Staff forecast. 
Staff-led scenario modelling might help assess and explain risks that differ from the central 
forecast. My assessment from a minority experience is that producing multiple forecasts 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 11 
 
under alternative scenarios during a period of large shocks has been beyond the resource 
capacity of individual external members and possibly even Bank Staff, particularly given 
the constraints imposed by the Bank’s IT and modelling infrastructure that were highlighted 
by the Bernanke Review. While experimenting with different assumptions and risks may be 
helpful in thinking through the uncertainties, getting a handle on the uncertainty over data 
and interpreting it to assess the evolution of the economy are more crucial. Timely and 
forward-looking insights into the working of the economy can discipline policymaking by 
challenging priors.  
A critical question would be how scenarios are chosen. The concern here is that it could 
become an “ad hoc” exercise and add to the incrementalism from the “repeat game” of 
negotiating a best collective judgement on the choice of scenarios - quite the opposite of 
what they are intended to do (Aikman, Giles and Goodhart; Grady and Julius in AB 
(2024)). Staff-led scenarios could reduce these risks, but the implementation details would 
determine if they are able to do so.  
Time and resources are always scarce in policymaking and the best use of them would be 
to develop the data and analytical infrastructure. Better inputs and a simplified forecasting 
apparatus would be most meaningful for better calibration of policy responses during large 
shocks to the economy.  
I would like to thank Jenny Chan and Donal McVeigh for their work on these remarks. I am 
grateful to Daniel Albuquerque, Lauren Barnes, Maren Froemel, Derrick Kanngiesser, 
Giulia Mantoan, Sophie Piton, Doug Rendle, Dan Steel, Carlo Varriale, and Ivan Yotzov for 
their analysis, and to Andrew Bailey, Fabrizio Cadamagnani, Andrew Gaffney, Jonathan 
Haskel, Ed Hill, Waris Panjwani, and Kate Reinold for comments and input.  


Bank of England  
 
 Page 12 
 
Appendix 
Chart 8: Central banks’ forecast errors, 2016-2023 
Adjusted for the relative magnitude of the energy shock on consumer prices (a) 
 
(a) Forecast errors normalised by the peak energy price relative to the peak energy price in the UK.
