BANK: BOE
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Not-so-private questions − speech by Nathanaël Benjamin
DATE: 01/06/2024
SPEAKER: Nathanaël Benjamin
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/speech/2024/april/speech-by-nathanael-benjamin-at-bloomberg.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Bank of England  
 
 Page 1 
 
 
 
Not-so-private questions − 
speech by Nathanaël 
Benjamin 
Given at Bloomberg 
22 April 2024 
 
 
 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 2 
 
Speech 
Good morning, all. I am delighted to be here today to discuss a very important topic: 
private equity. I will step through the growth in the market, its important role in supporting 
companies to access finance, and the emergence of different players in that ecosystem. I 
will also explain why I have concerns about certain aspects of the developments in private 
equity and interconnected markets. That is something I have spoken about before,1 and 
which the Bank of England’s Financial Policy Committee (FPC) – of which I am now a 
member – has been highlighting in recent communications.2 
Shining a light on the current dynamics in the private equity market is crucial at this 
juncture, given the important role the sector plays for the real economy. Indeed, making 
sure that the financial system evolves in a way that is conducive to safe and sustainable 
financing practices is essential for durable economic stability and growth in the UK. It is 
important for the FPC to consider both its primary and secondary objectives in the round: 
financial stability as well as supporting the government’s economic policy to achieve 
strong, sustainable, and balanced growth. And with that combined lens, in a sense, 
financial stability is a means towards the ultimate goal of promoting the good – the welfare 
– of the people of the UK for the long term. As I embark on my role within the FPC, this will 
be a key area of focus for me. And in my opinion, private equity is perhaps the most 
material case at the moment that demonstrates the importance of this combined lens. 
That is because recent developments in that market have the potential to disrupt the 
supply of funding to real economy companies in a stress. And to cause systemic 
institutions – such as banks – to experience significant and correlated losses on their 
exposures linked to private equity. These dynamics, as well as exogenous shocks, could 
all be amplified by vulnerabilities in this sector, such as opacity and interconnectedness 
across institutions and markets. So this is typical financial stability ground. That’s why we 
care. 
How does the growth of private equity contribute to  
market-based finance? 
Market-based financing3 in the broadest sense has grown significantly over the last 
decade. Half of the funding for UK businesses now comes directly from financial markets 
 
1 See: 'Yesterday’s logic' − speech by Nathanaël Benjamin, Bank of England 
2 See: Financial Policy Summary and Record of the Financial Policy Committee meeting on 13 March, 
Bank of England  
3 Market based finance is made up of markets (eg, equity, debt, and derivatives markets) and different kinds 
of investment funds, insurers, intermediaries like broker-dealers, and market infrastructure like central 
counterparties. 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 3 
 
and non-bank financial institutions. Rather than from banks, as was the case traditionally. 
Since the end of 2007, market-based finance has made up almost all of the net increase in 
lending to UK businesses.  
Private equity consists of funds which use pools of capital, largely from institutional 
investors, to invest in non-publicly-traded companies. They are one part of the system of 
market-based finance that has grown particularly rapidly. During the era of low interest 
rates, investors have turned to private equity as they sought returns. Also, they have been 
attracted to the perceived benefits of investing in unlisted, and therefore less liquid, assets. 
They can focus on total return in the absence of short-term earnings targets associated 
with public markets. And they get greater control over the companies. 
Globally, assets under management in the private equity sector have increased from 
around $2 trillion in 20134 to around $8 trillion in 20235 (Figure 1). In comparison, the 
public equity market is around $100 trillion.6 And the size of the private credit market, part 
of the wider market-based finance ecosystem, stands at about $2 trillion.7  
This has been accompanied by a movement of people away from banks to the non-bank 
sector, including private equity. So people who used to work for banks are now 
competitors, or clients, of banks, often in sectors such as private equity. 
Figure 1: Private equity assets under management have increased 
Private equity assets under management 
 
Source: McKinsey, Preqin, and Bank Calculations 
 
4 Joyce, 2020, Future of Alternatives 2025: Private Equity AUM Will Top $9tn in 2025, Preqin, accessed 
10 April 2024 
5 McKinsey, 2024, McKinsey Global Private Markets Review 2024: Private markets in a slower era, 
accessed 10 April 2024 
6 Slok, Agarwal, and Shah, 2024, Apollo Global Management, ‘Trends in private markets going into 2024’, 
January 2024, accessed 10 April 2024 
7 See: Financial Stability Report - December 2023, Bank of England 
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
2012 2013 2014 2015 2016 2017 2018 2019 2020 2021 2022 2023
$, Trillions


Bank of England  
 
 Page 4 
 
The sector plays a crucial role in funding UK businesses, with around £250 billion actively 
invested in UK companies via private equity. Notably, companies in ‘software, 
communications, IT, and media’ sectors, as well as ‘commercial products and services’, 
particularly benefit from private equity funding, with each receiving around 22% of all 
private equity fund investments (Figure 2). Additionally, companies in ‘consumer goods, 
hospitality, and retail’ sectors receive around 15% of private equity’s total financing. 
Figure 2: Almost a quarter of private equity fund investments in the UK are directed 
to companies in software, communications, IT and media 
Sectoral distribution of private equity investee companies in UK 
 
Source: Pitchbook and Bank calculations  
Given this picture, it is clear that the sector plays an important role in supporting 
employment in the global and UK economies. A report by the British Private Equity and 
Venture Capital Association and EY estimates that in 2023, UK businesses backed by 
private equity and venture capital employ 2.2 million workers (of which 1.9 million are 
private-equity-backed only), collectively earning £75 billion.8 Furthermore, suppliers to 
these same businesses employ an additional 1.3 million workers. Overall, this is 
comparable to the entire education sector’s workforce.9 So private equity affects a material 
part of the UK’s workforce. In turn, this employment will support consumer spending.  
The growth in private markets is definitely contributing to greater competition within the 
financial sector. And the resulting diversification in the sources of financing available to 
 
8 See: British Private Equity and Venture Capital Association and EY, 2023, Economic contribution of UK 
private equity and venture capital in 2023, accessed 10 April 
9 According to the Office for National Statistics employment data by industry, there are around 3.5 million 
people employed in the education sector in the months of October to December 2023. See: Office for 
National Statistics, EMP13: All in employment by industry: People (not seasonally adjusted), released 
13 February 2024 
22%
22%
16%
11%
10%
4%
9%
6%
Software, communications, IT and media
Commercial products and services, and other
business/non-financial services
Consumer goods, hospitality, and retail
Semi-conductors
Health and pharmaceuticals
Transport and Utilities
Financial sector
Others (including energy and agriculture)


Bank of England  
 
 Page 5 
 
corporates is clearly a good thing for the economy. For example, some evidence suggests 
that investment by companies backed by private equity held up by more than their peers 
during the global financial crisis.10 Indeed sustained financing to businesses and to 
productive finance assets – including in times of stress – is important and can, in turn, 
support investment by those businesses, which is a crucial driver of productivity growth. 
Private equity investment is also more than just financing. It can contribute to the 
productive use of capital in the economy, with sponsors using their experience of working 
with a variety of businesses to improve underperforming companies. 
So the prominence of the private equity sector both within the financial system and for the 
real economy is significant. But with that comes a responsibility for the sector to ensure 
that its growth happens safely and sustainably. 
 
What makes up the private equity ecosystem? 
There are many players in the private equity ecosystem, each with a different role to play. 
Please bear with me as I make introductions. 
First, there are financial ‘sponsors’ (sometimes called ‘general partners’) who manage 
the private equity funds, and typically make money via management fees and carried 
interest. There is a lot of diversity here. But while there are still many small sponsors, the 
market is starting to become more dominated by larger sponsors than before. According to 
McKinsey, the top twenty-five fund managers accounted for 47% of private equity 
fundraising in 2023, which is the highest share in a decade.11 Sponsors are also 
increasingly sophisticated. Their activities are becoming more complex. At one end of the 
spectrum you find single strategies, focussing on buy-out activities. But at the other end 
you find multi-strategies, competing in lending activities, and active in the private credit, 
commercial real estate, infrastructure, and insurance spaces, for example. Not only has 
their product portfolio expanded, the largest of these sponsors are also operating globally. 
Second, there are ‘limited partners’, who are the investors into the private equity funds. 
And these include insurers, pension funds, foundations, or wealthy individuals. However, 
and conversely, there is also a trend of large private equity sponsors gaining control of 
institutional investors, such as insurers and reinsurers, in order to access more stable 
funding sources. 
 
10 Bernstein, Lerner, Mezzanotti, 2019, Private Equity and Financial Fragility during the Crisis in The 
Review of Financial Studies, The Review of Financial Studies, Volume 32, Issue 4, Pages 1309–1373  
11 McKinsey, 2024, McKinsey Global Private Markets Review 2024: Private markets in a slower era, 
Accessed 10 April 2024 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 6 
 
Third, banks also play a crucial role by providing leverage throughout the ecosystem. 
They provide and facilitate ‘downstream’ lending to companies owned by private equity 
funds. They do ‘mid-stream’ lending to the private equity funds themselves. And they have 
‘upstream’ exposures where there is recourse to the limited partners. The private equity 
industry is an increasingly important source of revenue and credit risk for banks, which see 
significant opportunities there. 
Fourth, private credit funds also participate by lending substantially and directly to 
companies owned by private equity funds, thereby competing with banks, while receiving 
credit from banks as well. Moreover, private equity sponsors are often establishing their 
own private credit funds to compete actively with other private credit funds that lend to the 
companies they seek to own. Private credit markets have been in focus recently. Earlier 
this year, my colleague Lee Foulger used the FPC’s approach to assessing financial 
stability risks in the non-bank sector to set out how the higher interest rate environment 
may impact private credit markets.12 And the IMF Global Financial Stability Report 
published recently also assesses vulnerabilities and potential risks to financial stability 
from corporate private credit.13 
And finally, last but certainly not least, there are the companies themselves that are 
owned by private equity – as well as financed by other mechanisms such as leveraged 
loans, or bond issuance. Notable names like Merlin Entertainment, Wagamama, and Hovis 
fall into this category. But private equity investments are often directed into small and 
medium-sized companies, managed as a portfolio by the private equity sponsors. 
As you can see, the ecosystem is becoming increasingly complex and interconnected. 
That requires careful navigation and underscores the importance of efforts to understand 
these interlinkages more thoroughly. 
Why am I focusing on this now?  
So now that I have presented the main players in the private equity ecosystem, let me turn 
to the dynamics we’re observing between those players. 
The strong growth and attractive returns of the private equity asset class over the last ten 
years has occurred during a period of low interest rates. However, since the start of 2022 
interest rates have increased substantially. And markets are not expecting for the 
foreseeable future a return to the low levels seen in the recent past. So the sector is now 
facing challenges.  
 
12 See: Non-bank risks, financial stability and the role of private credit – speech by Lee Foulger, Bank 
of England  
13 IMF 2024, Global Financial Stability Report, The Last Mile: Financial Vulnerabilities and Risks 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 7 
 
These challenges fall into two categories. Firstly, the difficulties that the  
highly-leveraged companies backed by private equity face in the higher interest rate 
environment. And secondly the consequences of a lack of exit opportunities for 
private equity fund investments. Private equity is particularly vulnerable to this given its 
extensive use of leverage, and the illiquid nature of its investments. I will step through 
these challenges in turn. 
First, higher risk-free interest rates have increased funding costs, creating a more 
challenging environment for highly-leveraged corporates everywhere. Those sponsored by 
private equity are no different. Indeed, it has been a generally less accommodating market 
for those real-economy companies to repay and roll over their debt. Many companies 
sponsored by private equity use leveraged loans or private credit loans to finance 
themselves. And these loans tend to have a floating rate. So much of the higher interest 
rate costs have already been passed through to them. Default rates on these leveraged 
loans have also started to increase, and may rise even further, which could impact credit 
spreads negatively, and in turn translate into even higher funding costs. This would make it 
more costly for the companies concerned to refinance themselves in the future. 
Some companies sponsored by private equity have turned to refinancing solutions which 
delay crystallisation of risks. That includes ‘amend and extend’ or ‘payment in kind’ 
agreements. While these agreements can help smooth through the stress, the risk is that 
the impact of higher rates is simply delayed, and an extension gives false comfort, 
increasing credit losses in the future. It is therefore important that there is high-quality risk 
management as debt is extended, and sponsors may also be called upon to inject equity. 
So these are undeniably challenging times for a number of companies financed by private 
equity – in the same way as for most corporates who are highly leveraged. And a crucial 
question for us is the extent to which that in turn leads them to cut back on investment and 
especially employment. And how that impacts systemic institutions or markets. 
But the challenges don’t stop here for the private equity sector. Private equity funds have 
the additional challenge of the drying up of traditional exit routes for their investments via 
the capital markets, leading to difficulties in achieving the return on capital sought by 
limited partners. Those pressures are particularly relevant in an environment where a 
given level of return can now be achieved by investing in less risky and more liquid assets. 
This has increased pressure on fund valuations in secondary markets and encouraged the 
emergence of new forms of leverage, which I’ll now turn to.    
Because of the higher funding costs and lower earnings multiples, sponsors are reluctant 
to sell their investments into this market, and investors are reluctant to buy. Sponsors have 
often used an initial public offering (an IPO – when the shares in a company that is owned 
privately are sold to the public for the first time) to sell down their private equity fund 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 8 
 
investments. But the IPO market has been weak globally, and in 2023, global IPO 
proceeds were down around 80% compared to their peak in 2021.14 Partly reflecting this, 
exit activity has declined significantly (Figure 3).  
Figure 3: Private equity exit activity has declined 
Number of Private Equity Exits 
 
Source: S&P Global, Preqin, and Bank Calculations 
The depression in exit activity has put pressure on limited partners in two key ways. Firstly, 
sponsors are unable to return capital to their investors. And so the length of time that the 
limited partners’ capital is locked up in funds is increasing. Secondly, some limited 
partners have found themselves above their target allocations towards the private equity 
sector.  
Faced with these challenges, limited partners have looked to sell their holdings or 
“interests” in secondary markets. And the increased supply of limited partner interests in 
the secondary market has put downward pressure on the prices that they can demand for 
selling their interests. So there is downward pressure on valuations in secondary markets. 
In a recent report, Jefferies noted that while pricing in the secondary market overall had 
improved due to rising public valuations globally, only 1% of limited partner interests were 
priced above the net asset value of the company portfolio, whilst many older interests were 
trading at discounts of 25% or more.15  
So it seems some people have been stuck. And this has catalysed the development of 
new types of leverage. Private equity “secondaries” funds have been established to 
purchase the increased supply of limited partner interests. These funds, in turn, often 
 
14 PWC 2024, Global IPO Watch 2023 and outlook for 2024, Accessed 10 April 2024 
15 Jefferies 2024, Global Secondary Market Review, Accessed 10 April 2024 
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900
Q1
Q3
Q1
Q3
Q1
Q3
Q1
Q3
2020
2021
2022
2023


Bank of England  
 
 Page 9 
 
require leverage to meet return targets. In addition, for some time sponsors have been 
creating “continuation funds” to restructure and spin off the ownership of selected 
sponsored companies, thereby providing an exit opportunity on their investments. New 
investors in continuation funds in turn may look for leverage against their capital 
commitments. And we have also seen additional forms of leverage being sought in the 
form of secured financing against portfolios of existing limited partner interests in private 
equity funds. 
We are also observing a trend towards private equity funds themselves seeking leverage, 
backed by the entire net assets of the fund. This is a way for sponsors to generate 
additional liquidity, in some cases reflecting pressure to finance dividend pay-outs to 
investors, to repay portfolio companies’ debt, or to purchase new fund assets.  
These loans are in the form of net asset value financing (“NAV financing”). While NAV 
financing has been present for many years, 17Capital – a financier of private equity 
investors – projected a seven-fold increase in NAV financing from $100 billion to $700 
billion by 2030.16 As the providers of NAV facilities have recourse to the assets of the 
private equity fund, and these assets are leveraged themselves, this has been termed 
“leverage on leverage”. You can see why.  
Banks are major providers of these new kinds of leverage. But they are increasingly joined 
by private credit funds. While the range of providers brings greater competition to the 
sector, it can also increase the risk profile for lenders in the market. So there are natural 
questions about the risks of these financing arrangements, and the growth in kinds and 
quantity of leverage, or ‘leverage on leverage’, throughout the ecosystem. And I cannot 
resist pointing out the ironic contradiction in banks on the one hand worried about the 
threat from non-bank players, but on the other hand keen to help them leverage 
themselves up. There are also questions about the liquidity of the underlying collateral, 
particularly in a stress. Indeed, the types of collateral used to secure these forms of 
financing are illiquid, being private assets, which are hard to value. Or collateral can be 
portfolios of limited partner interests which involve hundreds of individual fund 
investments, which may be challenging to unwind.  
Why do we worry?  
So what?  
Well, the dynamics I have just described speak for themselves. And it is not hard to work 
out that naturally they cause us concerns related to the financial system as a whole.  
 
16 17Capital, 2023, “Why 2022 was another record-breaking year for NAV finance”, accessed 10 April 
2024 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 10 
 
Macro-financial vulnerabilities 
The developments I described are set against a backdrop of opacity and are resulting 
in growing interconnectedness. 
First, the opacity: there is a lack of transparency about the degree and kinds of leverage 
(and “leverage on leverage”) entering the system. Moreover, private asset valuations are 
more opaque than public markets because assets are marked manually on a quarterly 
basis, by the sponsors, which is much less frequently than public equivalents. That is, they 
are not ‘marked-to-market’. This can have benefits: opacity around valuations can smooth 
things through a period of uncertainty. But there are material risks. As my colleague Lee 
Foulger has highlighted: “opaque valuations could increase the chance of an abrupt  
re-assessment of risks or sharp and correlated falls in value, particularly if further shocks 
materialise”. But it could also put pressure on the portfolio companies themselves. If a 
shock happens, sponsors may need to deleverage and rebalance their exposures to meet 
the debt repayments or demands for dividends from limited partners that I have just 
described. This could lead to sponsors selling their portfolio companies to meet these 
demands. If this happened, the opacity throughout the system could get in the way of 
appropriate risk management and cause a procyclical reaction. In other words, it could 
amplify any initial shock. And otherwise healthy companies might need to be sold at steep 
and unnecessary discounts. 
Now let me turn to the interconnectedness: as is obvious from the time it has taken me 
just now to attempt to describe comprehensively who’s doing what, the environment is 
becoming increasingly complex and interconnected. Banks find themselves exposed to 
various parts of the private equity ecosystem. That includes through lending to private 
equity sponsors and funds, to limited partners, to the companies under private equity 
ownership, and they are competing with private credit funds. Pension funds and insurance 
companies invest in private equity sponsors, and conversely they are sometimes owned 
by private equity, most significantly at a global level. But in the UK there is also an 
increased exposure to the private equity ecosystem through the growth in the use of cross-
border risk transfer in the insurance sector, known as funded reinsurance, a topic that has 
been touched on by my colleagues.17 There are also significant interlinkages between 
private credit markets, leveraged lending, and private equity activity.18 This intricate web of 
connections adds to the notable lack of transparency, making it difficult to assess financial 
stability risks. 
As set out in recent publications, our approach to assessing risks in market-based 
finance is to focus on how vulnerabilities could affect systemic institutions, systemic 
 
17 See: CP24/23 – Funded reinsurance, Bank of England 
18 See: Non-bank risks, financial stability and the role of private credit – speech by Lee Foulger,  
Bank of England 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 11 
 
markets, and the provision of vital services, such as credit. And as you can see, we worry 
about all three of those things in the specific case of private equity. To spell it out: 
First, the impact on systemic institutions: understanding financial sector exposures to 
private equity is difficult given limited public data. But we have previously noted the 
substantial activity which banks are undertaking in relation to the private equity sector. 
Investors such as insurers and pension funds appear to be less exposed. But as with 
banks, a shock or a significant deterioration in the macro-outlook could result in correlated 
losses on their private equity investments and debt linked to private equity. My colleague 
Rebecca Jackson will tomorrow set out our views on risk management in relation to banks’ 
activities in private equity. The extent to which these institutions manage their counterparty 
risk and credit concentrations competently – and the extent to which they understand their 
correlated exposures – is key for financial stability. We’ve warned about this before a 
number of times.19 It remains particularly true in the case of private equity. But it is 
important that all the players in the ecosystem, not just banks but also sponsors and 
investors, have robust risk management frameworks.  
Second, the impact on interlinked markets: there are significant interlinkages between 
players in the private equity ecosystem, with overlap between public and private markets. 
In a stress, behaviours of sponsors, banks, and investors may interact, leading to the 
potential for spillovers between private and public markets. For example, common players 
may respond to a stress by reducing future investment into private-equity-concentrated 
industries, or by selling assets, with potential impacts on high yield and leveraged loan 
markets. 
And third, the impact on the real economy and employment via the provision of 
finance, in what we call vital services: with many UK companies (large and small) 
reliant on private markets for financing, a shock to this sector – driven by investor losses 
and/or a decreased appetite for private assets – could limit their ability to access the 
financing they need. Which could lead to cutbacks in investment and employment. We are 
continuing to evaluate these risks. But to be honest, in the same way as there is a lack of 
transparency in valuations, more generally data about the impact of private equity on the 
corporate sector is scarce and it is difficult to assemble the overall picture. 
Conclusion: What is the role of the FPC? 
While we cannot predict the future, we expect that private equity will continue to grow in 
size and complexity, adding to the already complex ecosystem I have described. Indeed, 
many financial institutions we speak to have strategic plans to grow their activities related 
to private equity. That trend is positive as it diversifies sources of financing, bringing 
 
19 See: 'Yesterday’s logic' − speech by Nathanaël Benjamin, Bank of England 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 12 
 
greater opportunities for businesses, and ultimately employment and growth. And the 
competition between banks and non-banks at play here is a very positive sign of a healthy 
and innovative financial sector. But that needs to happen in a safe and sustainable way. 
The opacity, complexity, and interconnectedness of the sector have made assessing its 
developments difficult, but it also means that it is all the more important. 
These developments could pose risks to financial stability through several transmission 
channels – systemic institutions, systemic markets, and through the provision of funding. 
So far, the majority of private equity demand globally is outside the UK. But a 
crystallisation of risks in other jurisdictions could easily spill over to UK institutions and 
corporates. The private equity sector plays a big role in channelling finance to UK 
corporates, and as a provider of services and employment. Those corporates employ 
many people. So it is important that we assess how a disruption to the provision of finance 
can impact them. In addition, we will look to monitor the impact on systemic institutions 
and markets, given their role in underpinning a stable financial system. 
The Bank of England’s Prudential Regulation Authority is focused on ensuring that the 
banking sector’s risk management practices keep pace with the evolution in the market. 
And that banks are adequately protecting themselves in case things go wrong. There will 
be more on that tomorrow from my colleague Rebecca, where she will explain the results 
of the PRA’s thematic review of banks’ exposures related to private equity. The Financial 
Conduct Authority is also carrying out a review of valuation practices for private assets.20 
That includes examining the personal accountabilities for valuation practices, governance 
of valuation committees, the information reported to boards about valuations, and the 
oversight by relevant boards of those practices. 
Ultimately, as a macro-prudential authority, the FPC’s role is to understand and respond to 
risks as appropriate. We seek to spot where private and public interests diverge. And we 
want to ensure that developments in the private equity sector happen in a safe and 
sustainable way, where the forward-looking interests of households and businesses are 
protected for the long term.  
So these are the questions we are asking. What is the impact of the dynamics in the 
private equity sector on UK corporates, and on the rest of the financial system? How might 
this all play out in times of stress? If some players feel they have been patient so far, what 
happens if they become less patient? 
We will examine these questions through a combined lens of our primary and secondary 
objectives of financial stability and sustainable growth. That combined lens is essential to 
 
20 Financial Conduct Authority, 2024, Portfolio letter: Asset Management & Alternatives Supervisory 
Strategy - interim update 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 13 
 
promote the good – the welfare – of the people of the UK for the long term. We will publish 
a further assessment of these risks in our June 2024 Financial Stability Report. 
Thank you.  
 
I’d like to thank Niamh Reynolds, Joshua Parikh, Simon Stockwell, Renee Horrell,  
George Pugh, David Baumslag, Neha Bora, Matthew Waldron, Joe Ganley, Geoff 
Coppins, Sameeksha Soni, Sarah Breeden, Daniel Walker, Natan Misak, and  
Harsh Mehta for their assistance in preparing these remarks. The views expressed here 
are not necessarily those of the Financial Policy Committee (FPC).
