BANK: BOE
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: The courage not to act − remarks by Huw Pill
DATE: 01/06/2025
SPEAKER: Huw Pill
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/speech/2025/may/the-courage-not-to-act-remarks-by-huw-pill.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Bank of England  
 
 Page 1 
 
 
 
The courage not to act − 
remarks by Huw Pill 
Remarks on the monetary policy outlook at a briefing hosted by 
Barclays 
20 May 2025 
 
 
 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 2 
 
Remarks 
Good morning. 
It is a great pleasure to discuss recent monetary policy decisions with you this morning. 
Thanks to our hosts here at Barclays for organising the event.  
The May 2025 MPC decision 
At its meeting on 8 May, the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) decided to reduce Bank 
Rate by 25bp to 4¼%. This represents a further step in the Committee’s “gradual and 
careful” withdrawal of monetary policy restriction, as the substantial pandemic- and 
invasion-induced inflationary shocks faced in recent years unwind.  
The Committee’s decision was enabled by evidence of continued progress in disinflation 
towards a lasting and sustainable achievement of the 2% inflation target.  
To illustrate, over the past few months: underlying services price inflation has eased; 
forward-looking indicators of pay growth have moderated; and – despite continuing 
challenges with the quality of the data – we are seeing more signs that slack is emerging 
in the UK labour market.  
Layered on top of these developments is the impact of recent announcements about the 
global trading system (and the uncertainties surrounding them) on the UK economy. On 
balance, the Committee judged that these announcements would have a modest 
disinflationary effect on the outlook for UK price developments at the policy-relevant 
horizon, albeit more marginal than appears to have been the prior expectation of others.  
The path of headline CPI inflation promises to be bumpy over the next few months. Owing 
in large part to the gyrations of European wholesale natural gas prices in the past (and 
their subsequent impact on UK energy utility bills in the CPI basket), the MPC expects 
inflation to rise to around 3½% through the summer. But behind this volatility, the 
underlying disinflation continues. 
This narrative and the evidence supporting it were marshalled in the MPC’s May Monetary 
Policy Report (MPR), which presents the data, analysis, forecasts and scenarios 
discussed by the Committee in coming to its Bank Rate decision. Committee members 
(including myself) have been active over the past couple of weeks in describing these data 
and analyses, so I will not repeat that again this morning. 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 3 
 
Of course, the world does not stand still. Since the MPC’s policy decision, we have seen 
significant further developments. There has been more news on the trade side, not least 
the US-UK trade agreement announced in Washington DC shortly after the publication of 
the Bank Rate decision. And that news together with the MPC’s policy announcement 
have led to substantial asset price movements, including a close-to-complete reversal of 
the post-‘Liberation Day’ decline in the price of risk assets and market expectations of 
Bank Rate to year-end.  
The implications of such news for the inflation outlook will need to be assessed by the 
MPC at its upcoming meetings. And the Committee will need to remain alert to the 
possibility that changes in circumstances demand changes in the monetary policy stance. 
As the MPC emphasised in its most recent statement: “monetary policy is not [and cannot 
be] on a pre-set path”. The Committee’s assessment, decision and communication on 8 
May were all conditional on the information it had at that point: necessarily and inevitably 
so.  
But my objective this morning is not to describe the rationale for the Committee’s Bank 
Rate cut. That has already been done, by the Governor and others. 
Rather I seek to stake out my own position. As I am sure most of you know, I dissented 
from the MPC majority in May in favour of leaving Bank Rate unchanged at 4½%. And that 
places me under an obligation to explain my dissent.  
Inverting the title of Ben Bernanke’s celebrated memoir of his experiences during the 
global financial crisis, my aim in today’s remarks is to justify my ‘courage not to act’ with 
Bank Rate at the May MPC.  
That argument has three elements: first, I will clarify my May dissenting vote (perhaps 
revealing that it was not so ‘courageous’ after all); second, I will explain the argumentation 
behind that vote (drawing on analytical material that was influential in my own thinking); 
and third, I will explore how the latest policy round illustrates the potential of scenario 
analysis (thereby proving a link back to Prof. Bernanke, given his recommendation of this 
approach in his recent review of the Bank of England’s forecasting process). 
How courageous? – A ‘skip’ not a ‘halt’ 
Crucially, I would characterise my May vote as favouring a ‘skip’ within a continuing 
withdrawal of monetary policy restriction, rather than a halt to the process of withdrawal.  
I still view the underlying disinflation process (towards lasting achievement of the 2% 
inflation target) as intact. It is the quarterly pace of 25bp Bank Rate cuts delivered since 
last summer that I question on this occasion – in line with my revealed preference for a 
“cautious and gradual” withdrawal of restriction over the past year.1 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 4 
 
As I have argued consistently since last spring, I am concerned about the potential 
inflationary impact of structural changes in price and wage setting behaviour, following the 
experience of prolonged, well above-target inflation in recent years. Greater ‘real income 
resistance’ among entrepreneurs and wage earners may have sustained momentum in 
nominal dynamics even as resource pressures and the labour market have eased.  
The resulting increased intrinsic inflation persistence2 has not only slowed the process of 
disinflation relative to inflation target era norms, it has also changed the character of the 
disinflation itself.  
The former observation would imply a need for a slower-than-average withdrawal of 
monetary policy restriction, simply to match the slower-than-average disinflation. But the 
latter observation brings out that structural changes in the nature of the disinflation process 
may require a more prolonged maintenance of policy restriction to ‘squeeze out’ the 
inflation arising from intrinsic persistence.  
Or to put it another way, while progress with disinflation is a signal that monetary policy 
restriction can be removed over time, progress with disinflation is also a signal that 
monetary policy restriction is working – and as long as disinflation back to target is not 
complete, maintenance of some restriction will still be required. On my reading, that is a 
view that is held across a broad swathe of MPC members. 
The disinflation process should not be seen simply as reflecting the dissipation of external 
shocks. It is also the result of the monetary policy response to those shocks. 
For sure we should be forward-looking and internalise the lags in monetary policy 
transmission to the inflation rate in making our policy choices. But this simply further 
highlights the need to manage the (potentially complex) inter-related dynamics between 
the parallel processes of disinflation and withdrawal of policy restriction. 
And in my view, that withdrawal of policy restriction has been running a little too fast of 
late, given the progress achieved thus far with returning inflation to target on a lasting 
basis.  
As reflected in the voting record, my sense is that Bank Rate plateaued at slightly too low 
a level in 2023, and the MPC started cutting Bank Rate slightly too early in 2024. To 
compensate, my starting point is that the pace of Bank Rate reduction should be 
“cautious”, running slower than the 25bp per quarter we have implemented since last 
August.  
That requires a ‘skip’ in that quarterly pattern at some point. And I decided that the May 
meeting was an appropriate moment for that ‘skip’. 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 5 
 
Why courageous? – ‘Resistance’ in theory and practice 
Evidence favouring a ‘skip’ to slow the pace of withdrawal of monetary policy restriction 
relative to what the MPC has implemented since last August comes from the signal 
extracted from many noisy nominal indicators. This signal has remained elevated even in 
an environment of stubbornly weak real activity. While disinflation towards the 2% inflation 
target continues, disinflationary momentum has shown signs of stuttering.  
To illustrate: the pace of decline in the underlying pay growth measure constructed by 
Bank staff and presented in the MPR has slowed. Core services inflation has remained 
obstinately robust. Nominal indicators from business surveys show renewed strength – 
both input and output price measures in the PMI survey, as well as goods inflation 
expectations in the Bank’s own Decision Maker Panel (DMP) survey. And household 
inflation expectations have picked up, rising to levels above their long-term averages 
consistent with the achievement of the inflation target. All this comes against a background 
of (almost) four years of above target CPI inflation, with a peak above 11%. And we expect 
April headline CPI inflation to show an increase as the prospective bumpiness in that time 
series I already mentioned becomes apparent. 
In short, I remain concerned about upside risks to the achievement of the inflation target.  
My concerns are captured in part by the ‘upside’ inflation scenario presented in Box A of 
the May MPR. This scenario associates a stronger-than-embodied-in-the-baseline- 
forecast outlook for CPI inflation with a combination of: (a) second-round effects stemming 
from the energy price induced ‘blip’ of headline inflation to 3½% over the summer; and (b) 
weaker labour productivity growth, which weighs on potential aggregate supply and 
increases unit labour costs.  
I have sympathy with both elements of the scenario. Bank research has demonstrated the 
potential for non-linear ‘threshold effects’ to kick into the price formation process once 
inflation reaches 3½ - 4%.3 This can be seen as a statistical warning of another bout of 
potential second-round effects, especially as households may be more attentive to inflation 
given recent experience and more sensitive to developments in especially salient items of 
the CPI basket (such as food and utility bills) that are driving the anticipated rise in 
inflation. And stagnant labour productivity is consistent with the reservations I have 
expressed for some time about the dynamism of the UK supply-side. 
But my concerns go beyond these risks. The scenarios published in the MPR are useful 
not just because they help to illustrate some of my concerns, but also because they serve 
to delineate where I have additional concerns that run beyond what is presented in the 
MPR.  
First, a brief empirical motivation.  


Bank of England  
 
 Page 6 
 
As shown in Chart 1 – which will be familiar to many of you from MPR press conferences 
over the past few quarters – since mid-2023 pay growth has exceeded the rates that would 
have been expected on the basis of developments in its usual determinants, such as 
labour market slack, inflation expectations and productivity. In parallel, the MPC’s wage 
growth forecasts – which, though judgemental, draw on models of these standard 
relationships estimated on data from the generally benign inflation targeting era – have 
systematically under-predicted the strength of pay growth, as shown in Chart 2.  
Chart 1  Pay growth has proved 
surprisingly strong since mid-2023 
Chart 2  Wage growth has proven to be 
more persistent than envisioned in the 
MPC forecast 
 
 
(a) The shaded swathe represents a range of projections from three statistical models of nominal private sector regular average weekly 
earnings growth, including two wage equations and a simple error-correction model based on productivity, inflation expectations and 
slack. The slack measure for these models is based on the MPC’s estimate of the unemployment gap. The projections are dynamic, 
multi-step ahead forecasts beginning at a point within the models’ estimation periods and are sensitive to data revisions, which can lead 
to changes in the swathe over the past as well as over the forecast period. 
To explore the monetary policy implications of these empirical developments, my 
collaborators at the Bank have estimated a small empirical model of the UK economy. 
Building on the work of my former colleagues at the ECB and their co-authors,4 this model 
explicitly incorporates unemployment and captures fluctuations in the natural rate of 
unemployment (see Annex).  
In this model, the natural rate of unemployment does not vary according to the degree of 
skills mismatch or the degree of churn in the labour market (as is the case in other models 
used at the Bank). Rather, the natural rate of unemployment is a function of the wage 
bargaining power of workers, which captures how much those workers seek to resist any 
fall in their real take-home incomes as the economy is subject to real shocks.5 
0
2
4
6
8
10
0
2
4
6
8
10
2022
2023
2024
2025
Four-quarter average weekly earnings growth 
(private sector regular pay)
Per cent (%)
Latest data
Swathe of wage 
models(a)
-2
0
2
4
6
8
10
18
19
20
21
22
23
24
25
26
27
Successive MPR forecasts from Feb 22 to Feb 25
Latest vintage of realised data
May 25 MPR forecast
Four-quarter average weekly earnings growth 
(private sector regular pay)
Per cent (%)


Bank of England  
 
 Page 7 
 
Not only does this model get closer to embracing the underlying inflation-propagating 
mechanism that I am most concerned about, but it does so in an internally consistent way. 
The approach permits exploration of not just the implications for the inflation outlook of 
changes in price and wage setting behaviour, but also how those changes in behaviour 
influence the transmission mechanism and thus the design of the appropriate monetary 
policy response.  
Charts 3 and 4 show how inflation and Bank Rate respond to a ‘cost-push shock’ in this 
model as the degree of ‘real income resistance’ in the wage bargaining process (ψ) 
strengthens.6 As intuition would suggest, greater resistance to declines in real income 
implies a stronger inflation reaction to the cost-push shock (i.e. amplification of the inflation 
impact) and requires a stronger monetary policy response in Bank Rate.78 
Chart 3  Inflation response to shock 
strengthens as ‘real income resistance’ 
rises …  
Chart 4  … requiring a stronger monetary 
policy response as reflected in higher 
Bank Rate 
 
 
What’s more, because the mechanism producing this stronger response is a reflection of 
changes in the structure of the economy rather than the specific economic shock – in other 
words, it is a consequence of greater intrinsic persistence in inflation, rather than extrinsic 
persistence – then further inflationary shocks would produce similar upside deviations from 
whatever disinflationary path the economy was on. 
Charts 3 and 4 have been produced under the assumption that monetary policy follows a 
common rule independent of the degree of real income persistence. But the policy 
response itself should reflect how changes in the structure economy influence the 
propagation of inflation and the transmission mechanism of monetary policy. What was the 
optimal monetary policy response under one view of the transmission mechanism will 
become sub-optimal should that view of the transmission mechanism change. 
-0.20
-0.10
0.00
0.10
0.20
0.30
0.40
0.50
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12
Impact on year-on-year CPI inflation 
(pp)
Quarters since shock
ψ = 1.3 := Baseline
ψ = 1.5 := Moderate
ψ = 1.7 := High
-0.20
0.00
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80
1.00
1.20
1.40
1.60
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9 10 11 12
Impact on Bank Rate (pp)
Quarters since shock
ψ = 1.3 := Baseline
ψ = 1.5 := Moderate
ψ = 1.7 := High


Bank of England  
 
 Page 8 
 
To illustrate this, we have constructed optimised ‘Taylor rules’ linking the level of Bank 
Rate to deviations of inflation from target and the output gap. Because we have an 
internally consistent model of the economy, we can use a measure of welfare to construct 
these optimised rules that itself reflects how the economy and transmission mechanism 
has been changed by the changes in ‘real income resistance’.  
While adopting a framework with novel structural features challenges the consistency of 
this exercise with the baseline forecasts and scenarios shown in the May MPR, it has the 
benefit of maintaining in fact, deepening) the internal consistency within this novel 
framework. 
Chart 5 shows how the parameter governing the optimised responsiveness of Bank Rate 
to the deviation of inflation from target in this set-up varies with the degree of ‘real income 
resistance’ shown by wage bargainers. Again in line with intuition, the greater the degree 
of intrinsic inflation persistence coming from higher ‘real income resistance’, the more 
strongly monetary policy needs to respond to above target inflation (other things equal). 
Taken together, these results imply that, if intrinsic inflation persistence were to rise as a 
result of wage bargainers exhibiting lastingly stronger real wage resistance, then: 
• Inflation would be higher than otherwise following a cost-push shock; 
 
• Since the drivers of that higher inflation are a change in the structure of the 
economy and the behaviour of firms and households within it, this greater sensitivity 
of inflation to a cost-push shock is not a ‘one-off’ but a lasting feature of the 
economy; 
 
• As a result, were there to be a series of inflationary cost-push shocks, the upside 
deviations of inflation from target would prove more persistent than historical 
estimates of the inflation response to those shocks would imply; 
 
• And the optimised response of monetary policy given greater intrinsic inflation 
persistence requires a stronger response of Bank Rate to upside deviations of 
inflation from target, in turn implying that Bank Rate should stay ‘higher-for-longer’ 
even as the disinflation process proceeds. 
This set of implications is consistent with our recent experience of under-estimating the 
persistence of above-target inflation following the pandemic- and invasion-induced 
inflationary cost-push shocks. It also offers support for a slower pace of withdrawal of 
monetary policy restriction during the subsequent disinflation phase. 
In other words, it is one persuasive argument behind my decision to support a May ‘skip’ in 
the ongoing process of Bank Rate reduction. 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 9 
 
Whither courageous? – Exploring ‘robustness’ 
Of course, this is all conjecture. The model-based results follow from different calibrations 
of ‘real income persistence’, not estimates based in the latest data. While the results of the 
exercises are consistent with the surprising strength of UK pay growth since 2023, we do 
not yet have sufficient data to assess whether there has indeed been a structural break in 
intrinsic inflation persistence in recent years.  
Econometricians enjoy the luxury of being able to wait for longer time series to become 
available to explore that possibility. Policy makers must take decisions in real time.  
That is one reason why scenarios based on calibrations can be valuable in monetary 
policy preparation – they allow various “what if” exercises to be conducted and published, 
which expose how policy makers maybe thinking about innovations in the data and the 
structure of the economy, and their implications for Bank Rate decisions. 
One illustration of how such scenarios can support monetary policy making comes from an 
exercise exploring the robustness of policy decisions in the face of uncertainty about 
where the true extent of ‘real income resistance’ among wage bargainers lies.9 The 
relatively simple yet empirically relevant model framework developed above is a helpful 
testbed.  
Chart 6 illustrates the following exercise. We assume that the parameter capturing intrinsic 
inflation persistence (ψ) has shifted to a higher value.10 We then assess how Taylor rules 
optimised under different assumptions for the real income resistance parameter made by 
the central bank (denoted ψ’)11 perform, both in model-consistent welfare terms and in 
terms of inflation volatility.  
By construction, the welfare loss in this exercise is minimised for the true value of the 
intrinsic inflation persistence parameter (i.e. when ψ’ = ψ).  
Inflation volatility (as shown by the orange bars in Chart 6) declines as the sensitivity of 
Bank Rate to inflation deviations from target rises (with the central banks assuming real 
income resistance is stronger than is actually the case, ψ’ > ψ). But this comes at a cost in 
terms of overall welfare (captured in the orange line) as the distortions to activity and 
employment rise. This simple model set-up therefore captures a central feature of the 
Bank’s flexible inflation targeting framework: it warns against adopting what is often called 
an “inflation nutter” approach that focuses solely on minimising inflation volatility even in 
the face of trade-off inducing shocks. 
 
 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 10 
 
Chart 5  More intrinsic inflation persistence should make monetary policy more 
sensitive to above-target inflation outturns  
 
Chart 6  For some values of intrinsic inflation persistence, it is better to err on the 
side of assuming more persistence rather than less 
 
0.94
0.96
0.98
1.00
1.02
1.04
1.06
1.08
1.10
1.12
1.14
1.16
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
Proportionate change in optimal sensitivity of Bank Rate to inflation
(relative to baseline)
ψ
Baseline
Sensitivity to inflation as
real income resistance ψ intensifies
Moderate
High
430
432
434
436
438
440
442
444
446
448
67085
67090
67095
67100
67105
67110
1.2
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
Index of inflation volatility
Index of welfare loss
ψ' | ψ = 1.5 
Inflation volatility
(rhs)
Welfare loss (lhs)


Bank of England  
 
 Page 11 
 
The key feature of Chart 6 is the asymmetry in welfare losses around this specific true 
value of inflation persistence. For the calibration chosen, a policy maker creates smaller 
losses if she errs on the side of assuming a higher-than-true value of intrinsic inflation 
persistence than is she errs by a similar margin on the side of assuming a lower-than-true 
value of that parameter.  
If this were to be a general result across all plausible value of intrinsic inflation persistence, 
it would have immediate policy-relevant conclusions: other things equal, it is preferable to 
worry about intrinsic inflation rather than neglect it. 
We explore this conjecture in Chart 7. This matrix illustrates how welfare losses vary for 
different true parameter values as policy makers assume different degrees of intrinsic 
inflation persistence in constructing their optimised Taylor rules.12  
Chart 7  Welfare losses when using Taylor Rule with mistaken beliefs (ψ’) about true 
degree of real income resistance (ψ) – No general rule 
 
 
1.3
1.4
1.5
1.6
1.7
1.3
0.0
0.6
2.3
4.7
7.5
1.4
0.6
0.0
0.6
2.0
4.0
1.5
2.4
0.6
0.0
0.5
1.6
1.6
5.0
2.1
0.5
0.0
0.3
1.7
8.1
4.2
1.6
0.4
0.0
Policymaker's belief ψ'
True ψ
Proportionate welfare loss when acting as if ψ = ψ', for various ψ (bps)


Bank of England  
 
 Page 12 
 
It is immediately apparent that the result drawn from Chart 6 is not generalisable across all 
the parameter values deemed plausible. To take the extremes shown here: assuming that 
intrinsic inflation persistence in low when it is in fact high results in a lower welfare loss 
than assuming intrinsic inflation is high when it is in fact low. 
Nonetheless, Chart 7 is a helpful summary of how uncertainties surrounding the degree of 
real income resistance (and thus intrinsic inflation persistence) may influence inflation and 
welfare outcomes. This summary can both help to organise the internal discussion of 
policy choices within the MPC and present key elements of the rationale for both individual 
decisions and the final collective outcome of an MPC meeting. 
Consideration of a satellite model of real income resistance is useful not just because it 
delineates where I have additional concerns that run beyond what is presented in the 
MPR. It is also useful because it reveals that no model (or set of models) is a complete 
substitute for the importance of my own subjective judgement in forming a view on the 
appropriate path for Bank Rate. The exercise in Chart 7 forces Committee members to 
disagree within a common framework and explore the welfare consequences of incorrect 
beliefs within a model in which macroeconomic mechanisms map directly to optimal policy 
paths. 
Concluding remarks 
Progress with underlying disinflation towards lasting and sustainable achievement of the 
2% inflation target in the UK continues. This justifies some further withdrawal of monetary 
policy restriction by the Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee. In that light, the 
Committee lowered Bank Rate by 25bp to 4¼% at its May meeting. 
My dissent from that decision does not reflect a fundamental difference with the 
Committee majority regarding the inflation and policy outlook.  
On the contrary, I also believe that the underlying disinflation process remains intact and – 
conditional, as always, on the information and analysis available today – that the 
prospective path of Bank Rate from here is downward. 
My dissenting vote stems from a concern that the pace of withdrawal of monetary policy 
restriction since last summer – quarterly cuts of 25bp – is too rapid given the balance of 
risks to price stability we face. This is in line with my preference for “cautious and gradual” 
cuts in Bank Rate expressed over the past twelve months. 
I would therefore characterise my dissenting vote as favouring a ‘skip’ in the quarterly 
pattern of Bank Rate cuts intended to slow the pace at which monetary restriction is 
withdrawn. It should not be seen as favouring a halt to (still less a reversal of) that 
withdrawal of restriction. 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 13 
 
Why this preference for caution? 
I remain concerned that structural changes in the price and wage setting behaviour have 
increased the intrinsic persistence of the UK inflation process. That not only makes 
inflation ‘higher-for-longer’ in the aftermath of pandemic- and invasion-induced inflationary 
shocks than would otherwise have been the case. It also influences the appropriate Bank 
Rate response in pursuit of lasting achievement of the inflation target. 
In these remarks, I have flagged those indicators that give me cause for concern. I have 
emphasised that these indicators need to be seen in the round and interpreted as part of a 
broader economic narrative. Monetary policy decisions should be ‘outlook dependent’ not 
narrowly ‘data (outturn) dependent’. 
But I also recognise the difficulty with concrete, real-time identification of the behavioural 
changes in price and wage setting that are cause for concern. This is where scenario 
analysis comes in.  
In my remarks this morning, I have sought to give some insight into how economic 
scenarios can be used to conduct “what if” exercises that influence my approach to 
monetary policy decisions. These exercises need empirical grounding and internal 
consistency. They can be conducted in parallel with the baseline forecasts and scenarios 
published in the MPC Monetary Policy Report.  
While these scenarios remain work-in-progress from an institutional point-of-view for both 
the Bank of England and its MPC, I hope my remarks have given some insight into how 
they influence my own thinking as I participate in the current monetary policy debate.  
They illustrate a number of more general points: the MPC and its members routinely 
consider a wide range of inputs and explore economic mechanisms from different 
perspectives; by implication, all analysis and judgments cannot be funnelled through a 
single framework like the forecast; and as a result, a single forecast will not as a general 
rule be a sufficient statistic for communicating the MPC's policy stance. 
And with that, I am happy to take your questions. 
 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 14 
 
References 
Bernanke, B.S. (2024). “Forecasting for monetary policy making and communication 
at the Bank of England: A review,” Bank of England. 
Bernanke, B.S. (2015). ‘The courage to act: A memoir of a crisis and its aftermath,’ 
W.W. Norton & Company. 
Gaffney, A. and G. Potjagailo (2025). ‘Looking through the blip? Evidence of intrinsic 
persistence when inflation is high,’ Bank of England, mimeo. 
Gali, J., F. Smets, and R. Wouters (2012). ‘Unemployment in an estimated new 
Keynesian model,” NBER Macroeconomics Annual 26, pp. 329-360. 
Lombardelli, C. (2025). ‘What if things are different?’ speech at the Bank of England 
watchers conference, 12 May.   
Monetary Policy Committee (2025). ‘Monetary Policy Report,’ May. 
Pill, H. (2024). ‘Cross-checking,’ speech at the Institute of Chartered Accountants for 
England and Wales annual conference ‘Building an Economy Fit for the Future’, 4 
October. 
Pill, H. (2023). ‘Inflation persistence and monetary policy,’ ICMB Lecture, Graduate 
Institute Geneva, 4 April. 
Pill, H. (2022). ‘Monetary policy with a steady hand,’ speech at the Society of 
Professional Economists, 9 February. 
Smets, F., A. Warne, and R. Wouters (2014). ‘Professional forecasters and real-time 
forecasting with a DSGE model,’ International Journal of Forecasting 30(4), pp. 981-
995. 
Söderström, U. (2002). ‘Monetary Policy with Uncertain Parameters,’ Scandinavian 
Journal of Economics 104(1), pp. 125-145. 
van der Ploeg, F. and Willems, T. (2024). ‘Battle of the markups: Conflict inflation and 
the aspirational channel of monetary policy transmission,’ Bank of England staff 
working paper no. 1065. 
 
 
 
 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 15 
 
Annex 
This Annex outlines in greater detail the modelling framework employed in the main text, 
which itself is adapted from the model of Gali et al. (2012).13  
The exercise seeks to consider empirically realistic scenarios for the UK economy that 
captured different degrees of intrinsic inflation persistence. More specifically, in moving 
from the “baseline” to the “moderate” to the “high” real income resistance scenarios, 
workers are endowed with greater wage bargaining power, which allows them to resist the 
erosion of their real incomes in the face of adverse real shocks to the economy. This in 
turn increases the steady-state rate of unemployment underpinning the model in that 
specific scenario. 
Useful features of the model  Unlike many other medium-scale DSGE models, the model 
described in Gali et al (2012) explicitly incorporates unemployment and formally captures 
fluctuations in the natural rate of unemployment. The natural rate of unemployment in this 
model is not determined by skills mismatch or churn in the labour market. Rather the 
natural rate of unemployment in this model is a function of the wage bargaining power of 
workers. This provides a link to more recent Bank research n the inflation process 
presented in van der Ploeg and Willems (2024). 
In this context, a common, exogenous wage mark-up shock propagates through the 
economy differently depending on the structural parameters of the model. Distinguishing 
between different mechanisms becomes crucial for understanding the evolution of real and 
nominal dynamics beyond the point at which the original wage mark-up shock has 
dissipated. Mechanisms therefore matter crucially for the optimal response of monetary 
policy to what is essentially a transitory shock to the wage-setting process.  
Conclusions rooted in empirical estimation  There are two types of nominal rigidity in 
the model: price rigidities and wage rigidities. Because these nominal rigidities are not 
completely synchronous, their interaction creates a real rigidity. The presence of both 
nominal and real rigidities affords the model with rich, empirically realistic dynamics. 
Gali et al. (2012) is estimated on US data. Smets et al. (2014) employ a similar framework 
estimated on euro area data. For the exercises discussed in the main text, a comparable 
model is estimated on UK data, spanning the period from 1990 to 2019. Other applications 
of Gali et al. (2012) have demonstrated that: (i) the impulse response functions generated 
by this model accord with empirical evidence in the US, especially with respect to 
fluctuations in unemployment and output; (ii) this model performs as well as a  
non-structural BVAR when it comes to forecasting key macroeconomic aggregates in the 
euro area. 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 16 
 
Parameterising different degrees of real income resistance  In each of the 
experiments shown in the main text, the starting point is a wage mark-up shock to the 
wage Phillips Curve. The time series properties of this wage mark-up shock are captured 
by parameters estimated on UK data over the period 1990 to 2019.  
In the “baseline” scenario, the degree of real income resistance in the economy is 
calibrated using estimates from UK data over the period from 1990 to 2019. Formally, this 
estimation informs the “baseline” setting where 𝜓= 1.3, as featured in equation (3). In the 
“moderate” scenario, the degree of real income resistance in the economy is calibrated 
using estimates from euro area data over a similar period. Formally, this estimation 
informs the “moderate” real income resistance setting of 𝜓= 1.5. Finally, 𝜓= 1.7 in our 
third scenario, capturing “high” real income resistance. 
To distinguish from the analysis shown in the ‘upside’ inflation scenario presented in the 
May MPR, none of these experiments appeal to greater price or wage indexation to past 
inflation to generate intrinsic inflation persistence (although of course that mechanism 
could also be introduced here by considering alternative parameterisations of 𝛾𝑝 and 𝛾𝑤 in 
equations (1) and (9) below).  
Characterising the central bank’s behaviour  In this model, a second-order 
approximation of the household’s utility function yields the per-period central bank loss 
function specified in equation (15) below. This derivation, which implies that the central 
bank’s preferences are both model-consistent and welfare-consistent, has two important 
implications. 
First, the central bank’s loss function is defined over deviations in price inflation, output 
and wage growth.14 As wages are typically stickier than prices, any asynchronicity 
between the frequency at which wages adjust and the frequency at which prices adjust 
creates real rigidities that cause allocative inefficiencies that erode the welfare of the 
representative household. These are therefore reflected in the central bank’s preferences, 
which derived from the welfare of that representative household. 
Second, the relative weights placed by the central bank on deviations in price inflation, 
output and wage growth are uniquely determined by the structural parameters of the 
model. The preferences of the central bank are not ad hoc. As equation (15) shows, for 
example, the trade-off that the central bank faces between output and inflation stabilisation 
is pinned down by structural parameters capturing the stickiness of prices, the pricing 
power of firms and the elasticity of the labour supplied by workers. 
Defining optimal monetary policy in the model  In the results described in the main 
text, model-based optimal monetary policy is characterised as the result of the central 
bank minimising its per-period loss function (as specified in equation (15) below) by 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 17 
 
choosing the appropriate response coefficients in a simple Taylor Rule defined over 
inflation and the output gap, along with a degree of interest-rate smoothing (as specified in 
(16)).  
Determinants of the optimal policy response across scenarios  The price Phillips 
Curve in this model set-up features two arguments which generate a trade-off between 
output and inflation stabilisation in the face of a wage mark-up shock. First, the presence 
of price and wage stickiness generates endogenous dynamics which affect price inflation 
via the real wage gap (see 𝜆𝑝𝑤𝑡
̃in (9)) in addition to the traditional role of the output gap 
(see 𝜅𝑝𝑦𝑡̃  in (9)). Second, the interaction between the wage mark-up shock and the 
desired (natural) wage mark-up generates exogenous dynamics which affect price inflation 
via the time-varying natural rate of unemployment (see 𝛿𝑝𝜀𝑡
𝑤 in (9)).  
Permanently increasing the bargaining power of workers 𝜓 in (13) implies a higher desired 
wage mark-up in steady state 𝜇𝑤
𝑛 given (13). This, in turn, implies a higher steady-state 
rate of unemployment 𝑢𝑛 given (14). Because 𝜖𝑤 is correspondingly lower, 𝜆𝑤 is 
correspondingly higher (given (2) and (3)). Greater real income resistance therefore 
implies a steeper wage Phillips Curve in (1): wage inflation responds more strongly to a 
given unemployment gap. While the relative weight of wage growth in the central bank’s 
loss function declines (as per (15)), the combined effect of the endogenous dynamics 
associated with a wider real wage gap and the exogenous dynamics associated with 
stronger transmission through the price Phillips Curve serves to aggravate the  
output-inflation trade-off induced by the original wage mark-up shock. 
 
Selected model equations 
The wage Phillips Curve in the model can be expressed as: 
𝜋𝑡
𝑤−𝛾𝑤𝜋𝑡−1
𝑝
= 𝛽(𝔼𝑡[𝜋𝑡+1
𝑤] −𝛾𝑤𝜋𝑡
𝑝) −𝜆𝑤(𝜇𝑤,𝑡−𝜇𝑤,𝑡
𝑛)  
 
 
 
(1) 
where (𝜇𝑤,𝑡−𝜇𝑤,𝑡
𝑛) is the difference between the actual and desired wage mark-up, and: 
𝜆𝑤≡ 
(1−𝛽𝜃𝑤)(1−𝜃𝑤)
𝜃𝑤(1+𝜖𝑤𝜑)   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(2) 
 
and, within that: 
𝜖𝑤≡ 
𝜓
𝜓−1 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(3) 
Note that the final term of the wage Phillips Curve (1) can be re-written as:  
(𝜇𝑤,𝑡−𝜇𝑤,𝑡
𝑛) = (𝜑𝑢𝑡−𝜇𝑤,𝑡
𝑛) = (𝜑𝑢𝑡−𝜑𝑢𝑡
𝑛) = 𝜑(𝑢𝑡−𝑢𝑡
𝑛) =  𝜑𝑢𝑡−𝜀𝑡
𝑤 
 
(4) 
because 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 18 
 
𝜇𝑤,𝑡
𝑛
= 𝜑𝑢𝑡
𝑛= 𝜀𝑡
𝑤 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(5) 
where: 
𝜀𝑡
𝑤= 𝜌𝑤𝜀𝑡−1
𝑤
+ 𝜂𝑡
𝑤−𝜏𝑤𝜂𝑡−1
𝑤  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(6) 
Alternatively, the final term of the wage Phillips Curve in (1) can be re-written as:  
(𝜇𝑤,𝑡−𝜇𝑤,𝑡
𝑛) =  𝜑(𝑢𝑡−𝑢𝑡
𝑛) = 𝜇𝑤,𝑡−𝜀𝑡
𝑤 
= 𝑤𝑡
̃ −(𝜎+
𝜑
1−𝛼) (𝑦𝑡−𝑦𝑡
∗)
⏟      
≡ 𝑦𝑡
̃
−(𝜎+
𝜑
1−𝛼) (𝑦𝑡
∗−𝑦𝑡
𝑛)
⏟            
≡ 𝜀𝑡
𝑤
 
 
 
 
 
(7) 
where the real wage gap can be written as: 
 𝑤𝑡
̃ = 𝑤𝑡−1
̃ + 𝜋𝑡
𝑤−𝜋𝑡
𝑝−(𝑤𝑡
∗−𝑤𝑡−1
∗
) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(8) 
As a result, the price Phillips Curve in the model can be expressed as:  
𝜋𝑡
𝑝−𝛾𝑝𝜋𝑡−1
𝑝
= 𝛽(𝔼𝑡[𝜋𝑡+1
𝑝
] −𝛾𝑝𝜋𝑡
𝑝) + 𝜅𝑝𝑦𝑡̃ + 𝜆𝑝𝑤𝑡
̃ + 𝛿𝑝𝜀𝑡
𝑤 
 
 
 
(9) 
where: 
𝜅𝑝= 
𝛼𝜆𝑝
1−𝛼 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(10) 
𝜆𝑝= 
(1−𝛽𝜃𝑝)(1−𝜃𝑝)
𝜃𝑝((1−𝛼) (1−𝛼+𝛼𝜖𝑝)
⁄
) 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(11) 
 
𝛿𝑝= 
𝜅𝑝
(𝜎+ 𝜑
1−𝛼)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(12) 
In steady state, note that: 
𝜇𝑤
𝑛≡ 𝑙𝑜𝑔(𝜓) = 𝑙𝑜𝑔(
𝜖𝑤
𝜖𝑤−1)  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(13) 
and 
𝑢𝑛= 
𝜇𝑤
𝑛
𝜑 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(14) 
It can be shown that a second-order approximation of the household’s utility function delivers 
the following per-period loss function for the central bank:  
ℒ𝑡= (𝜎+
𝜑+𝛼
1−𝛼) 𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝑦𝑡̃ ) + (
𝜖𝑝
𝜆𝑝) 𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝜋𝑡
𝑝) + (
𝜖𝑤(1−𝛼)
𝜆𝑤
) 𝑣𝑎𝑟(𝜋𝑡
𝑤) 
 
 
 
(15) 
In our definition of optimal monetary policy, the central bank minimises ℒ𝑡 in (15) by choosing 
appropriate response coefficients in a simple Taylor Rule for Bank Rate 𝑖𝑡, as specified by: 
𝑖𝑡= 𝜙𝑖𝑖𝑡−1 + 𝜙𝜋𝑝𝜋𝑡
𝑝+ 𝜙𝑦𝑦𝑡̃ + 𝜀𝑖 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
(16) 
 
 
 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 19 
 
Notes 
 
1  See the concluding remarks to my speech at the Institute of Chartered Accountant of England and Wales 
last October (Pill, 2024). 
2  For a discussion of the distinction between intrinsic inflation persistence driven by the behaviour of firms 
and households in the economy and extrinsic inflation persistence associated with a series of external 
shocks all acting in the same direction, see my IMCB lecture (Pill, 2023). 
3  See Gaffney and Potjagailo (2025). Their analysis uses a Threshold VAR model that detects shifts in UK 
economic dynamics once CPI inflation rates exceed 3½ - 4%. 
4  See Gali et al. (2012) and Smets et al. (2014). 
5  For a richer discussion of these mechanisms, see the model presented in van der Ploeg and Willems 
(2024). 
6  The specifics of these exercises are described in more detail in the Annex. Responses in Charts 3 and 4 
are to a ‘wage mark-up’ shock as defined in the model. An important assumption here is that the shift in 
real income resistance is unanticipated by both firms and households, as well as by the central bank. 
Crucially, this shift in real income resistance is also independent of current and future monetary policy 
implemented by the central bank (i.e. there is no signalling effect). 
7  As discussed in the Annex, the “baseline” shown in Charts 3 and 4 derives from an empirical estimate of 
the real income resistance parameter (ψ) in the model estimated using UK data drawn from the inflation 
targeting era. The “moderate” scenario is based on a value for this parameter drawn from estimates based 
on euro area data over the same period. On the basis of the posterior distribution of the UK estimate 
obtained using Bayesian techniques, the shift from “baseline” to “moderate” scenario amounts to a slightly 
more than one standard deviation rise in the real income resistance parameter. This assessment suggests 
that the shift is a plausible one, on both economic and statistical grounds – and therefore worthy of attention 
by policy makers. 
8  For clarity, I emphasise that the machinery used here to produce endogenous monetary paths is different 
from (and simpler than) the optimising algorithms used in a recent speech by Deputy Governor Clare 
Lombardelli (2025). The exercises shown in her speech and in the associated material in Box A of the May 
MPR are therefore not comparable with this analysis. 
9  There is a large economic literature on this issue, to which an important contribution is Söderström (2002). 
Given constraints of time and space, this is not the place to review that literature, which nonetheless 
deserves careful reading. Rather the analysis here is intended to represent efforts to use the thinking 
embodied in that literature in a practical way for monetary policy preparation and discussion. 
10  Specifically, the ψ parameter capturing real income resistance and defined precisely in the Annex rises 
from a value of 1.3 to 1.5. As already explained in footnote 7, this shift in this parameter can be understood 
as equivalent to UK labour market behaviour becoming closer to that seen in the euro area. As such, it 
represents an empirically plausible change, rather than an extreme tail event. 
11  We allow the real income resistance parameter assumed by policy makers (ψ’) to range from 1.2 to 1.7. 
On our assessment, the extremes of this range are still plausible rather than tail events. As shown in Chart 
5, the responsiveness of Bank Rate to deviations of inflation from target increases as the central bank’s 
assumption on the real income resistance parameter rise. 
12  To help with the orientation of this chart: the curve shown in Chart 6 translates into the highlighted column 
in Chart 7, since this column captures the exercise when the central bank assumes different values of real 
income resistance (ψ’ ranges between 1.2 and 1.7), whereas the true parameter value ψ = 1.5. 
13  The material presented in this Annex was prepared by my colleagues Tim Munday and Adrian Paul. 
14  In the model equations reported below, the superscript * denotes the efficient allocation. Because this model 
embodies shocks to the desired (natural) wage mark-up, the flexible-price (natural) allocation is no longer 
efficient. The relevant gaps for monetary policy are therefore the gaps defined with respect to each 
variable’s efficient allocation – not with respect to its flexible-price (natural) allocation.
