BANK: BOE
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Robustness - speech by Huw Pill
DATE: 01/06/2026
SPEAKER: Huw Pill
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.bankofengland.co.uk/-/media/boe/files/speech/2026/speech-given-by-huw-pill.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Bank of England  
 
 Page 1 
 
 
 
Robustness − speech by Huw 
Pill 
Speech at the National Bank of the Republic of North Macedonia and 
SUERF conference – Central Banking Amid Persistent Global Shifts: 
Fostering Stability, Innovation, and Resilience, Skopje 
24 March 2026 
 
 
 
 
 
 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 2 
 
Speech  
Thank you for the invitation to speak at today’s conference and for the warm welcome that 
I have received here in Skopje.1 It is a privilege to hear from both former colleagues and 
leading central bankers about how to address the multitude of challenges currently facing 
macroeconomic and financial policymakers.2  
In my remarks this morning, I will explore well-trodden ground: the conduct of monetary 
policy under uncertainty.  
To set expectations at the right level at the outset, I recognise that – precisely because this 
ground is so well-trodden – it will be difficult to say something new. So don’t expect too 
much in terms of novelty. 
But equally, this ground is well-trodden precisely because it is so important. Dealing with 
uncertainty is central to taking monetary policy decisions – perhaps now more than ever.  
The outbreak of hostilities in the Gulf has created new risks for central bankers that we are 
grappling with in real time (I will return to the conjuncture at the end of my comments). And 
as my tenure on the Bank of England’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) extends into its 
fifth year, I look back across a period of what seems like unprecedented uncertainty, 
spanning pandemic, invasions, energy price spikes and market turmoil.  
But monetary policy makers are often prone to characterise their tenure as one of 
“unusually high uncertainty”. Mea culpa.3 It is noteworthy then that, for all the talk of a 
Great Moderation in the early years of this century,4 you didn’t hear central bankers at that 
time saying that they were facing a period of “unusually high certainty”.5  
But there is a sense in which this misses the point.  
It is the irreducible nature of the uncertainty surrounding the inflation outlook and the 
propagation of inflationary shocks that renders the monetary policy problem         
‘interesting’ – or (perhaps better when viewed from my seat on the MPC) ‘difficult’. After 
all, as former Fed Chairman Alan Greenspan famously remarked: “Uncertainty is not just 
an important feature of the monetary policy landscape; it is the defining characteristic of 
that landscape”.6 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 3 
 
And the nature of that uncertainty matters. 
Back to the work of Theil in the 1950s and ‘60s,7 macroeconomists have characterised the 
challenges facing monetary policy makers as an optimal control problem. Under certain 
conditions,8 this leads to a certainty equivalence result.  
In that setting, while introducing greater uncertainty into the system unavoidably adds to 
the volatility of inflation, it does not alter how monetary policy should respond to 
developments in the data. The optimal monetary policy rule is invariant to the magnitude of 
risk captured by the distribution of shocks hitting the economy.  
This approach became the workhorse framework for thinking about monetary policy. And 
much progress was made in developing ‘the science of monetary policy’ on that basis.9 
For example, the approach established the importance of the Taylor principle: having 
nominal interest rates rise more than proportionately to inflation’s deviation from its target 
imparted a necessary stabilising property to the conduct of monetary policy.10 
In that context, a mapping was identified between ‘optimal targeting rules’ for monetary 
policy and ‘optimal instrument rules’ for monetary policy.11 Cutting through the jargon, this 
implied that once the monetary policy problem has been defined correctly within the 
standard framework, deriving how monetary policy should respond to developments in the 
state of the economy was simply a matter of mathematics.  
The optimal sensitivity of policy interest rates to the evolution of macroeconomic indicators 
(such as inflation or the output gap) was implicit in the definition of the inflation target, the 
central bank’s model of the economy, and the distribution of shocks hitting that             
economy – all of which were assumed to be known with certainty. 
This was the basis of the textbook presentation of the ‘inflation forecast targeting’ regime 
that served the Bank of England (and other central banks) well for a long period around 
the turn of the century. And it marked the apogee of viewing ‘monetary policy as 
engineering’.12 
But if the answer to your question is simply a mechanical transformation of the question 
itself, then you need to be confident that you have defined the question in the right way.  
From the outset it was recognised that the standard optimal control characterisation of 
monetary policy missed important forms of uncertainty: where expectation formation was 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 4 
 
not always rational; where key players in the economy needed to learn over time about its 
structure and the behaviour of other actors; where key model parameters were not known 
with certainty and/or were subject to shocks; where the underlying paradigm driving the 
inflation process – whether New Keynesian, monetarist, classical or Austrian – was 
unclear.  
The economic literature explored how policy makers should address these concerns.13 
And in doing so, they brought into question the certainty equivalence result that insulated 
monetary policy makers from the quantum of uncertainty they faced. The benefit of 
adopting simple rules that were easier to communicate was also touted.14 
Experience over recent years has further challenged the belief that the economy and the 
transmission of monetary policy were simple enough and/or understood well enough to be 
characterised by a naïve linear modelling framework. From my perspective, the character 
and magnitude of the uncertainties the MPC have faced over recent years extends well 
beyond what that standard framework could capture. 
More profoundly, former BoE Governor Lord King has argued that monetary policy makers 
face ‘radical uncertainty’ – uncertainties that are not susceptible to being represented by 
probabilities or as risks.15 Such radical uncertainty captures: the Knightian uncertainty 
familiar from economics texts; the Keynesian uncertainty that arises from the strategic 
interaction among economic actors (through which the economy coordinates on one of 
several aggregate outcomes); and, more simply, the “unknown unknowns” that plague the 
policy making environment in practice. 
Rather than confining themselves to the question nested within the conventional analytical 
framework, a successful monetary policy maker needs to start by asking a more             
relevant – but also substantially more challenging – question: How should monetary policy 
be conducted in an environment of more profound uncertainty, where the character of 
inflationary shocks and structure of the transmission mechanism are not well understood?  
Recognising the necessarily real time dimension of policy making16 – the need to take 
decisions as events happen, rather than enjoying the luxury of waiting to see how events 
transpire before analysing the outcomes and then setting policy – only sharpens these 
challenges. 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 5 
 
Acknowledging these considerations, in 2023 the Court of the Bank of England 
commissioned Ben Bernanke (former Chair of the Federal Reserve Board and Nobel Prize 
winner in economics) to conduct ‘a review into the Bank’s forecasting and related 
processes during times of significant uncertainty” (emphasis added). 
That is a big question. It deservedly received a big answer. Professor Bernanke’s review 
ran to more than 30,000 words and offered twelve recommendations for reform of the 
Bank of England’s preparation of its monetary policy decisions.17 These recommendations 
are currently being addressed by BoE staff, with the results becoming apparent in the 
evolution of the MPC’s published analysis and communication over time.18 
But in the eyes of many stakeholders, Professor Bernanke’s guidance can be boiled down 
to one word: scenarios. More specifically, Professor Bernanke recommended that ‘to 
improve the MPC’s policy discussion, the central forecast should be regularly augmented 
by alternative scenarios’ (recommendation 7). This has been the focus of much of the 
subsequent commentary about how the Bank of England is responding to Professor 
Bernanke’s suggestions.  
Constructing scenarios is not a novel approach to addressing the implications of 
uncertainty for monetary policy, neither across central banks nor through time at the Bank 
of England. And scenario analysis has been used in many other settings. But using 
scenarios as a tool to address the implications of radical uncertainty for monetary policy is 
an important innovation (even if not, of itself, a complete answer to all the issues raised by 
Professor Bernanke in his review), particularly so if the results of this approach are also 
used as a key tool for central bank communication with the public. 
At the heart of such an approach is the pursuit of robustness in policy choices. By 
evaluating policy settings across a range of different scenarios, monetary policy makers 
can develop confidence that their decisions will deliver ‘good’ outcomes (evaluated against 
their price stability objective) even in the face of radical uncertainty.  
Rather than narrowly optimal in one setting (and potentially fragile in the face of small 
deviations from that setting), a robust monetary policy delivers inflation close to target 
across a broad and diverse set of environments defined by the range of scenarios 
considered.19  


Bank of England  
 
 Page 6 
 
Using scenario analysis in this way immediately begs two inter-related questions: (1) How 
do you select the scenarios of relevance? and (2) How do you distil the implications of 
various scenarios into a necessarily single decision about the level (and future path) of 
policy interest rates? 
As regards the former question, choosing the breadth and diversity of scenarios inevitably 
requires the exercise of judgment. That judgement will have to manage the trade-off 
between, on the one hand, ensuring the range of scenarios considered is broad enough to 
offer meaningful diversity (and thus really test robustness of decisions in different 
environments) and, on the other hand, avoiding that decisions are distracted or distorted 
by arcane or obscure scenarios. Exercising judgement in this context is one aspect of what 
might be labelled ‘the art of monetary policy’. 
This allusion to art is not as trivial as it may initially sound. I understand that the CIA and 
the US Department of Homeland Security have both employed science fiction writers to 
develop scenarios for their counter-terrorism work, on the basis that institutional biases 
and ‘groupthink’ among experts stifle their ability to think ‘outside-the-box’ and consider 
possibilities that would otherwise be ignored.20 While (to my knowledge) the Bank of 
England has not followed this route as yet, an important aspect of the post-Bernanke 
reforms at the Bank of England is to promote diversity of thought among the staff and 
encourage those willing to take contrarian views to ‘think-the-unthinkable’.21 
I will dwell a little longer on the second question. 
Monetary policy makers benefit from adopting a systematic approach to setting the stance 
of policy, since this allows them to influence private expectations of those policy settings 
and the implications they have for a wider set of economic variables. It is this insight that 
has led to a focus on ‘monetary policy rules’, which in most practical applications provide a 
mapping from the available data to the policy interest rate.  
When pursuing a robust approach to monetary policy in the face of radical uncertainty, 
policy makers need to choose a policy rule that performs well in a variety of disparate 
settings.  
To explore this in the abstract (and for simplicity), we can imagine two characterisations of 
the inflation process and ask how monetary policy should be set to deliver price stability 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 7 
 
reliably when we cannot be sure which of the two characterisations is actually driving 
inflation outcomes. 
Suppose each policy rule were to deliver a pair of performance outturns, one in each of the 
two settings that we consider. By looking across all the possible rules, we can define a 
locus of efficient pairings – each pair associated with a specific policy rule – that represent 
the outturns that cannot be improved upon in a Pareto sense (i.e., along this efficient 
locus, you cannot find a rule that improves performance in one of the settings without 
worsening it in the other).  
This leaves the question of how to select a rule from among those defining this efficient 
frontier.22 
One way of doing so would be to adopt a Bayesian approach. This entails assigning 
subjective probabilities to each of the two characterisations of inflation dynamics, even 
though there may not be an objective analytical basis for those probabilities at certain 
times. Such an approach assesses the desirability of policy rules on the basis of a 
weighted average of how they perform across the two settings, with the weights 
determined by the chosen subjective probabilities. 
An alternative approach involves a form of ‘risk management’, where policy makers 
choose a policy rule on the basis that it will avoid the worst possible outcomes. One way to 
capture this is to assume that policy makers seek to minimise the impact of the worst 
outcome they could achieve across the two inflation environments – a so-called ‘min-max’ 
strategy. 
In this context, the preferred rule under the Bayesian approach will be identified by a 
tangency to this efficient locus, where the slope of the tangent is related to the probability 
assigned to each if the two settings.23 By contrast, the preferred rule under the min-max 
approach will be identified by the point where the efficient locus crosses the 450 line – if all 
scope to lower the two losses simultaneously has been exhausted, the minimisation of the 
maximum loss entails the two losses being equal. 
Having set up this simple machinery, we can explore three cases.24 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 8 
 
Chart 1: Standard framework where the losses are equal 
    
 
The first case is one with the standard setting, where the underlying drivers of the inflation 
process are unique and known. In that context, there is a unique optimal rule.  
It may be that we have several narratives to describe monetary policy – say a monetarist 
narrative and a New Keynesian narrative – but in this setting the differences between them 
are cosmetic not substantial. In this context, the preferred choice of rule in the Bayesian 
approach is independent of the subjective probability and identical to the preferred choice 
in the min-max approach (Chart 1). In other words, in the standard setting robustness 
collapses into optimality and the issues raised earlier in my presentation are irrelevant. 
A more interesting case arises when the efficient locus is convex to the origin (as in    
Chart 2), so that identifying a preferred rule faces meaningful trade-offs. In general, the 
Bayesian and min-max approaches will be associated with different preferred rules. As a 
starting point for a policy discussion at the MPC, these two different rules identify distinct 
scenarios that are worth exploring in coming to a final ‘rule-based but not rule-bound’ 
decision on the setting for policy interest rates.  


Bank of England  
 
 Page 9 
 
Chart 2: Convex Efficient Locus  
    
 
Two features of this case are worth highlighting. 
First, there is always a subjective probability in the Bayesian approach that will mimic the 
preferred rule in the min-max approach. In that sense, the Bayesian approach 
encompasses the min-max approach. 
Second, within the Bayesian approach small changes in the subjective probability involve 
small movements along the efficient locus. And in all likelihood, this implies relatively small 
changes in the definition of the preferred policy rule. As such, in this setting updating 
subjective Bayesian probabilities of the two characterisations of the inflation process – say 
shifting a parameter capturing the slope of the Phillips curve or the persistence of 
inflationary shocks – is not likely to lead to big changes in the preferred policy rule (and 
therefore in the preferred path for policy rates).  
It may require a shift to a different approach (say min-max) to create scope for a 
meaningfully different scenario and meaningfully different implications for monetary policy. 
 
 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 10 
 
 
Chart 3a: Non-convex efficient locus 
 
There is finally a yet more interesting setting. In this case, the efficient locus – while 
necessarily always downward sloping – no longer shows convexity to the origin (as in 
Chart 3a). (The features of the underlying economic processes that would lead to this form 
of locus are worth exploring further, but in the interests of time I will not do so here.)  
Again, a number of points can be highlighted. 
First, it is possible that the preferred rule from the min-max approach is no longer 
supportable by a specific subjective probability in the Bayesian approach. In other words, 
the min-max approach no longer nests within the Bayesian approach. As a result, the 
scenarios associated with the two approaches are demonstrably more distinct. 
Second, while updating of subjective Bayesian probabilities leads to the same marginal 
moves along the efficient locus (and thus small changes in the preferred policy rule) over 
most ranges, there are also situations where such updating leads to significant jumps 
along the efficient locus (as in Chart 3b) – and thus potentially much bigger changes in the 
preferred policy rule. These discontinuities emphasise the importance of looking at a more 
diverse set of scenarios, since such scenarios may require much more significant shifts in 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 11 
 
the appropriate path of monetary policy than the more marginal recalibration of policy 
implied by a simple sensitivity analysis. 
Chart 3b: Non-convex efficient locus: Jumps along the efficient locus 
 
Third, in this situation, it is natural to consider at least three distinct scenarios, which do 
not straightforwardly line up along a simple hawk / dove spectrum. Having a richer 
dimensionality to the definition of scenarios may serve a richer discussion among policy 
makers in coming to an eventual policy decision. 
This simple exercise demonstrates how the pursuit of robustness in monetary policy 
making can be supported by scenario analysis, which both entertains a variety of different 
characterisations of the inflation process (“different models”) and defines different 
systematic characterisations of monetary policy that span those different characterisations 
(“different policy rules”). In other words, the questions of how to select scenarios and how 
to bring the analysis of them together to support a necessarily single policy choice are     
dxco-determined. 
Of course, the practical question of how to operationalise this abstract framework to 
address immediate policy questions remains open. My colleagues on the Bank of England 
staff are already hard at work preparing scenarios and other material ahead of our next 
MPC meeting at the end of April. It would not be appropriate for me to front-run their work 
today. 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 12 
 
At the same time – and notwithstanding the crude interpretation of the Bernanke review 
that I have mentioned – the MPC’s assessment is not confined to scenario analysis.  
In my view, the MPC operates in a rule-based rather than rule-bound manner: we need to 
retain flexibility (and thus room for discretion) when there is so much uncertainty and 
volatility as at present.  
Irrespective of the scenarios presented by Bank staff and the policy rules we might 
consider in the context of those scenarios, the MPC will always retain agency over its 
policy decisions. The rationale for MPC decisions to deviate from those policy rules or 
scenarios often contains as much information as the choice of the rules or scenarios 
themselves.  
Scenario analysis is a method by which we test whether a rule remains appropriate under 
materially different states of the world. It does not encourage discretion. Rather it 
reinforces focus and discipline in decision making in a radically uncertain world. 
That said, some helpful parallels between the current challenges facing the MPC and the 
simple framework I have discussed today can be drawn. 
Much has happened over the past few weeks since hostilities commenced in the Gulf. And 
much uncertainty remains. That uncertainty has a ‘radical’ character. 
From a UK monetary policy perspective, for all the geo-political and geo-economic 
speculation of late, the evolution of global commodity prices (particularly energy prices) is 
of greatest importance. It is via energy prices that events in the Gulf will shape the outlook 
for UK inflation and thus monetary policy. 
Three channels of transmission to prices25 are relevant: (1) direct effects on UK inflation 
via the impact of oil and gas price rises on fuel and energy price components of the CPI; 
(2) indirect effects owing to the pass-through of higher energy costs to other components 
of the CPI, such as food and services prices; and (3) potential second-round effects, 
stemming both from (a) relative price changes (whereby CPI inflation is propagated by the 
efforts of individuals and firms to resist the real income deterioration owing to relative price 
shocks) and (b) from a possible de-anchoring of longer-term private inflation 
expectations.26 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 13 
 
Given the way utility bills and fuel prices are determined in the UK, direct effects operate 
relatively mechanically. While less mechanical, through analysis of input / output tables 
and estimation of time series models, we have a reasonably reliable guide to how indirect 
effects influence the evolution of CPI inflation. Nonetheless, given the lags in monetary 
policy transmission and the immediacy with which direct and indirect effects influence CPI 
inflation, there are limits to what the MPC can do to dampen volatility arising through these 
channels at shorter horizons. 
As a result, the MPC’s focus is second-round effects – in particular, those associated with 
‘catch-up’ dynamics in the aftermath of large relative price changes.27 The distinguishing 
feature of second-round effects is their potential to have a lasting impact on price 
dynamics. The resulting lower frequency and more persistent inflationary pressures        
can – and must – be contained by monetary policy in pursuit of the 2% inflation target.  
At the heart of these second-round effects lies the complex interactions among price 
setting, wage dynamics and inflation expectations. But, while there is much evidence and 
agreement that our understanding of the price / wage / cost nexus is at present 
inadequate,28 there is no consensus over how it should be improved. In the spirit of the 
earlier discussion, one might say that our collective understanding of these interactions is 
characterised by ‘radical uncertainty’. 
Mapping to the framework discussed above, two broad views of the likely character of 
second-round effects can be identified. 
One interpretation makes cyclical tightness central to why the propagation of the energy 
shocks in 2022 proved more persistent than originally expected. Now that the labour 
market is softer and an output gap has emerged, this interpretation implies a more 
sanguine view of inflation persistence in the aftermath of Gulf hostilities relative to what we 
saw at the time Ukraine was invaded.  
An alternative interpretation places more weight on structural change in price and wage 
setting as the explanation of greater-than-expected inflation persistence after the 2022 
energy shock. Other things equal, this interpretation would suggest that persistence in the 
current episode may again be greater than implied by our standard models estimated 
during the ‘halcyon days of inflation targeting’ in the early 2000s.  


Bank of England  
 
 Page 14 
 
On this latter view, the energy shocks of 2022 and 2026 (so far at least in the latter case) 
both represent significant adverse terms-of-trade shocks that weigh on domestic real 
income and exacerbate cost-of-living of households (particularly more vulnerable, lower 
incomes households). These are real phenomena that need to play out via real 
adjustments over time. Monetary policy cannot prevent or implement those real 
adjustments: it can simply provide the nominal environment in which they can occur in a 
less costly manner. 
These two interpretations are neither mutually exclusive nor exhaustive. But nonetheless it 
is useful here to distinguish them in this simplistic way in order to offer some mapping into 
the framework developed above. 
In the policy discussion, my own view has been (and remains) that the burden of proof lies 
on the side of those seeking to deny a role for structural change (owing to the cumulative 
effect of past shocks – the financial crisis, Brexit, Covid, invasion and government policies 
– and perhaps the prospective effect of new shocks, such as the impact of AI adoption) in 
price and wage setting. 
Using the language of the Bayesian approach, I attach sufficient weight to the ‘structural 
change’ interpretation to conclude that propagation of both previous inflationary shocks 
and the new energy shock emanating from the Gulf is persistent enough to justify “caution” 
in the conduct of monetary policy.29  
At the same time, I cannot be certain that this interpretation of the inflation risks is correct. 
The power of statistical tests to identify the slow-moving structural changes in price and 
wage setting behaviour on which my view rests in real time is unavoidably low. So, my 
policy assessment also entertains the possibility that the alternative view of the risk of 
second-round effects could be true. And in evaluating how to weight this alternative view,    
I consider not just the likelihood of it holding, but also the implications in terms of policy 
outcomes if it were to do so.30 
The pursuit of a robust monetary policy response inherent in these considerations led me 
to support the unanimous MPC decision to hold Bank Rate at 3¾% at our meeting last 
week. That said, I see the upside risks to price stability mounting as a result of events in 
the Gulf.  


Bank of England  
 
 Page 15 
 
As a result, I stand ready to act – if necessary – to contain the lasting components of any 
new inflationary pressures so as to deliver on the MPC’s price stability mandate over the 
medium term. The fog of uncertainty in which we always operate cannot be an excuse for 
inaction. Uncertainty is always present (perhaps especially so of late), but the task of 
monetary policy makers is to provide clarity on their pursuit of the price stability objective in 
that uncertain world. 
 
 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 16 
 
References 
 
Bank of England (2024). Forecast Evaluation Report, 23 January 2026. 
Bernanke, B.S. (2004). “The Great Moderation,” remarks at the meetings of the Eastern 
Economic Association, Washington DC, 20 February 2004. 
Bernanke, B.S. (2024). “Forecasting for monetary policy making and communication at the 
Bank of England: A review,” Bank of England. 
Breeden, S. (2023). “Monetary policy as engineering?” speech at the Institute of 
International Finance, 19 December 2023. 
Clarida, R., J. Gali and M. Gertler (1999). “The science of monetary policy: A New 
Keynesian perspective,” Journal of Economic Literature 37(4), pp. 1661–1707. 
Gerdesmeier, D., R. Motto and H. Pill (2002). “Monetary policy rules under paradigm 
uncertainty,” Computing in Economics and Finance 154. 
Giannone, D., L. Reichlin and L. Sala (2005). “Monetary policy in real time,” NBER 
Macroeconomics Annual 19, pp. 161-217. 
Greenspan, A. (2003). “Monetary policy under uncertainty,” remarks at the Federal 
Reserve Bank of Kansas City Jackson Hole symposium, 29 August 2003. 
Haberis, A., R. Harrison, K. Reinold and M. Waldron (2025). “Monetary policymaking 
under uncertainty,” Bank of England macro technical paper no. 5. 
Kanngiesser, D. and T. Willems (2024). “Forecast accuracy and efficiency at the Bank of 
England – and how errors can be leveraged to do better,” Bank of England staff working 
paper no. 1078. 
Kay, J. and M.A. King (2020). Radical uncertainty: Decision-making for an unknowable 
future, Bridge Street Press. 
McCallum, B.T. and E. Nelson (2005). “Targeting vs. instrument rules for monetary policy”, 
Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 87(5), pp. 597-611. 
Nakamura, E., V. Riblier and J Steinsson (2025). “Beyond the Taylor rule,” NBER working 
paper no. 34200. 
Pill, H. (2025a). “Evolving UK monetary policy in an evolving world,” speech at the Institute 
of Chartered Accountants of England and Wales annual conference Thriving in 
Transformation, 17 October 2025. 
Pill, H. (2025b). “The courage not to act,” remarks on the monetary policy outlook at a 
briefing hosted by Barclays, 20 May 2025. 
Rudebusch, G. and L.E.O. Svensson (1999). “Policy rules for Inflation Targeting,” chapter 
5 in (ed. J.B. Taylor) Monetary policy rules, Chicago University Press, pp. 203-262. 
Sargent, T.J. (1987). Macroeconomic theory, 2nd ed., Academic Press. 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 17 
 
Speyerl, E. (2025). “Science fiction as a military asset,” Foreign Affairs Review, 14 
November 2025. 
Stock, J. and M. Watson (2002). “Has the business cycle changed and why?” NBER 
Macroeconomics Annual 17, pp. 159-218. 
Svensson, L.E.O. (2005). “Targeting versus instrument rules for monetary policy: What is 
wrong with McCallum and Nelson?” Federal Reserve Bank of St. Louis Review 87(5), 
pp. 613-626. 
Theil, H. (1964). Optimal decision rules for government and industry, Amsterdam: North-
Holland. 
Williams, J.C. (2025). “Uncertainty and robust monetary policy,” remarks at the Reykjavík 
Economic Conference, 9 May 2025.  
Woodford, M. (2001). “The Taylor rule and optimal monetary policy,” American Economic 
Review 91(2), pp. 232-237. 
 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 18 
 
Notes 
 
1  The views expressed in these remarks are not necessarily those of the Bank of England or its Monetary 
Policy Committee. I would particularly like to thank Kavya Saxena, Lou Everett and Claire Willis for their 
help in the preparation of these remarks and Saba Alam, Andrew Bailey, John Barrdear, Shiv Chowla, 
David Learmonth, Tim Munday, Adrian Paul, Galina Potjagailo, Martin Seneca, Matt Tong and Tim 
Willems for their comments on earlier drafts. I would particularly like to thank the chair (Emma Hatwell) 
and participants in an internal Bank of England seminar where the material presented here was critically 
scrutinised by what transpired to be a suitably tough audience. Opinions (and all remaining errors, 
whether of commission or omission) are my own. 
2  Perhaps it is a feature of getting older, but I am glad to acknowledge the significant overlap between 
these two groups among the contributors to this conference. 
3  For example, the minutes of the 4 August 2022 MPC meeting (in which I participated) state: “The risks 
around the MPC’s projections from both external and domestic factors are exceptionally large at 
present” (emphasis added). 
4  Stock and Watson (2002), Bernanke (2004). 
5  And, once you switch from a real time policy making perspective to a retrospective analytical perspective, 
it is easy to forget that the Great Moderation was itself punctuated by risky events: the regime change 
marked by the introduction of the euro; Y2K; 9/11; the second Gulf War, etc. 
6  Greenspan (2003) (emphasis added). 
7  Theil (1964). 
8  Specifically, if the problem is characterised in linear quadratic (LQ) terms, where the structure of the 
economy is linear and the objective of the policy maker is quadratic (Sargent, 1987). Such a setting 
emerges naturally when a macro model is linearised around a steady-state which is consistent with the 
achievement of an inflation target and shocks to the system are additive and Gaussian. 
9  Clarida et al. (1999). 
10  Woodford (2001). 
11  Rudebusch and Svensson (1999). 
12  Breeden (2023). 
13  Haberis et al (2025). (This is one of a series of new macro technical papers published by Bank of England 
staff describing how responses to the Bernanke review are being incorporated into the preparation of 
MPC meetings and decisions.) 
14  For an insightful discussion of these issues, see the interactions recorded in McCallum and Nelson (2005) 
and Svensson (2005). 
15  Kay and King (2020). 
16  Giannone et al (2005). 
17  Bernanke (2024). 
18  Pill (2025a). 
19  Williams (2025). 
20  Speyerl (2025). 
21  Looking to Hollywood for inspiration for monetary policy scenarios might appear farfetched. But the 
insights in AI Artificial Intelligence (dir. Steven Spielberg, 2001) and Contagion (dir. Steven Soderbergh, 
2011) would have been very relevant for recent and contemporary monetary policy challenges. 
22  Gerdesmeier et al (2002). 
23  This follows from the usual graphical approach to optimisation familiar to any undergraduate student of 
economics. 
24  To explain the nomenclature shown in the charts: gMM(.) is the preferred policy rule deriving from the min-
max approach; gB(p,.) is the preferred policy rules deriving from the Bayesian approach with subjective 
probability p. 
25  I recognise that via terms of trade and confidence effects, the fallout from events in the Gulf is also likely 
to weigh on UK demand and therefore influence price developments through its impact on resource 
pressure via the Phillips curve. 
 


Bank of England  
 
 Page 19 
 
 
26  Although I do not focus on the differences here, it is important to distinguish between second-round 
effects owing to ‘catch up’ dynamics as firms and households respond to relative price changes with 
distributional impact ((a) in the text) and those owing to scepticism about the credibility of monetary policy 
((b) in the text. The former are those likely to derive from structural changes in price and wage setting 
behaviour. 
27  As Nakamura et al (2025) noted in their Jackson Hole paper last year, while the academic literature has 
tended to focus on the uniqueness of outcomes consistent with price stability in their evaluation of 
structural monetary models (which in turn reflects understandable concerns about dis-anchoring longer-
term private inflation expectations from target), monetary policy makers have tended to focus on ‘catch-up 
dynamics’ in price- and wage-setting behaviour (which tends to reflect concerns about the aggregate 
inflationary implications of adjustments to relative price shocks). 
28  This is one of the main conclusions of the recently published Forecast Evaluation Report (Bank of 
England, 2026), which draws on the work of Kanngiesser and Willems (2024). 
29  This assessment is reinforced by the latest (pre-Gulf hostilities) information from the Agents’ pay survey. 
With a fuller sample, expected pay settlements in 2026 now lie at 3.6% – barely below the equivalent 
survey expectation reported a year ago for 2025 (3.7%). Of course, this is a single indicator (albeit one on 
which the MPC have rested much in the past), but it signals – even before the new inflationary shock from 
the Gulf became apparent – a potential stalling of the underlying disinflation process that we are relying 
on to achieve the inflation target on a lasting basis. See also the discussion in Pill (2025b). 
30  Given these concerns, I internalise in my policy deliberations the possibility that small perturbations of the 
baseline scenario (e.g. slightly increasing the slope of the wage PC in a workhorse New Keynesian model 
estimated on data largely from the ‘Great Moderation’ period) would leave me vulnerable to missing more 
appropriate policy prescriptions that would derive from a fundamental rethink of the relevant 
macroeconomic dynamics (e.g. models of price- and wage-setting behaviour harking back to the 1970s 
and ‘80s, where real income resistance plays a greater role).
