BANK: BOJ
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: (Reference) Review of Monetary Policy from a Broad Perspective: Summary (Updated on February 13, 2025) [PDF 233KB]
DATE: 19/12/2024
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.boj.or.jp/en/mopo/mpmdeci/mpr_2024/k241219c.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Review of Monetary Policy from a Broad Perspective
December 2024
Bank of Japan
Summary


1
Major Initiatives for the Review of Monetary Policy from a Broad Perspective
Analyses by the Bank
Outreach Initiatives to Incorporate a Wide Range of External Expertise
Research and 
Analysis
42 papers1
Note 1: Only papers written in 
English are counted.
Monetary policy
Economic activity 
and prices
Financial markets
Financial system
Surveys
Bond Market Survey, Special Survey
(70 financial institutions)
Experts' Commentaries
Public Consultation
Commentaries from 
academic experts
(8 experts)
Survey on corporate behavior
(2,509 firms, including local SMEs)
Exchange of Views
Meetings of the Policy Board members 
with local and business leaders
(17 sessions with local firms, financial 
institutions, etc.)
Conferences and workshops
(6 events with academics and experts)
Opinions gathered via the internet           
and by mail
(172 responses)
Opinion Survey on the General Public's 
Views and Behavior (Households)
•
Since the late 1990s, when Japan's economy fell into deflation, achieving price stability has been a challenge.
•
In April 2023, the Bank decided to conduct a review of monetary policy from a broad perspective in order to 
deepen its understanding of monetary policy during that period and gain insights that would be useful for 
future policy conduct.


Outline of the Review of Monetary Policy from a Broad Perspective
Developments in Economic Activity, Prices, and Financial 
Conditions in Japan since the Latter Half of the 1990s
Monetary Policy Conduct until the Early 2010s
Impact of the Large-Scale Monetary Easing since 2013 on 
Economic Activity and Prices
Impact of Large-Scale Monetary Easing on Market Functioning, the 
Functioning of Financial Intermediation, and the Growth Potential
Assessment of the Effects and Side Effects of Large-Scale 
Monetary Easing
The Bank's Thinking on Unconventional Monetary Policy
Price Stability Target of 2 Percent
Fiscal and Monetary Policy
Issues regarding Individual Monetary Policy Measures
Developments in Economic Activity, Prices, and Financial Conditions 
and the Conduct of Monetary Policy in Japan over the Past 25 Years
Implications for the Future Conduct of Monetary Policy
2


•
Chronic demand shortages with a decline in the natural rate of interest

Conventional monetary policy measures were unable to sufficiently stimulate the economy due to the 
effective lower bound on nominal interest rates.

The decline in the natural rate of interest was attributable to factors such as asset prices falling and 
growth expectations taking a downward turn after the burst of the bubble economy; firms becoming more 
cautious in their risk-taking, particularly due to the Global Financial Crisis; and demographic changes.
•
Downward pressure on prices due to globalization and IT innovations
•
Entrenchment of behavior and a mindset based on the assumption that wages 
and prices will not increase easily
Developments in Economic Activity, Prices, and Financial Conditions in Japan 
since the Latter Half of the 1990s
•
The chronic shortage of demand abated, mainly due to large-scale monetary easing 
and fiscal stimulus packages, as well as changes in the external environment
•
Inflation expectations rose somewhat, and the rate of change in prices turned 
positive but remained below 2 percent

There remained room for increases in the labor supply, such as from women and seniors.

It took time for the behavior and mindset based on the assumption that wages and prices will not increase 
easily to change.
Since 2013: moved out of the state of deflation
•
Firms' behavior has shifted more toward raising wages and prices

Labor shortages became more pronounced (shrinkage of the room for additional labor supply and 
increased number of employed persons due to monetary easing and other factors).

Import prices rose significantly and government measures were taken to support firms to pass on higher 
input prices to their selling prices and raise wages.
In the 2020s: changes since the COVID-19 pandemic
3
Since the latter half of 1990s: prolonged moderate deflation


•Affected inflation expectations to some degree

But not sufficiently effective to anchor inflation at 2 
percent
Impact of the Large-Scale Monetary Easing since 2013 (1)
Influencing Expectations
•Large-scale monetary easing pushed up 
economic activity and prices
•However, mainly due to the difficulties of influencing 
expectations, the effect was not as large as 
expected at the time when it was introduced1
Note 1: The Bank initially aimed to achieve the price stability target of 
2  percent at the earliest possible time, with a time horizon of 
about two years.
Impact on Economic Activity and Prices
•Large-scale JGB purchases exerted downward 
pressure across the yield curve

Long-term interest rates were pushed down by 
about 1 percentage point since 2016
Reduction in Nominal Interest Rates
Real
GDP
(level)
CPI
(y/y chg.)
Macroeconomic 
model (Q-JEM)
+1.3 to 
+1.8%
+0.5 to 
+0.7% points
Time-series 
model (FAVAR)
――
+0.6 to 
+1.1% points
Impact of the Large-Scale Monetary Easing
(Average from 2013 Onward)
－
  ＝
＝
 ＋
Massive purchases 
of JGBs
Strong and clear commitment
to achieve the price stability 
target of 2 percent
Quantitative and Qualitative Monetary Easing
Inflation 
expectations
Real 
interest 
rates
Nominal
interest 
rates
Boosting economic 
activity through 
improvement in 
financial conditions
Adaptive 
expectations
formation
Strengthening forward-
looking expectations 
formation
Stabilizing interest
rates at low levels
Observed 
inflation
rates
Inflation 
expectations
Improvement 
in the output 
gap
4


Impact of the Large-Scale Monetary Easing since 2013 (2)
Side Effects of Large-Scale Monetary Easing etc.
•
Although there have been certain side effects on financial markets and financial institutions' profits, the 
overall effect on the Japanese economy so far appears to have been positive.
•
However, attention should be paid to the possibility that the negative effects may become larger 
in the future, such as the possibility that the functioning of the JGB market does not fully recover or 
possible side effects of large-scale monetary easing materialize at a later date.

The Bank's share of JGB holdings is expected to remain extremely large for some time, and it may take a period 
of time for the functioning of the JGB market to recover.

Some of the bank lending may contain loans to borrowers with relatively low resilience to a decline in income or
an increase in loan interest rates, and the durations of loans provided and bonds held by financial institutions have 
been getting longer. These points could be factors that impede financial intermediation activities in the event of a 
significant change in the external environment.
Functioning of
financial 
markets
Negative impact on the functioning of the JGB market

Amid the prolonged large-scale JGB purchases, the functioning of the JGB market deteriorated 
as the effect of YCC in suppressing long-term interest rates became more pronounced.
Functioning of 
financial 
intermediation
Downward pressure on financial institutions' interest margins on 
loans and other assets but no evidence of financial intermediation 
activities being impeded

Downward pressure has been exerted on financial institutions' interest margins on loans and 
other assets, while their capital adequacy ratio has been enhanced through lower credit risk etc. 
Corporate demand for funds has increased through improvements in the economy.
Supply side of 
the economy
No clear conclusion reached, either positive or negative

Theoretically, both positive impact (e.g., promoting capital accumulation) and negative impact 
(e.g., distortions in resource allocation due to low-productivity firms surviving) can be considered.
Assessment of the Effects and Side Effects of Large-Scale Monetary Easing
5


•
Unconventional monetary policy measures were effective in pushing up Japan's economic activity and 
prices. However, the quantitative degree of their effects are uncertain compared with conventional 
monetary policy measures (guiding short-term interest rates). When unconventional monetary policy 
measures are implemented at a large scale for a long period of time, they could bring about side effects.
•
Going forward, if it becomes necessary to implement unconventional monetary policy measures, it will 
be important to weigh the benefits and costs, while taking account of the developments in economic 
activity and prices as well as financial conditions at that point in time.
•
The Bank should not exclude at this point any specific measures when considering the future 
conduct of monetary policy. Looking ahead, in considering the implementation of each measure, it 
will be necessary for the Bank to design policy measures that can exert positive effects while 
minimizing side effects as much as possible, taking account of the findings of the Review.
Implications for the Future Conduct of Monetary Policy
•
It is appropriate for the Bank to continue to conduct monetary policy from the perspective of 
sustainable and stable achievement of the price stability target of 2 percent.

Unconventional monetary policy measures cannot fully substitute for short-term interest rate control, and it is 
desirable to conduct monetary policy so that the zero lower bound would not be reached. It is important to 
maintain a moderate positive inflation rate in a stable manner so that real interest rates can be lowered in the case 
of an economic downturn.

Bias in the CPI serves as supporting evidence.

Many central banks in major advanced economies have set their inflation targets at 2 percent.

When Japan was under the prolonged deflation, or in a low-inflation environment, prices of individual items 
became more rigid and the regular pay tended to be unchanged, and this may have distorted resource allocation 
or have constrained proactive investment by firms.
The Bank's Thinking on Unconventional Monetary Policy
Price Stability Target of 2 Percent
6
