BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Minutes
TITLE: 3 August 2021
DATE: 03/08/2021
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/monetary-policy/rba-board-minutes/2021/2021-08-03.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Videoconference – 3 August 2021
Members present
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM,
 Ian Harper AO, Carolyn Hewson AO, Steven Kennedy PSM, Carol Schwartz AO, Alison Watkins
Others participating
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial
 Markets)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Penelope Smith (Deputy Secretary), Michele Bullock (Assistant Governor,
 Financial System), Alexandra Heath (Head, International Department), Bradley Jones (Head, Economic
 Analysis Department), Jonathan Kearns (Head, Financial Stability Department), Marion Kohler (Head,
 Domestic Markets Department)
International economic developments
Members commenced their discussion of international economic developments by noting that the global
 economy had continued to recover from the largest contraction in decades, supported by a substantial
 fiscal and monetary policy response and the easing of measures to contain the virus in some countries.
 There were widening gaps in the outlook across economies, however, which largely reflected differences
 in health outcomes and progress with the vaccination of populations. Higher vaccination rates and the
 associated relaxation of containment measures had enabled a rapid recovery in several advanced
 economies, but in countries with low vaccine coverage, the rapid spread of the Delta variant of
COVID-19
was tempering the economic outlook. Access to vaccines was an ongoing
 concern for some emerging market countries and high case numbers were putting health systems under
 considerable strain.
The medium-term outlook for Australia's major trading partners generally remained solid. The
 Chinese economy continued to grow in line with pre-pandemic expectations. In a number of economies in
 Asia, strong global demand for goods had led to stronger export growth and increased investment in
 manufacturing capacity, although a resurgence of the virus and restrictions on activity in some
 countries were weighing on domestic demand. The recovery was expected to continue in countries in North
 America and Europe where progress with vaccination programs allowed for an easing of containment
 measures. Fiscal settings remained highly stimulatory in the United States.
Members noted that substantial spare capacity remained in most advanced economies' labour markets,
 despite the strong recovery in economic activity. In contrast to Australia, employment, participation
 rates and hours worked remained well below pre-pandemic levels in many countries. Lower labour force
 participation in some countries reflected the impact of prolonged school closures on child care
 responsibilities, lingering health concerns and ongoing provision of wage subsidies.
Headline inflation had picked up in a number of advanced economies. However, this was in large part the
 result of pandemic-related disruptions, including supply chain bottlenecks and unusually high shipping
 costs, which were likely to be temporary. Members observed that there were both upside and downside
 risks to global inflation in the near term, and that the outlook for inflation in the medium term would
 largely depend on how quickly spare capacity in labour markets was absorbed and how wages responded to
 this.
Domestic economic developments
Turning to domestic economic developments, members noted that the recovery had established strong
 momentum prior to recent outbreaks of the Delta variant of
COVID-19
. GDP
 had recovered to its pre-pandemic level in the March quarter and timely indicators suggested that growth
 in private demand had remained strong in the June quarter. Labour market conditions had also
 strengthened further in the June quarter.
More recently, outbreaks of the Delta variant and accompanying lockdowns had introduced a high degree
 of uncertainty to the outlook for the second half of 2021. Members observed that economic activity and
 employment were expected to decline in the September quarter. The high transmissibility of the Delta
 variant raised the possibility that a more gradual reopening of the economy in affected areas would be
 needed compared with earlier episodes of lockdown restrictions. Under the assumption that further
 lengthy lockdowns would be limited, the economy was forecast to rebound from the current setback later
 in the year as restrictions are eased, consistent with the previously observed pattern in Australia and
 overseas.
Members noted that the prospects for recovery beyond the effects of the recent virus outbreaks are
 supported by a number of factors. These include the underlying momentum in the economy and strengthened
 balance sheets prior to the recent virus outbreaks, the substantial fiscal support offered to households
 and businesses in areas affected by lockdowns, progress with the vaccination rollout and the ability of
 the economy to adapt. In the meantime, health outcomes would continue to present the main source of
 uncertainty for the economic outlook.
Beyond the near term, the level of output at the end of the forecast period in 2023 was expected to be
 a little higher than had been forecast in May, underpinned by stronger private investment and public
 demand. Under the baseline scenario, GDP was forecast to grow by a little above 4 per cent
 over 2022, and around 2½ per cent over 2023.
Members noted that household spending had been tracking strongly in the months prior to the recent
 lockdowns. Consumption had continued to recover over April and May before restrictions affected spending
 in June. Timely indicators suggested that household consumption would contract in the September quarter
 in response to the extended lockdown in Greater Sydney and the shorter lockdowns elsewhere. This was
 expected to account for much of the quarterly decline in GDP. Later in 2021 and early the following
 year, consumption was forecast to recover in affected areas. The outlook for consumption in 2022 and
 2023 was expected to be supported by increased opportunities for spending on discretionary services as
 restrictions are eased, together with higher household income and wealth. The household saving ratio was
 expected to increase temporarily in the September quarter, reflecting reduced consumption in areas
 affected by the lockdowns, before declining steadily thereafter.
The outlook for dwelling and business investment would continue to be supported by accommodative
 financing conditions and fiscal policy measures. Recent lockdowns and restrictions on construction
 activity in Greater Sydney and elsewhere were anticipated to affect both residential and non-residential
 investment in the September quarter, but this was generally expected to lead to plans being deferred
 rather than cancelled. Residential building approvals had eased, as expected, following the end of the
 application period for the HomeBuilder program. However, approvals remained at a high level and the
 large volume of residential building work in the pipeline was likely to support dwelling investment for
 some time. The recovery in non-mining investment over the forecast period was expected to be led by
 spending on machinery and equipment, underpinned by tax incentives, high levels of business confidence,
 declining spare capacity and strong business balance sheets. Mining investment was at its highest level
 since 2017 and a further gradual increase was expected over the forecast period, mainly to replace
 existing capacity. Growth in mining investment was likely to be modest relative to the very high levels
 of commodity prices.
Members noted that conditions in established housing markets remained strong, in contrast to the
 experience during the extended lockdowns in 2020. National housing prices had increased further in July
 following a 6 per cent increase in the June quarter. Prices for detached houses and units in
 Sydney had continued to increase in July despite the lockdowns. Owner-occupiers had accounted for a
 large share of purchases in the period to mid 2021, but investor activity had picked up in recent
 months. The number of newly listed properties for sale had declined recently; however, online auctions
 were reported to have become more common and sales activity had held up well compared with the
 experience during the lockdowns in 2020. Members also noted that advertised rents for houses had
 continued to increase in recent quarters. In regional areas and smaller cities, growth in rents had been
 strong and vacancy rates remained very low. Rental conditions in apartment markets in Sydney and
 Melbourne had begun to stabilise following the earlier decline in rents.
Members observed that labour market conditions had continued to improve at a faster-than-expected pace
 through the June quarter. The unemployment rate had declined to 4.9 per cent in June and
 labour force participation remained around record highs. The rate of underemployment was around its
 lowest level in a number of years. Growth in full-time employment had been particularly strong. Job
 vacancies had been at record high levels and there had been ongoing reports of labour shortages in parts
 of the economy.
Improvements in labour market conditions were expected to reverse temporarily in the September quarter
 as a result of the lockdowns in Greater Sydney and other parts of the country. The restrictions on
 activity were expected to result in a substantial decline in average hours worked. Labour force
 participation was also expected to decline for a period as people delayed searching for work while
 restrictions on mobility remain in place, as had been seen during previous lockdowns. Some employment
 losses were expected, although a fall in labour force participation was anticipated to limit the
 increase in the unemployment rate. The high level of job vacancies and increased fiscal support would
 also help limit job losses. However, much would depend on health outcomes and the duration of the
 lockdowns.
Looking further ahead, members noted that the eventual lifting of restrictions and underlying strength
 in economic conditions are expected to result in the labour market recovery regaining momentum. In the
 baseline scenario, the unemployment rate was forecast to decline to around 4¼ per cent by
 the end of 2022 and to 4 per cent by the end of 2023, which was lower than previously
 forecast. Members noted that, in the preceding half-century, this was a level that had been reached only
 briefly during the mining investment boom and in the early 1970s, when the structure of the economy had
 been very different.
With the unemployment rate expected to decline to a lower level than previously forecast, wages growth
 and inflation were also expected to pick up at a slightly faster pace. The Wage Price Index was forecast
 to increase gradually to around 2¾ per cent by the end of 2023, and broader measures of
 growth in labour costs were expected to be running at a slightly faster pace by that time.
CPI inflation increased to 3.8 per cent over the year to the June quarter, although most of
 this increase reflected the reversal of earlier large falls in certain prices related to the pandemic.
 Much of the 0.8 per cent increase in the June quarter was accounted for by large increases in
 the prices of fuel and fruit and vegetables, and the unwinding of earlier electricity rebates. Members
 observed that there would continue to be some divergence between headline and underlying inflation as
 some of the recent one-off boosts to inflation were unwound. Underlying inflation had stabilised
 recently, and was a little below ½ per cent in the June quarter and
 1¾ per cent over the year. Underlying inflation was likely to remain subdued over
 subsequent quarters, given the expected decline in activity in the September quarter and the absence of
 broad-based inflationary pressures, and then gradually increase to 2¼ per cent by the end
 of 2023.
Members discussed the balance of risks to the forecasts. The baseline scenario assumed that the
 domestic vaccine rollout would accelerate in the months ahead, reducing the frequency and severity of
 lockdowns and allowing the international border to be reopened gradually from mid 2022. It also
 assumed that the Greater Sydney lockdown would extend through the September quarter, with some further
 brief and/or less severe restrictions assumed to occur in parts of Australia in the December
 quarter.
A downside scenario assumed more extended and widespread lockdowns and a more gradual reopening of the
 international border than in the baseline scenario. In this scenario, restrictions on the consumption of
 discretionary services, coupled with precautionary behaviour, would be expected to result in a higher
 rate of household saving and lower household consumption. Private investment and services exports would
 also be lower. Lower activity would result in the unemployment rate rising in subsequent months and
 remaining above 5 per cent over coming years. In this scenario, underlying inflation would be
 expected to remain in the range of 1¼–1½ per cent through to 2023.
Members also considered an upside scenario premised on the assumption that the virus would be contained
 more quickly than in the baseline scenario, with household consumption and private investment increasing
 rapidly once containment measures are lifted. In this scenario, households would be more willing and
 able to consume out of their savings and wealth than in the baseline scenario, supported by higher
 household income and fewer restrictions on discretionary services. International travel would recover
 more quickly once the international border was reopened, boosting services exports. In this scenario,
 the unemployment rate would be expected to decline more rapidly and by more than in the baseline
 scenario, with inflation increasing to the upper half of the target range by the end of 2023.
International financial markets
Yields on longer-term government bonds had fallen over preceding months in many countries, as optimism
 about the global recovery was tempered by the rapid spread of the Delta variant of
COVID-19
and the risks of future variants emerging. This had unwound much of the
 increase in yields seen globally earlier in the year, which had reflected a faster-than-expected
 economic recovery and a rise in inflation expectations to be more consistent with central banks'
 inflation targets. Much of the recent declines in longer-term bond yields in the United States and
 Australia had reflected declines in real yields.
Despite the renewed concerns over the pace of the global economic recovery, market pricing implied that
 the expected path of central bank policy rates was still higher than at the start of the year. Some
 central banks were widely expected to lift policy rates before the end of 2021 because they were nearer
 to their inflation goals, while other central banks were not expected to raise their policy rates for a
 number of years.
Several central banks had reduced their purchases of government bonds, or were soon expected to do so.
 Members observed that the Reserve Bank of New Zealand had halted its asset purchases in July and market
 pricing implied that it was expected to start raising the policy rate before the end of 2021. This had
 followed stronger-than-expected data, which suggested that capacity constraints were evident in the New
 Zealand economy.
Financing conditions for businesses in advanced economies had remained highly favourable. In corporate
 bond markets, spreads to risk-free rates had remained low and bond issuance had remained around, or in
 some cases above, pre-pandemic levels. Equity prices had remained high in these countries, including
 Australia. Share prices in the United States and Europe had been supported by recent positive earnings
 reports.
In China, equity prices had fallen sharply following a tightening of regulations on private-sector
 companies in the technology and education sectors. More broadly, financial conditions in China had been
 supported by an unexpected reduction in reserve requirements for banks. By contrast, some other emerging
 market central banks had started to raise their policy rates in response to rising inflation, despite
 slow recoveries in output.
The US dollar had appreciated against most currencies over the preceding couple of months. The
 Australian dollar had correspondingly depreciated to around its lowest levels in 2021. Members noted
 that this had occurred despite commodity prices being at high levels.
Domestic financial markets
In Australia, the Bank's policy measures continued to underpin very low interest rates. Members
 observed there had been little movement in yields following the announcement of the Board's
 decisions in July to maintain the yield target for the April 2024 bond and to continue purchasing
 government bonds, following the completion of the current program in early September 2021, at a reduced
 rate of $4 billion per week until at least mid November 2021.
With the ongoing lockdowns and other containment measures affecting economic conditions and the outlook
 in the near term, yields on longer-term Australian government bonds had declined by a little more than
 those globally, to be back around early 2021 levels. A number of market economists had suggested that
 the Board might reconsider its decision to taper bond purchases. Market pricing continued to imply
 expectations that the cash rate would increase to around 25 basis points in the second half of
 2022, but the expected path thereafter was a little lower than it had been a month earlier.
Members discussed the fact that banks' funding costs and lending rates had drifted down to new
 lows. Funding costs had benefited from significant final drawdowns from the Term Funding Facility in
 June and deposit rates having edged down further. In turn, average interest rates on outstanding housing
 and business loans had also continued to drift lower.
Credit growth had picked up in June for both households and businesses, although members noted that
 these data largely predated the recent lockdowns. Firms' demand for credit had picked up strongly
 in June, with sizeable contributions from large and medium-sized businesses. This potentially reflected
 the pick-up in business confidence in preceding months and followed subdued demand over much of the
 previous year. Demand for housing finance had strengthened further in June, with growth in housing
 credit rising to nearly 6¾ per cent on a six-month-ended-annualised basis. Overall, it
 appeared that banks' lending standards were being maintained. Non-bank housing credit growth had
 been particularly strong over recent months, with non-bank lenders benefitting from favourable
 conditions in securitisation markets.
Members noted that measures to contain the virus in a number of states might result in a reduction in
 demand for new loans from July, particularly if these measures remained in place for an extended period.
 Banks had offered support to household and business borrowers affected by the lockdowns, and the
 Australian Prudential Regulation Authority had provided regulatory relief for these support measures, as
 it had done in 2020.
Considerations for monetary policy
In considering the policy decision, members observed that the recent outbreaks of the Delta variant of
COVID-19
had interrupted the recovery and that the near-term outlook was
 highly uncertain and dependent on health outcomes. However, the economy had entered the current episode
 of outbreaks and lockdowns with more momentum than previously expected, and fiscal and monetary policy
 support was already cushioning the economic effects. Domestic financial conditions remained highly
 accommodative and the fiscal responses by the Australian Government and the state and territory
 governments were providing welcome support to the economy at a time of significant short-term
 disruption.
Experience to date had been that, once virus outbreaks were contained, the economy bounced back
 quickly. The vaccination program would assist with containment of the virus and longer-term economic
 recovery. Although uncertainty had increased, the central scenario was still that the Australian economy
 would grow strongly again next year. Prior to the recent outbreaks, the labour market recovery had been
 stronger than expected. Job vacancies had been high and there had been ongoing reports of labour
 shortages in parts of the economy. The unemployment rate was expected to increase in the near term, but
 then recover quickly when restrictions are eased and trend lower over 2022 and 2023 to reach around
 4 per cent at the end of 2023.
Members observed that wages growth and underlying inflation would remain subdued for some time yet,
 despite the positive medium-term outlook for output and employment. Headline inflation had spiked to be
 temporarily above the target in the June quarter as earlier pandemic-related price declines were
 unwound. But, in underlying terms, inflation remained low. A pick-up in both wages growth and underlying
 inflation was expected, but this pick-up was likely to be only gradual. In the Bank's central
 scenario, it would take some years for the stronger economy to feed through into wage and price
 increases that would be consistent with the inflation target. Australia had no recent experience of
 unemployment rates that had been sustained at the low levels being forecast. A significant source of
 uncertainty was how wages and prices would behave at these low levels of unemployment.
Members noted that housing markets had continued to strengthen, with prices rising in all major
 markets. Housing credit growth had also increased. Given the environment of strong demand for housing,
 rising housing prices and low interest rates, members continued to emphasise the importance of
 maintaining lending standards and carefully monitoring trends in borrowing.
The Board remained committed to maintaining highly accommodative monetary conditions to support a
 return to full employment in Australia and inflation consistent with the target. Together, the low level
 of the cash rate, the bond purchase program, the yield target and the ongoing funding that had been
 provided under the Term Funding Facility were providing substantial support to the Australian economy in
 the face of the current lockdowns and the expected resumption of the economic expansion.
At its July meeting, the Board had decided to continue with the bond purchase program at a reduced rate
 of $4 billon a week, once the second $100 billion of purchases is complete in September 2021.
 This adjustment reflected the better-than-expected progress that had been made towards the Bank's
 goals and the improved outlook. The Board had agreed in July to keep the rate of bond purchases under
 review and adjust the rate of purchases in either direction as appropriate.
The current virus outbreaks and lockdowns had interrupted the recovery and many households and
 businesses were facing difficult conditions. Members therefore considered the case for delaying the
 tapering of bond purchases to $4 billion a week currently scheduled for September 2021. They noted
 that the outlook for the economy is for a resumption of strong growth in 2022. Members judged that any
 additional bond purchases would have their maximum effect at that time, with only a marginal effect at
 present, which is when the extra support might be required.
Recognising that fiscal policy is a more appropriate instrument than monetary policy for providing
 support in response to a temporary, localised reduction in incomes, members welcomed the substantial
 fiscal measures that had been announced. Given these considerations, the Board reaffirmed the previously
 announced change in the rate of bond purchases. That said, the bond purchase program will continue to be
 reviewed in light of economic conditions and the health situation, and their implications for the
 expected progress towards full employment and the inflation target. The Board would be prepared to act
 in response to further bad news on the health front should that lead to a more significant setback for
 the economic recovery. In any event, the Board will not increase the cash rate until actual inflation is
 sustainably within the 2 to 3 per cent target range. The central scenario for the economy
 is that this condition will not be met before 2024. Meeting this condition will require the labour
 market to be tight enough to generate wages growth that is materially higher than it is currently.
The decision
The Board reaffirmed the existing policy settings, namely:
maintain the cash rate target at 10 basis points and the interest rate on Exchange Settlement
 balances of zero per cent
maintain the target of 10 basis points for the April 2024 Australian Government bond
continue to purchase government securities at the rate of $5 billion a week until early
 September 2021 and then $4 billion a week until at least mid November 2021.
