BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Minutes
TITLE: 1 June 2021
DATE: 01/06/2021
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/monetary-policy/rba-board-minutes/2021/2021-06-01.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Hybrid – 1 June 2021
Members participating
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM, Wendy Craik AM,
 Ian Harper AO, Carolyn Hewson AO, Carol Schwartz AO, Alison Watkins
Luke Yeaman (Deputy Secretary, Macroeconomic Group, Treasury) attended in place of Steven Kennedy PSM
 (Secretary to the Australian Treasury) in terms of section 22 of the
Reserve Bank Act
 1959
.
Others participating
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial Markets),
 Alexandra Heath (Head, International Department)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Penelope Smith (Deputy Secretary), Bradley Jones (Head, Economic Analysis
 Department), Marion Kohler (Head, Domestic Markets Department), Andrea Brischetto (Deputy Head, Domestic
 Markets Department), Clare Noone (Senior Manager, International Department)
International economic developments
Members commenced their discussion of international economic developments by noting that the global
 outlook had improved over recent months and risks to the global economy had become more balanced. Global
 trade volumes had increased strongly and measures of new export orders were buoyant.
COVID-19
case numbers had fallen in many advanced economies as vaccination rates
 had risen, and containment measures were being eased. Surveys of business conditions were strong, with
 manufacturing activity at high levels and conditions in the services sector continuing to improve.
 Fiscal and monetary policy measures had continued to support the recovery. In China, the economy was
 continuing to benefit from strong global demand for manufactured goods. The underlying drivers of the
 recovery there were also becoming more broadly based with the recovery in the consumption of household
 services.
Despite these positive developments, the global recovery had been uneven and this would continue to be
 a feature of the outlook for some time. Many emerging market countries, including India, continued to
 experience significant health and economic challenges. Vaccine supplies remained limited in many
 emerging market countries, hampering their economic recoveries. Containment measures had been reimposed
 in some countries in Asia following recent virus outbreaks and were likely to slow the recovery
 temporarily in these countries.
A key feature of the global economy during the pandemic had been the emergence of supply chain
 bottlenecks, which had contributed to lengthening delays in the delivery of some manufactured goods.
 Members noted that these bottlenecks had been caused by disruptions to current and earlier production
 and ongoing strong demand for goods. Many firms were attempting to rebuild inventories after they had
 declined to low levels. Shortages of global semiconductor chips and constraints on shipping capacity
 were reported as acute. This, in turn, had hampered downstream production for a variety of goods.
Global supply chain bottlenecks were generally expected to be transitory, although there was
 considerable uncertainty about how long they could take to ease. Considerations included the speed with
 which global demand rebalanced from goods back to services and how quickly containment measures were
 lifted in response to increased vaccination coverage and successful control of the virus. In parts of
 east Asia, businesses were responding to supply pressures by investing in new capacity. Large producers
 of semiconductor chips had boosted investment and projected substantial further increases in production
 over the following couple of years. Large shipbuilders were also planning to increase capacity following
 several years where investment in shipping had been weak, but this would take time.
In discussing recent developments in global inflation, members noted that global supply chain
 bottlenecks and higher commodity prices had contributed to an increase in producer price inflation in a
 number of countries. However, increases in wages and other production costs, which are key components of
 the overall cost base for many firms, had generally been more subdued. Wages growth in the United States
 had been noticeably stronger than elsewhere.
Year-ended consumer price inflation had increased in advanced economies because of the upstream price
 pressures and an increase in consumer demand as containment measures were relaxed. However, measures of
 underlying inflation that exclude volatile items had been lower. Goods account for less than half of the
 consumer price index basket in many advanced economies, muting the effect of upstream price pressures on
 overall inflation. In Australia, the exchange rate had appreciated alongside higher commodity prices at
 the end of 2020, further limiting the extent to which higher global goods prices were passed on to
 consumers.
Members noted that, in the short term, year-ended headline inflation was expected to rise temporarily
 around the middle of the year, owing to base effects and temporary price pressures as global supply
 chain bottlenecks and higher commodity prices drove consumer prices up. However, in most advanced
 economies, including Australia, spare capacity in labour markets was likely to contain underlying
 inflationary pressures for some time. Measures of inflation expectations in advanced economies were
 around or below central banks' targets.
The Australian economy was continuing to benefit from higher commodity prices and strong demand for
 resource exports, despite ongoing difficulties in the trading relationship with China. Members noted
 that the terms of trade were likely to be near record levels in the June quarter and remain high in the
 near term. The price of iron ore briefly reached a record high early in May, before easing back to below
 the levels observed at the time of the previous meeting.
Domestic economic developments
Turning to domestic economic developments, members noted that the Australian economy was transitioning
 from recovery to expansion with more momentum than previously anticipated. This was the result of
 favourable health outcomes and substantial fiscal and monetary policy support. While uncertainty around
 the outlook had declined, further surprises in either direction were plausible given scenarios for the
 path of household consumption and saving, as well as the extent of stimulus from the substantial fiscal
 and monetary policy easing. Health outcomes also continued to be an important source of uncertainty,
 although this was likely to diminish as a greater proportion of the population is vaccinated.
Members noted that growth in household consumption had moderated in the March quarter following the
 strong rebound in the second half of 2020. The decline in consumption since the onset of the pandemic
 had been driven by the reduction in spending on discretionary services. However, it was expected that,
 as containment measures continue to be eased and more consumption possibilities become available, the
 recovery in spending on services would continue. While the most recent lockdown in Victoria would
 constrain spending on services in the June quarter, over the following couple of years household
 consumption was expected to be strong, especially in per capita terms, supported by higher employment,
 rising net wealth and lower levels of uncertainty.
Conditions in the residential construction sector remained buoyant. Residential construction activity
 had increased strongly in the March quarter, led by the construction of detached houses and alterations
 & additions. Despite historically low population growth, residential construction activity was
 expected to strengthen further over coming quarters, supported by government incentives, low interest
 rates and the very high level of building approvals over prior months. Building approvals and land sales
 were expected to ease back as the HomeBuilder subsidy had closed to new applications. However, the
 extension of the final commencement date for construction under this program implied that the effects of
 higher construction activity would be spread over the following 18 months or so.
Prices in the established housing market increased further in May. New residential listings had been
 above the levels recorded in previous years, but the total number of outstanding listings remained low,
 indicating that properties continued to be sold quickly. Auction volumes and housing turnover had also
 picked up strongly over recent months, and auction clearance rates remained above average. Rental market
 conditions had continued to tighten outside of Melbourne and Sydney, with advertised rents increasing
 rapidly in regional areas and some capital cities. In Sydney, advertised rents had been increasing again
 after declining earlier in the pandemic. In contrast, rental market conditions remained weak in
 Melbourne, where advertised rents remained well below their pre-pandemic levels and the vacancy rate was
 still high.
Members welcomed the increase in business investment expenditure in the March quarter, led by machinery
 and equipment investment, and forward-looking indicators of business investment were more favourable
 than they had been for some time. Accommodative financing conditions and tax incentives were supporting
 the recovery in investment. Survey measures of business confidence, capacity utilisation and forward
 orders had all increased to very high levels in April. Non-residential building approvals and surveyed
 capital expenditure intentions also pointed to further growth in investment. However, even this recovery
 implied that non-mining investment would remain a relatively low share of overall output. Members
 observed that mining firms' investment intentions had been largely unresponsive to the increase in
 commodity prices over the preceding year.
Members noted that labour market data had been mixed in April. The rate of unemployment and
 underemployment had declined further in April, and while total employment had also declined in the
 month, full-time employment had increased. Unusually strong seasonal effects related to the timing of
 Easter and school holidays appeared to have reduced both employment and unemployment in April, as more
 people took leave or exited the labour force in the month. More broadly, leading indicators of labour
 demand, such as job vacancies, continued to point to further solid increases in employment in the period
 ahead.
In discussing spare capacity in the labour market, members noted that while the participation rate had
 increased to historically high levels, further increases were possible. The number of people who were
 recorded as outside the labour force but open to work in the near future was still quite high. Combined
 with other measures of potential labour supply currently classified as outside the labour force, this
 suggested there was still a pool of workers available to firms should the demand for labour continue to
 increase. Information from the Bank's liaison program and other surveys indicated that labour
 shortages were appearing in some parts of the economy. The reduction in access to foreign labour and
 reduced interstate mobility were cited by some firms as contributing factors. However, firms facing
 labour shortages were citing a preference for non-wage measures to attract and retain staff, such as
 one-off bonuses and more flexible working arrangements. Some firms were also opting to ration output
 because of labour shortages, rather than pay higher wages to attract new workers.
Recent data for the March quarter did not point to a meaningful pick-up in wages growth overall. Wages
 growth had remained around historically low levels, and many firms still had wage freezes in place.
 Wages growth was low across a broad range of industries. While a faster pick-up in wages growth was
 possible, members continued to expect a gradual increase in the following few years as spare capacity in
 the labour market was steadily absorbed.
In concluding their analysis of recent developments in the domestic economy, members discussed the
 further fiscal support announced in the Australian Government Budget. Receipts for the
2020/21
financial year were much stronger and outlays were lower than
 foreshadowed in December's mid-year fiscal update; the Victorian Government Budget in May reflected
 a similar pattern of revisions to receipts and outlays. Higher-than-expected iron ore prices, and the
 strong recovery in the labour market and household consumption, had all contributed to the strength in
 revenues. The underlying cash deficit for the Australian Government was therefore expected to be smaller
 in the current financial year than previously assumed. However, new spending commitments and an
 extension of tax relief measures were also announced for the coming years. These were expected to offer
 additional support for the recovery relative to the assumptions at the time of the mid-year fiscal
 update.
International financial markets
Financial market conditions had been broadly stable during May. Longer-term sovereign bond yields
 remained around levels seen since mid March and conditions in corporate bond markets remained highly
 accommodative. Equity prices in most major markets, including in Australia, were around record
 highs.
Members observed that central banks in advanced economies had reiterated their commitments to provide
 significant monetary policy support until there is evidence of sustained progress towards their goals
 for employment and inflation. In line with this guidance, market-implied policy rate expectations had
 been little changed in recent weeks. An exception was in New Zealand, where market expectations for the
 policy rate had moved higher after the central bank released projections showing a faster increase in
 the policy rate from mid 2022 than markets had expected. A few central banks had slowed their
 government bond purchases in prior months and the US Federal Open Market Committee had indicated in its
 meeting minutes that discussions to plan such an adjustment could begin at upcoming meetings. These
 communications were broadly consistent with market expectations.
The US dollar had depreciated since bond markets had stabilised in March and, on a trade-weighted
 basis, had returned to its level at the start of the year. The Australian dollar continued to trade in a
 narrow range despite significant movements in some commodity prices over the prior month.
Domestic financial markets
In domestic financial markets, the Bank's policy measures continued to underpin very low
 interest rates and the provision of credit. The yield on the 3-year Australian Government bond had
 edged lower over the preceding month to be a little below 10 basis points. The November 2024
 Australian Government bond will become the bond with a residual maturity closest to 3 years in
 early August. Members observed that the yield on this bond implied that market participants did not, on
 balance, expect the yield target to be extended to that bond in August. Market expectations for the
 cash rate had been little changed, with market pricing still implying an expectation that the cash rate
 will begin to be increased from its current level late in 2022 or early in 2023.
The yield on 10-year Australian Government Securities (AGS) had declined slightly over May, but
 remained around levels of recent months. The spread between yields on 10-year AGS and US Treasuries was
 still close to zero.
The Bank's bond purchase program had run smoothly, with the second $100 billion of bond
 purchases scheduled to be completed in September 2021. Members noted that the Bank was projected to own
 around 30 per cent of AGS outstanding and around 15 per cent of bonds issued by
 Australian states and territories outstanding by that time. This was at the lower end of other central
 banks' ownership share of outstanding government bonds. Members observed that market economists
 expected an extension of the program, with expectations ranging from a further $50 to
 $100 billion of purchases over the course of the 6 months or so after September.
Bank funding costs and lending rates overall were at historic lows. Draw-downs on the Bank's
 Term Funding Facility had picked up as the 30 June deadline for accessing the 3-year funding
 program approached. At the time of the meeting, banks had drawn down $134 billion and a
 significant proportion of the remaining $75 billion still available to banks was expected to be
 drawn down over subsequent weeks. Members noted that the facility is providing low-cost fixed-rate
 funding for 3 years, which means that it will continue to support low borrowing costs until
 mid 2024.
Members observed that the Bank's package of monetary policy measures had led to sizeable
 declines in mortgage rates, particularly for fixed-rate loans. As a result, the share of fixed-rate
 mortgages had risen to account for around 30 per cent of the stock of housing credit. Housing
 credit growth had continued to pick up, with ongoing strong demand from owner-occupiers, especially
 first-home buyers. Growth in credit extended to investors in housing had also strengthened from low
 levels. Business lending rates had also declined substantially over the preceding year, although
 lending to businesses had been little changed. Information from liaison with banks suggested that,
 while businesses' appetite to borrow had increased somewhat, many businesses had little immediate
 need to borrow and demand for credit remained uneven.
Members discussed the implications of climate change for monetary policy and the Bank's
 financial stability mandate through its effects on the economy and the financial system. Members noted
 that, both in Australia and abroad, the private sector had begun responding to climate risks in a
 number of ways, including by increasing disclosure of climate-related risks and developing
 ‘green finance’ products. Central banks and financial regulators had been actively
 accounting for climate-related risks in carrying out their policy and regulatory responsibilities.
 Domestically, the Bank is working closely with other Council of Financial Regulators (CFR) agencies on
 these issues, with a focus on building the foundations for financial institutions and corporations to
 understand climate risks and for the effective pricing of these risks by markets. The Australian
 Prudential Regulation Authority's Climate Vulnerability Assessment is a key CFR initiative that is
 expected to assist Australian financial institutions with the management of climate risk, and improve
 the consistency and effectiveness of climate-related disclosures.
Members observed that developments globally relating to the management and regulation of
 climate-related risk had become increasingly prominent in the asset allocation decisions of
 international investors. This development could affect the cost and availability of finance for
 corporations and governments. As a related matter, members observed that taxonomies were being
 established in a number of economies to provide corporations and investors with a framework to
 understand whether an activity or financial product is ‘sustainable’. Members noted that
 particular taxonomies could become very influential in global financial markets, and these will have an
 important bearing on the cost and availability of financing the transition to lower carbon emissions
 for Australia.
Considerations for monetary policy
In considering the policy decision, members observed that the global economic recovery from the
 pandemic had continued and the outlook was for strong growth in output in 2021 and the following year.
 Policy settings and the pace of
COVID-19
vaccinations had supported global
 economic activity, but the recovery remained uneven and the virus had not yet been contained in some
 countries. Global goods trade had continued to increase strongly and commodity prices remained at higher
 levels than at the beginning of 2021. Despite the more positive real economic conditions, wages growth
 and inflation in underlying terms remained low.
Sovereign bond yields had been steady in recent months, after rising earlier in the year in response to
 the positive news on vaccines and the additional sizeable fiscal stimulus in the United States.
 Medium-term inflation expectations had increased from around record lows to be closer to central
 banks' inflation targets. Central banks in major advanced economies had continued to signal that
 higher inflation would be temporary and restated guidance that they would continue to provide
 significant monetary policy support until there was evidence of substantial progress towards their goals
 for employment and inflation.
The economic recovery in Australia was stronger than had been expected, supported by fiscal measures
 and very accommodative financial conditions. The unemployment rate had fallen more quickly than expected
 and there had been reports of labour shortages in some parts of the economy. Leading indicators of
 employment growth, including job vacancies, pointed to ongoing strong employment growth, and the
 unemployment rate was expected to decline to around 5 per cent by the end of 2021.
Inflation and wage pressures remained subdued, despite the strong recovery in the economy and
 employment. A pick-up in inflation and wages growth was expected, but this was likely to be only gradual
 and modest. In the central forecast scenario, inflation in underlying terms was expected to be
 1½ per cent in 2021 and 2 per cent in mid 2023. The reversal of some
COVID-19
-related price reductions would see inflation temporarily rise above
 3 per cent in the June quarter before falling back below the target. Members noted that the
 strong focus on cost containment by businesses meant that it would take some time for spare capacity to
 be reduced and the labour market to be tight enough to generate wage increases consistent with achieving
 the inflation target. Moreover, it was likely that overall wages growth would need to be sustainably
 above 3 per cent to achieve the target, and this is well above the current level.
Members observed that housing markets had strengthened further, with prices continuing to increase in
 all major markets. Housing credit growth had increased, with ongoing strong demand from owner-occupiers,
 especially first-home buyers. Growth in borrowing by investors had also started to increase in recent
 months, from low levels. Given the environment of strong demand for housing, rising housing prices and
 low interest rates, members continued to emphasise the importance of maintaining lending standards and
 carefully monitoring trends in borrowing.
Members agreed that the current package of monetary policy measures continued to support the economy by
 encouraging an ample supply of credit to the economy and keeping financing costs very low. The 3-year
 Australian Government bond yield had edged lower but remained consistent with the Board's target of
 around 10 basis points. Banks' overall funding costs were at historically low levels.
 Borrowing rates for households and businesses on outstanding loans had continued to drift lower and were
 also at historical lows. Members noted that, in addition to lowering domestic funding costs, the
 Bank's policy package had contributed to a lower exchange rate than would otherwise have been the
 case. Together, monetary and fiscal policy had supported the recovery in aggregate demand and the
 pick-up in employment.
Members discussed the key considerations for the decisions to be made at the July 2021 meeting on the
 3-year yield target and the government bond purchase program. In discussing these considerations,
 members noted a return to full employment as a priority for monetary policy that would assist with
 achieving the inflation target. Consequently, monetary policy would be likely to need to remain highly
 accommodative for some time yet.
Regarding the 3-year yield target, the Board will consider whether to retain the April 2024 bond as the
 target bond or extend the target to the next maturity, the November 2024 bond. Members had previously
 agreed that the target of around 10 basis points would be retained. In addition, the Board had
 previously stated that it would not increase the cash rate until actual inflation is sustainably within
 the 2 to 3 per cent target range. A key consideration for the decision regarding the
 yield target would be an assessment of the prospect of this condition being met some time in 2024.
 Members also discussed the likely effect of the decision in relation to the yield target on overall
 financial conditions.
In relation to the government bond purchase program, the Board would decide upon future government bond
 purchases at the July meeting ahead of the completion of the second $100 billion of purchases in
 early September 2021. The options discussed included ceasing purchasing bonds in September (other than
 to support the yield target if necessary); repeating $100 billion of purchases for another
 6 months; scaling back the amount purchased or spreading the purchases over a longer period; and
 moving to an approach where the pace of the bond purchases is reviewed more frequently, based on the
 flow of data and the economic outlook.
Key considerations for the decision in July would be the progress made towards the Board's goals
 for employment and inflation, and the likely effect of different options on overall financial
 conditions. Observing that the bond purchase program had been one of the factors underpinning the
 accommodative conditions necessary for the economic recovery, members thought it would be premature to
 consider ceasing the program.
The Board remained committed to doing what it reasonably could to support the Australian economy, and
 would maintain highly supportive monetary conditions until its goals for employment and inflation were
 achieved. Members affirmed that the cash rate target would remain at 10 basis points, and the rate
 of remuneration on Exchange Settlement balances at zero, for as long as necessary. The Board would not
 increase the cash rate until actual inflation is sustainably within the 2 to 3 per cent
 target range. For this to occur, wages growth would need to be materially higher than it is currently.
 This would require significant gains in employment and a sustained return to a tight labour market. The
 Board viewed these conditions as unlikely until 2024 at the earliest.
The decision
The Board reaffirmed the existing policy settings, namely:
a target for the cash rate of 0.1 per cent
an interest rate of zero on Exchange Settlement balances held by financial institutions at the
 Bank
a target of around 0.1 per cent for the yield on the 3-year Australian Government bond
the purchase of an additional $100 billion of government bonds at the same rate of $5 billion
 per week following completion of the first bond purchase program of $100 billion
the expanded Term Funding Facility to support credit to businesses, particularly small and medium-sized
 businesses, with an interest rate on new drawings until 30 June 2021 of
 0.1 per cent.
