BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Minutes
TITLE: 4 October 2022
DATE: 04/10/2022
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/monetary-policy/rba-board-minutes/2022/2022-10-04.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Hybrid – 4 October 2022
Members participating
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Michele Bullock (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM,
 Wendy Craik AM, Ian Harper AO, Carolyn Hewson AO,
 Steven Kennedy PSM, Alison Watkins AM
Members had granted leave of absence to Carol Schwartz AO, in accordance with section 18A of the
Reserve Bank Act 1959
.
Others participating
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial
 Markets), Bradley Jones (Assistant Governor, Financial Stability)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), David Jacobs (Deputy Secretary)
Jonathan Kearns (Head, Domestic Markets Department), Marion Kohler (Head, Economic Analysis
 Department), Penelope Smith (Head, International Department)
International economic developments
Members commenced their discussion of international economic developments by observing that inflation
 remained high. Headline inflation had declined in some economies as oil prices had fallen, but core
 inflation was yet to show any signs of easing in most advanced economies. The UK and other European
 governments had announced sizeable assistance packages to alleviate the effects of stress in energy
 markets and support their economies, especially households. While these assistance packages had lowered
 the expected near-term peaks in headline inflation stemming from higher energy costs, the scale of the UK
 fiscal stimulus was expected to add to inflationary pressures over the medium term.
European gas and thermal coal prices had fallen significantly over the prior month owing to the commitment
 to implement energy rationing and the imposition of a windfall tax on non-gas energy generation,
 including from coal. Nevertheless, prices remained many times higher than a few years earlier and there
 was considerable anxiety about how the energy situation would evolve over the European winter. Non-energy
 commodity prices were well below the peaks reached immediately following Russia’s invasion of
 Ukraine, in part because the outlook for global growth had weakened.
Members noted that, in a number of other advanced economies, monthly headline inflation had lately
 declined from recent peak rates, mainly reflecting lower petrol prices. Goods price inflation had also
 eased from high levels, as demand rebalanced from goods back to services and as input price pressures
 moderated. Members observed that global supply chains were also improving; shipping costs and supplier
 delivery times had fallen and further declines could be envisaged, given that they were still well above
 pre-pandemic levels. This improvement was likely to have reflected supply chain realignments, reduced
 backlogs and an easing in global demand for goods.
Notwithstanding the easing in measures of headline inflation, core inflation remained high and was
 increasingly being driven by higher prices for services. Higher services inflation was a response to
 strong domestic demand and growth in labour costs running above rates that would be consistent with
 inflation returning to central banks’ targets. Labour markets remained tight, with very high vacancy
 rates and unemployment rates back to or a little below their pre-pandemic lows.
Recent indicators continued to point to a further moderate softening in aggregate demand in advanced
 economies. Household consumption was growing modestly, with some switch back to spending on services and
 away from goods. Businesses’ hiring and investment intentions remained at or above pre-pandemic
 levels. The recent cost-of-living policies announced by governments in Europe would help support economic
 activity and reduce some of the downside risks. The housing sector in a number of countries remained an
 area of weakness, reflecting rising interest rates.
Members observed that the Chinese economy continued to face significant headwinds as it grappled with its
 weak real estate market as well as periodic bouts of rising
COVID-19
case
 numbers and associated lockdowns. In response to mounting concerns about developers pausing or abandoning
 development projects, the Chinese authorities had put in place a number of measures to support the
 completion of projects. However, given the sharp decline in starts, housing construction was expected to
 fall further for some time.
COVID-19
containment restrictions had been
 imposed on more parts of the country in September, although the effect on the movement of goods had been
 more modest than following the Shanghai lockdown earlier in the year. China’s zero-COVID policy
 seemed likely to continue until at least the five-yearly party congress on 16 October, and possibly
 beyond then.
Domestic economic developments
Turning to the domestic economy, members noted that information over the preceding month showed little
 change in overall economic conditions from the assessment in early September. According to the newly
 released monthly Consumer Price Index (CPI) indicator, inflation had remained high in the first two
 months of the September quarter and was in line with the Bank’s expectations. The national accounts
 had confirmed that the domestic economy had grown strongly in the June quarter, driven by household
 consumption and exports. More timely information suggested that household spending growth had held up
 well in the September quarter, supported by continuing strong conditions in the labour market.
Members observed that household spending had increased solidly in the September quarter, supported by the
 ongoing recovery in consumption of services and the return to a more usual level of household saving.
 Firms generally were optimistic about the longer term outlook for demand and this was reflected in
 investment intentions remaining at or above average levels. However, shortages of materials and labour
 were expected to remain a challenge in a number of areas of the economy, including residential and
 infrastructure investment projects.
The current high level of energy-related commodity prices had boosted Australia’s national income.
 Members noted that the combination of record-high terms of trade, strong demand and high inflation had
 meant that nominal income growth had been very strong in the June quarter and nominal GDP was growing
 around its fastest pace over the inflation-targeting period.
Members observed that the monthly CPI indicator had confirmed the Bank’s expectation that inflation
 had picked up further in July and August, and that it was broadly based. Overall, headline inflation was
 expected to be around 7¾ per cent and underlying inflation around 6 per cent over
 2022. Although some of the supply-side factors that had contributed to inflation over the preceding year
 were expected to ease in coming quarters, items such as utilities prices and rents were likely to pick up
 further and add to inflationary pressures for some time. The very limited supply of properties available
 for rent, as reflected in low and declining vacancy rates, was supporting large increases in advertised
 rents and this was starting to flow through to the stock of rents as recorded in the CPI.
The labour market remained very tight. The employment-to-population ratio and the participation rate were
 both around record highs, and measures of spare capacity in the labour market were near their lowest
 levels in decades. Labour demand remained strong, with job advertisements and vacancies at very high
 levels in August and into September. Members noted, however, that conversion of this strong demand into
 additional employment had been relatively modest of late, suggesting that limited spare capacity remained
 in the labour market. Consistent with this, firms in the Bank’s liaison program and in business
 surveys generally reported that finding suitable labour remained their most significant challenge. Growth
 in labour costs looked to have picked up somewhat, with the liaison measure of private-sector wages
 growth increasing a little further in the September quarter. Information from liaison and business
 surveys pointed to a further increase in wages growth in coming quarters. A number of state governments
 had also recently offered larger wage increases than had previously been agreed.
International financial markets
Members observed that financial markets had been volatile over the preceding month as uncertainty about
 the global economic outlook increased. This reflected persistent inflationary pressures in most advanced
 economies, and an expectation by financial markets that central banks would raise policy interest rates
 by more and for longer than previously anticipated. Developments affecting financial stability in the
 United Kingdom had also contributed to the volatility in financial markets.
Central banks around the world had continued the rapid and synchronised tightening of monetary policy.
 Members noted that the speed and extent of monetary policy tightening had been faster than any episode in
 recent decades, and market pricing implied that the level of policy rates in most major economies was
 expected to be a little below, but still comparable with, the peaks reached in the mid-2000s. Over the
 prior month, market participants had raised their expectations for further policy rate increases in
 response to higher-than-expected inflation and communication by some central banks that monetary policy
 settings would need to be restrictive to return inflation to their targets. These developments were
 contributing to growing concerns around the risk of recession in a number of economies.
Long-term government bond yields had increased noticeably over the preceding month and had become
 increasingly volatile, reflecting uncertainty about the outlook for growth and inflation and limited
 liquidity in some markets. In the United Kingdom, sovereign bond yields had increased sharply in response
 to the government’s announcement of further substantial fiscal stimulus. The increase in yields had
 been further amplified by the selling of long-dated government bonds and other assets by UK pension funds
 to cover margin calls. To restore market functioning and reduce risks from contagion to credit conditions
 for UK households and businesses, the Bank of England had undertaken temporary bond purchases. Members
 noted that UK sovereign bond yields had retraced some of their previous increase following the Bank of
 England’s actions.
Private sector financing conditions had continued to tighten in most advanced economies. Equity prices had
 fallen further over the preceding month and corporate bond yields and credit spreads had risen.
The US dollar had appreciated against most currencies since the start of the year, most notably
 against the Japanese yen and the UK pound. Members noted that the Japanese Ministry of Finance had
 intervened to slow the depreciation of the yen, while the People’s Bank of China had implemented
 measures to lean against the pace of depreciation of the renminbi. The Australian dollar had depreciated
 further against the US dollar, but had appreciated slightly over 2022 on a trade-weighted basis.
 Members noted that the trade-weighted exchange rate typically has a greater bearing on imported inflation
 than bilateral rates.
In China, financial conditions had become more accommodative, supported by earlier fiscal and monetary
 policy easing and more recent targeted efforts to bolster the property sector. Members noted that
 financial stress among Chinese property developers had broadened to some smaller state-owned developers
 over preceding months. Chinese equity prices had declined further over September, reflecting concerns
 about growth prospects in China. In many other emerging markets, central banks had further tightened
 policy amid high inflation.
Domestic financial markets
Members noted that Australian financial markets had followed global trends but with more moderate moves,
 as evidenced in Australian Government bond yields, equity prices and market expectations for the cash
 rate. This was consistent with inflationary pressures generally being seen to be weaker in Australia,
 with wages growth lower than in many advanced economies. Expectations for the cash rate, as revealed by
 market pricing, had increased over the preceding month, but to a lesser extent than in other countries.
 At the time of the October meeting, market pricing implied that financial market participants applied
 around a 75 per cent likelihood of a 50 basis point increase in the cash rate and a
 25 per cent likelihood of a 25 basis point increase; the cash rate was expected to be
 around 3.4 per cent by the end of 2022 and peak slightly above 4¼ per cent in
 mid-2023. Market economists expected the peak in the cash rate to be a little lower than this.
Housing mortgage payments had risen and were set to rise further in the period ahead as a result of the
 increase in home loan interest rates that had already been announced. Given the increases in the cash
 rate prior to the October meeting, required housing mortgage payments as a share of household income were
 expected to increase to around levels last seen in 2010. This included the effect of fixed interest rate
 loans rolling off over time. Payments into offset and redraw accounts were still high, but somewhat lower
 over 2022 than in 2021. Housing loan commitments had declined for both owner-occupiers and investors,
 demonstrating the effect of higher interest rates on housing lending.
Financial stability
Members discussed the Bank’s regular half-yearly assessment of financial stability risks.
Financial stability risks had increased over preceding months. Global financial conditions had continued
 to tighten as persistently high inflation had prompted the rapid and synchronised increase in policy
 rates in advanced economies. Growth in housing prices had slowed or reversed in many economies. Alongside
 a sharp downgrade in forecasts for global economic growth over recent months, financial asset prices had
 declined and volatility had increased significantly. Geopolitical tensions had continued to destabilise
 energy markets, particularly in Europe, where the macroeconomic and financial stability outlook had
 deteriorated sharply. A turn in the global credit cycle was therefore apparent, although from a starting
 point where loan arrears were at very low levels and large global banks were well capitalised.
Financial stability risks had continued to increase in China and in some emerging market economies where
 longstanding domestic vulnerabilities were being exacerbated by the more difficult environment for
 external financing. Foreign investors had reduced their exposure to China’s bond markets over the
 year; members noted it was too early to tell if foreign portfolio outflows from China were largely a
 cyclical response to domestic and external factors, or whether they marked the beginning of a longer term
 reassessment of the risks associated with deploying capital in China.
Turning to the outlook for domestic financial stability, members noted that households, firms and banks in
 Australia had entered what was likely to be a more challenging economic environment in a strong financial
 position overall. Many Australian households and businesses had established substantial savings buffers
 during the pandemic, and policy support had contributed to a strong recovery in labour market outcomes
 and private incomes. This, along with forbearance for some borrowers, had resulted in low levels of loan
 arrears.
However, members noted that resilience across private sector balance sheets was not evenly distributed,
 and housing and financial asset prices had declined in 2022. While many variable-rate borrowers were well
 ahead on their mortgage payments, pressures on some household budgets and business cash flows were rising
 in response to higher interest rates and higher inflation. Members noted that variable-rate borrowers
 with low incomes, small liquidity buffers and high debt were most vulnerable to mortgage payment
 difficulties, although the share of borrowers in such a position was low. Many fixed-rate borrowers were
 also set to face large increases in their minimum payments when their fixed-rate terms expire. Members
 recognised, however, that lenders had assessed borrowers’ ability to service their mortgages at
 interest rates above those prevailing at the time those mortgages originated.
Members discussed the reduction in loan-to-valuation ratios since the onset of the pandemic. Most
 borrowers had accumulated large amounts of equity in their homes, reflecting the large increase in
 housing prices over prior years and the small share of high loan-to-valuation ratio lending in recent
 times. These developments had reduced risks to the financial system flowing from borrowers encountering
 difficulties in their debt-servicing capacity.
Members noted that, in aggregate, the effects of rising interest rates and inflation were more likely to
 be evident in a slowdown in consumption growth over the period ahead, rather than a large spike in
 banks’ non-performing loans. However, this outlook did not account for the potential for a large
 increase in unemployment, which would be problematic.
Members noted that, following a period of forbearance during the pandemic, the number of business
 insolvencies in Australia had picked up of late, including in sectors where cost pressures were acute or
 where balance sheets had been severely affected by pandemic-related restrictions. However, the recent
 increase in the number of business insolvencies had occurred from very low levels, similar to the pattern
 observed in other countries.
Banks in Australia remained very well capitalised with high levels of liquidity. Large capital buffers
 meant banks were well positioned in the event non-performing loans picked up from their current very low
 levels. Non-bank lending for housing had been particularly strong. Members noted that, while non-bank
 lending comprised a small share of system-wide credit and there had been little evidence of a decline in
 lending standards, it was important that lending standards remained prudent.
Finally, members discussed the Bank’s ongoing involvement in work streams addressing the financial
 stability risks associated with cybercrime and climate change. The recent cyber-attack on Optus
 underscored the importance of organisations having effective cyber resilience and recovery plans. In
 conjunction with other agencies comprising the Council of Financial Regulators, the Bank had participated
 in several exercises aimed at assessing the preparedness of financial institutions to navigate
 significant cyber-related disruptions. The Bank also continued to progress work on the economic and
 financial stability implications of climate change and associated policies, including the modelling of
 physical and transition risks and scenario analysis. In addition, the Bank continued to engage in
 international forums on the development of consistent standards for ‘green finance’ and the
 reporting of climate-related disclosures, which was relevant to its ongoing analysis of the cost and
 availability of finance in Australia.
Considerations for monetary policy
In considering the policy decision, members noted that inflation in Australia was too high, as was the
 case in most countries. Global factors explained much of the high inflation, but strong domestic demand
 relative to the ability of the economy to meet that demand was also playing a role.
A further increase in inflation was expected over the months ahead. Inflation was then expected to decline
 towards the
2–3
per cent range, reflecting the ongoing
 resolution of global supply-side problems, recent declines in some commodity prices and the effect of
 rising interest rates. Medium-term inflation expectations remained well anchored and members emphasised
 the importance of this remaining the case. The Bank’s central forecast was for CPI inflation to be
 around 7¾ per cent over 2022, a little above 4 per cent over 2023 and around
 3 per cent over 2024. Members noted that a full set of updated forecasts will be published in
 November following the release of the September quarter CPI.
Members discussed the continued solid growth of the Australian economy and noted that national income was
 being boosted by a record level of the terms of trade. The labour market was very tight and many firms
 were having difficulty hiring workers. The unemployment rate in August was 3.5 per cent, around
 the lowest rate in almost 50 years. Job vacancies and job advertisements were both at very high
 levels, suggesting a further decline in the unemployment rate over the months ahead. Beyond that, some
 increase in the unemployment rate was expected as economic growth slows.
Wages growth had continued to pick up from the low rates of recent years, although it remained lower than
 in other advanced economies, where inflation was also higher. Many firms were seeking to raise their
 headcount, and the increased difficulty finding workers meant that this strong labour demand was likely
 to result in a further lift in wages growth in coming months. The Board will continue to pay close
 attention to both the evolution of labour costs and the price-setting behaviour of firms in the period
 ahead.
Members agreed that a further increase in the cash rate was necessary to achieve a more sustainable
 balance of demand and supply in the Australian economy. Price stability is a prerequisite for a strong
 economy and a sustained period of full employment. Given this, the Board’s priority is to return
 inflation to the
2–3
per cent range over time while keeping
 the economy on an even keel. Members saw the path to achieving this balance as a narrow one clouded in
 uncertainty.
Members carefully considered two options for the size of the increase in the cash rate: continuing with
 the 50 basis point increases of the preceding four meetings; or announcing a smaller 25 basis
 point increase.
The arguments for continuing with an increase of 50 basis points stemmed from the inflationary
 environment and risks to inflation expectations. Inflation was high, broadly based and expected to
 increase further. Inflationary pressures had earlier proven more persistent than expected and there were
 upside risks to inflation from the labour market, rents and energy costs. While wages growth had
 increased more rapidly in other economies where labour supply had been more adversely affected by the
 pandemic, Australia could yet have the same experience given the tightness of the labour market.
If the Board were to reduce the size of the rate increase, it would be the first to do so among advanced
 economies. This might in turn prompt an unhelpful reaction in inflation expectations and financial
 markets, if the community came to question the Board’s resolve to reduce inflation. Ultimately, if
 upside risks to inflation were to materialise, or the credibility of the path to reduce inflation came
 into question, it would be costly to re-establish low inflation.
In this context, members also noted that the cash rate was not at an especially high level. Consumption
 had so far proven resilient to the increase in interest rates, supported by strong labour market
 conditions and the large financial buffers that many households had built up during the pandemic.
The arguments for a 25 basis point increase rested on the risks to global and domestic growth, and
 the potential for inflation to subside quickly. The cash rate had risen by a significant amount in a
 short period of time. While consumption had so far held up, monetary policy operated with a lag and there
 was a risk that household spending might adjust by more than expected. Higher interest rates, alongside
 higher inflation, were putting pressure on household budgets and consumer confidence had fallen. The full
 effects of higher interest rates were yet to be felt in mortgage payments and the increases in the cash
 rate were close to the interest rate buffer applied when many current borrowers took out their loans. The
 tightening of monetary policy was having a clear effect in the housing market, where prices had declined
 after earlier large increases, and the demand for housing loans had also fallen. Previous episodes of
 lower housing prices and turnover had seen a large effect on consumer spending, in part through the
 wealth channel of transmission.
With regard to inflationary pressures, members noted that wages growth had not reached levels that would
 be inconsistent with the inflation target. Moreover, some further rise in wages growth would not
 necessarily be cause for concern, given the flexible and medium-term nature of the inflation target, so
 long as inflation expectations remained well anchored. Institutional features of the Australian labour
 market also made a sharp rise in wages less likely than in other economies, which would help smooth the
 cycle in wages growth until some of the tightness of the labour market lessened.
External inflationary pressures might ease quickly given that the global outlook had deteriorated.
 Commodity prices had generally declined and supply chain pressures had begun to ease. Increases in policy
 rates in advanced economies were likely to entail a period of significantly lower output growth, which
 would be important for reducing global inflationary pressures.
Finally, members noted that, in an uncertain environment, there was an argument to slow the adjustment of
 policy for a time to assess the effects of the significant increases in interest rates to date and the
 evolving economic outlook. Drawing out policy adjustments would also help to keep public attention
 focused for a longer period on the Board’s resolve to return inflation to target. While some other
 central banks had been increasing policy by larger increments, policymaking bodies in these central banks
 met less frequently than the Reserve Bank Board.
Members acknowledged that the arguments were finely balanced. They concluded, though, that the case to
 increase the cash rate by 25 basis points at the present meeting was the stronger one. A smaller
 increase than that agreed at preceding meetings was warranted given that the cash rate had been increased
 substantially in a short period of time and the full effect of that increase lay ahead. Members also
 recognised the benefits of a smaller increase while the incoming data on both the global and domestic
 economy were assessed. At the same time, the Board agreed on the importance of returning inflation to
 target and the need to establish a more sustainable balance of demand and supply in the Australian
 economy. This was likely to require further increases in interest rates over the period ahead.
The Board will continue to monitor the global economy, household spending and wage- and price-setting
 behaviour closely. The size and timing of future interest rate increases will continue to be determined
 by the incoming data and the Board’s assessment of the outlook for inflation and the labour market.
 The Board remains resolute in its determination to return inflation to target and will do what is
 necessary to achieve that outcome.
The decision
The Board decided to increase the cash rate target by 25 basis points to 2.60 per cent. It
 also increased the interest rate on Exchange Settlement balances by 25 basis points to
 2.50 per cent.
