BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Minutes
TITLE: 1 February 2022
DATE: 01/02/2022
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/monetary-policy/rba-board-minutes/2022/2022-02-01.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Videoconference – 1 February 2022
Members present
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM,
 Wendy Craik AM, Ian Harper AO, Carolyn Hewson AO, Steven Kennedy PSM,
 Carol Schwartz AO, Alison Watkins AM
Others participating
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial
 Markets)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Penelope Smith (Deputy Secretary)
Alexandra Heath (Head, International Department), Bradley Jones (Head, Economic Analysis Department),
 Marion Kohler (Head, Domestic Markets Department)
International economic developments
Members commenced their discussion of international developments by noting that global economic growth had
 gathered momentum in the second half of 2021, ahead of the outbreak of the Omicron variant of
COVID-19
. The global recovery was most progressed in advanced economies, where
 activity had returned to – or, in some cases, exceeded – its pre-pandemic level. In these
 economies, household balance sheets and labour market conditions were strong, fiscal and monetary
 policies remained supportive and vaccination coverage was generally high. Activity across much of Asia
 had also rebounded in late 2021, following the disruption of the midyear outbreak of the Delta variant.
 In China, economic activity had already rebounded to its pre-pandemic trajectory in 2020, although output
 growth had been subdued by historical standards throughout most of 2021. Growth in China had picked up in
 the December quarter as the drag from earlier policy tightening measures abated.
Members noted that the outlook for global output growth remained favourable, with the economies of
 Australia's major trading partners expected to grow at an above-average rate in 2022. While the rapid
 spread of the Omicron variant had disrupted global activity, including supply chains, the effects on
 demand appeared to be less substantial than in earlier outbreaks. In most advanced economies, GDP was
 forecast to return to its pre-pandemic path in 2022, and the Chinese economy was expected to continue
 growing around its pre-pandemic trend through the year. Strong growth was forecast for emerging market
 economies in 2022, although for many this was unlikely to be sufficient to return GDP to its pre-pandemic
 path.
Members noted that inflation in many economies had persisted at multi-year highs and broadened in scope in
 prior months to include the prices of services as well as goods as restrictions had eased. Global supply
 chains remained under pressure. In addition, outbreaks of
COVID-19
had
 continued to disrupt labour supply and distribution networks at a time of strong household consumption in
 advanced economies. Energy and non-energy commodity prices had risen further in prior months and, in some
 economies, inventories remained low across a number of sectors, including retail. Even so, some sources
 of upstream price pressure, such as shipping costs and semiconductor prices, had stabilised or abated.
 Central banks had recently raised their inflation forecasts for 2022; however, most expected inflation to
 moderate over the course of the coming year and had emphasised the considerable uncertainty surrounding
 the outlook. Members noted that key uncertainties for the global inflation outlook included whether, and
 how quickly, global consumption patterns normalise, and whether inflationary pressures ease in an
 environment of low unemployment and negative real interest rates.
Labour markets in advanced economies had continued to recover in prior months and the outlook remained
 strong. Job vacancies remained high and solid employment growth had driven unemployment rates down to
 around the low levels prevailing before the onset of the pandemic. Yet outcomes for wages growth had
 differed across economies. Wages growth had picked up most sharply in the United States and the United
 Kingdom, where labour demand had been strong but participation rates had still been well below
 pre-pandemic levels. In addition to paying higher wages, an increasing proportion of firms in these
 countries had been paying bonuses and offering other incentives to attract and retain employees. By
 contrast, wages growth had remained subdued in a number of countries where unemployment rates had been
 low but labour supply had largely recovered, including in the euro area, Canada and Australia.
Members concluded their discussion of international economic conditions by taking stock of upside and
 downside risks to the global outlook. Much would continue to depend on health-related developments.
 Favourable health outcomes could result in much stronger private demand, while the emergence of a more
 severe strain of
COVID-19
would be expected to further disrupt supply
 chains, labour supply and economic activity more generally. Another risk was that the upswing in global
 inflation turned out to be larger and/or more persistent than currently anticipated by central banks and
 market participants. This could trigger a significant tightening in monetary policy and global financial
 conditions. The complexity of medium-term policy challenges in China, together with the possibility of
 broader and more frequent lockdowns in response to
COVID-19
outbreaks, meant
 that risks remained skewed to the downside there. An increase in geopolitical tensions was also noted as
 a downside risk to the global outlook.
Domestic economic developments
Turning to domestic economic conditions, members observed that the Australian economy had established
 solid momentum prior to the Omicron outbreak. Economic activity had bounced back strongly in the December
 quarter, led by a surge in household spending as restrictions relating to the Delta outbreak in the
 second half of 2021 were eased. Conditions in the labour market had also rebounded quickly.
Members discussed how the spread of the Omicron variant would slow growth in the March quarter, but agreed
 that it was likely to have a much smaller impact on economic activity than previous waves of
COVID-19
. High vaccination rates in Australia and less severe health outcomes
 associated with the Omicron variant had reduced the need for widespread lockdowns. As of late January,
 case numbers were starting to trend lower and hospitalisations appeared to have peaked. Timely measures
 of household spending suggested that consumption had been relatively resilient during the outbreak. This
 was despite a drop in mobility, which reflected the effects of illness, isolation requirements, some
 restrictions on activity and people voluntarily reducing their social interaction to reduce the risk of
 infection. Hours worked, more so than employment, were expected to bear much of the adjustment to the
 disruption caused by the Omicron outbreak.
GDP growth was forecast to strengthen through the middle of the year, with broad-based growth in domestic
 demand sustained across the forecast period. GDP was estimated to have grown by 5 per cent over
 2021, and it was forecast to grow by around 4¼ per cent over 2022 and 2 per cent over
 2023; the resulting level of output was expected to be higher over the forecast period than had been
 forecast three months earlier. Household consumption was expected to be supported by strong growth in
 labour income and the large increase in household wealth over prior years. The household saving ratio was
 expected to decline over the forecast period, but remain higher than its average level in the years prior
 to the pandemic. Members noted that an important source of uncertainty surrounded households' use of
 savings accumulated during the pandemic and how consumption would respond to the increase in household
 wealth.
Members discussed the outlook for private and public investment, which remained strong. A high level of
 dwelling investment was expected to be sustained during the forecast period, reflecting a large pipeline
 of work. The recovery in non-mining business investment that had been under way before the Delta outbreak
 was expected to continue, supported by tax incentives, strong corporate balance sheets and the broader
 recovery in demand conditions. Federal and state midyear budgets had also pointed to a stronger outlook
 for public investment and public consumption than previously foreshadowed. However, information from the
 Bank's liaison program suggested that capacity constraints – including difficulties in sourcing
 building materials, labour shortages and planning bottlenecks – could slow the roll-out of some
 investment projects.
Turning to the outlook for the labour market, members noted that employment had recovered more quickly
 than previously expected. In December, employment was higher and the unemployment rate lower than
 pre-Delta levels. The unemployment rate had declined by 1 percentage point to 4.2 per cent
 in the final two months of 2021, and underemployment had declined further to reach its lowest rate in
 13 years in December. Labour force participation had also rebounded to around historically high
 levels.
The Omicron outbreak was expected to have caused average hours worked to decline significantly in January
 as employees recovered from illness or self-isolated. However, employment was expected to be less
 affected. Looking beyond the near term, strong demand for labour was forecast to translate into a lower
 unemployment rate, as well as a declining rate of underemployment as firms boosted the working hours of
 existing staff to meet demand. The central forecast was for the unemployment rate to fall below
 4 per cent later in 2022 and to be around 3¾ per cent at the end of 2023. Members
 noted that the unemployment rate had not been sustained below 4 per cent in Australia since the
 early 1970s.
Members noted that wages growth had picked up, but only to the subdued rates prevailing before the
 pandemic. A further pick-up in wages growth was expected in response to the tightening in the labour
 market, particularly for employees whose wages are set under individual agreements. However, the increase
 in overall wages growth was anticipated to be gradual in light of the inertia in institutional
 wage-setting practices, including in public and private enterprise agreements. The outlook for broader
 measures of employee earnings growth had been upgraded more substantially than for base wages. This
 reflected an expected increase in bonus payments, a larger share of hours being worked at overtime rates,
 and a pick-up in job turnover as workers become more willing to change jobs for higher pay. Members
 concurred that there was considerable uncertainty about the response of labour costs to historically low
 levels of unemployment and the reopening of the international border.
Members noted that inflation had picked up more quickly than expected and price pressures had broadened.
 Headline CPI inflation had increased to 3.5 per cent over the year to the December quarter,
 largely reflecting higher fuel prices, higher prices for newly constructed homes and disruptions to
 supply chains (including for imported durable goods). In underlying terms, inflation had picked up to
 2.6 per cent. Members noted that this was the first time in more than seven years that
 underlying inflation had been around the midpoint of the target range. Members observed that,
 nonetheless, inflation in Australia remained well below that in many other advanced economies and the
 behaviour of prices and wages in Australia differed in important ways from the experience in other
 countries. Goods price inflation in Australia was lower than elsewhere (particularly the United States)
 and Australia had been less affected by increases in wholesale gas and electricity prices. Rents, which
 comprise a large share of the consumer price index, remained relatively subdued in Australia, which was
 not the case in other countries. Wages growth in Australia was also substantially lower than in the
 United States and the United Kingdom, where participation rates had not recovered to a similar extent.
Members discussed the upward revision to the outlook for inflation. The central forecast was for
 underlying inflation to increase to around 3¼ per cent in mid-2022, before declining to around
 2¾ per cent over 2023. Near-term inflation outcomes were forecast to be boosted by the
 pass-through of upstream cost pressures to consumers, particularly for building materials and retail
 goods. The underlying drivers of inflation were expected to shift later in 2022, with broader
 inflationary pressures emerging, including through a pick-up in labour costs. Members observed that there
 were a number of sources of uncertainty surrounding the outlook for inflation, including the persistence
 of price changes in response to disruptions to global and domestic supply chains, how quickly consumption
 patterns might normalise, and how prices would respond as the remaining spare capacity in the economy is
 absorbed.
Members concluded their discussion of the domestic economy by considering two alternative scenarios that
 were illustrative of the ongoing uncertainty around health outcomes and household consumption. In the
 upside scenario, better-than-assumed health outcomes would boost households' confidence and
 willingness to spend out of accumulated savings; this would also support private investment. Stronger
 activity would increase the demand for labour, resulting in a decline in the unemployment rate to around
 3 per cent by the end of the forecast period. Inflation would be noticeably higher in this
 scenario as the economy's resources would be fully employed. Alternatively, a weaker trajectory could
 eventuate, owing to a combination of heightened health-related risk aversion and a major negative health
 event such as the emergence of a severe new variant of
COVID-19
. While both
 demand and supply would be adversely affected by the reintroduction of restrictions on activity and
 self-imposed restraint by individuals, labour supply could be particularly affected. In this scenario,
 the unemployment rate would remain above current levels throughout the forecast period. Persistent
 weakness in labour market conditions would be sufficient to keep inflation in the bottom half of the
 target range for most of the forecast period, although the impairment to the supply side of the economy
 would be expected to prevent an even larger decline in inflation.
International financial markets
Many central banks in advanced economies – including the Bank of England, Sveriges Riksbank, the
 Bank of Canada and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand (RBNZ) – had ceased their pandemic-related asset
 purchase programs in 2021 in response to economic conditions, including stronger and more persistent
 inflationary pressures than had been expected. Other central banks, including the US Federal Reserve and
 the European Central Bank, were expected to follow suit early in 2022. In addition, the Bank of England,
 Norges Bank and the RBNZ had already started to increase their policy rates in 2021. Members observed
 that the flow of data over the preceding two months had contributed to financial market participants
 raising their expectations for the path of policy rates over 2022 for most advanced economy central
 banks. The Federal Reserve and the Bank of Canada were expected to start raising their policy rates as
 early as March.
Financial markets expected the Federal Reserve to increase the federal funds rate by at least
 100 basis points over 2022. Members noted that the upward revision to the expected path of the
 federal funds rate had been particularly important for financial market developments since December. The
 Federal Reserve had indicated in December that it expected to cease its asset purchases by March 2022
 – previously the plan had been to stop in June 2022 – given the persistence of high inflation
 and further improvements in labour market conditions. However, following its meeting in January, the
 Federal Reserve indicated that it was likely to start running down its asset holdings sooner and faster
 than in previous episodes. It emphasised that the policy rate is regarded as the main tool for
 withdrawing policy stimulus and also indicated that the first increase in the federal funds rate could be
 as early as March.
Government bond yields in most advanced economies had risen notably since December. Most of the increase
 had occurred in real rates as market participants' expectations for withdrawal of monetary policy
 stimulus had increased, while longer-term inflation expectations had remained little changed around
 central banks' targets. Members noted that, despite recent increases, longer-term bond yields
 remained at historically low levels.
Corporate financing conditions remained accommodative internationally and in Australia, despite some
 tightening in line with rising government bond yields and declines in equity prices. The declines in
 equity prices had partly reflected the effect of higher sovereign bond yields – particularly on
 ‘high growth’ stocks – as well as rising geopolitical tensions.
In contrast to many advanced and emerging market economies, Chinese authorities had recently eased
 monetary policy by lowering reserve requirement ratios as well as some key policy rates. The authorities
 had also expressed a willingness to ease monetary policy further to support the real economy. Despite the
 broader loosening in financial conditions, some highly leveraged private Chinese property developers
 continued to face significant financial difficulties. Members noted that the process of resolving
 defaults would take time and that the authorities had expressed a preference to manage these problems by
 allowing firms with sound finances to take over the projects of distressed property developers.
 Spillovers to broader financial markets had remained limited and the authorities were expected to remain
 focused on alleviating any potential flow-on to wider financial conditions.
Domestic financial markets
In Australia, money market rates had risen slightly over preceding weeks. However, they remained close to
 historical lows, reflecting the Bank's policy measures. Market participants expected the cash rate to
 increase to a little over 1 per cent by the end of 2022 and to around 2 per cent by
 the end of 2023. Members noted that this was similar to market expectations for policy rates in the
 United States, despite significant differences in wages growth and inflationary pressures between the two
 countries. Members also observed that market economists had brought forward their expectations for cash
 rate increases, with most now expecting the first increase towards the latter part of 2022.
Members noted that, following the strong labour force data and CPI releases in January, all market
 economists surveyed by the Bank had expected the Bank to cease bond purchases in February 2022. The Bank
 held 42 per cent of outstanding Australian Government Securities in the target purchase range
 and 24 per cent of outstanding securities issued by the states and territories in the target
 purchase range.
Overall, the Bank's holdings of Australian Government Securities as a share of the stock outstanding
 were in the range of international experience. Members noted that after a period of weakness in the
 latter part of October and early November, some measures of bond market functioning, such as bid-offer
 spreads, had improved. Members noted that stock lending from the Bank's bond holdings had increased
 significantly over prior months, especially of bonds in the three-year futures basket (of which the Bank
 holds a sizeable share); this lending was supporting the functioning of the government bond market.
 Measures for the bond futures market suggested relatively low levels of liquidity at times, especially
 for the three-year futures contract.
Government bond yields in Australia had risen alongside US treasury yields in early 2022. As a result, the
 difference between bond yields in Australia and in the United States had remained broadly unchanged over
 the preceding two months. The Australian dollar had traded towards the bottom of its recent range against
 the US dollar and in trade-weighted terms, and had depreciated since the beginning of 2021 despite
 an increase in commodity prices over the period.
Members noted that banks' funding costs remained at historic lows. Although yields on bank bonds had
 increased in late 2021, the bulk of banks' funding costs are linked to the three-month bank bill swap
 rate, which had remained very low. Outstanding lending rates had continued to drift downwards over recent
 months. While interest rates on new fixed-rate home loans had increased in line with swap rates in prior
 months, interest rates on new variable-rate basic home loans had decreased over this period.
Credit growth had picked up strongly over 2021, driven by strong demand for finance from households and
 businesses. In monthly terms, growth in credit to owner-occupiers had increased in late 2021, after
 easing over the preceding few months, while growth in credit to investors had continued to rise. Business
 credit had increased at a fast pace, driven by lending to large firms, while lending to small firms had
 been little changed. It was noted that these data largely predated the outbreak of the Omicron variant.
Considerations for monetary policy
In considering the policy decision, members observed that the recent Omicron outbreak of
COVID-19
had affected the economy, but had not derailed the recovery. The
 Australian economy was resilient and spending was expected to pick up as case numbers trended lower. The
 economic outlook was being supported by household and business balance sheets that remain in generally
 good shape, strong business investment, a large pipeline of construction work and accommodative
 macroeconomic policy settings. The pandemic continued to be the main source of uncertainty surrounding
 the outlook for economic activity.
The labour market had recovered strongly, with the unemployment rate declining to its lowest level in more
 than a decade in December. Members noted that forward-looking indicators of labour demand remained
 strong, and the staff's central forecast would see the unemployment rate fall to levels not seen
 since the early 1970s. Wages growth had picked up, but only to the low rates prevailing prior to the
 onset of the pandemic. A further pick-up in wages growth was expected as the labour market continues to
 tighten. However, the pick-up was expected to be only gradual and there was uncertainty about the
 behaviour of wages as the international border re-opens and the unemployment rate declines to
 historically low levels.
Members observed that inflation had picked up more quickly than the Bank had expected, but was still lower
 than in many other countries. In year-ended terms, underlying inflation was expected to increase further
 over coming quarters. Members noted that some moderation in inflation was expected as supply problems
 were resolved. Over time, stronger growth in labour costs was expected to become the more important
 driver of inflation. The central forecast was for underlying inflation to be within the target band over
 both 2022 and 2023.
Members noted that financial conditions in Australia remained highly accommodative, and that the
 Bank's bond purchase program, the funding provided under the Term Funding Facility and the low level
 of interest rates were providing important support to the Australian economy as it recovers from the
 effects of the pandemic. Australian Government bond yields had risen in early 2022 alongside US treasury
 yields. The Australian dollar exchange rate was around its lows of the preceding year. The Australian
 bond market was continuing to function reasonably well, supported by the Bank's stock lending
 activities, although there had been some pressure points recently. This was evident around the three-year
 mark, where a gap had emerged between the price of physical bonds and the futures contract.
Housing prices had risen strongly over the preceding year, although the rate of increase had eased in some
 cities. Housing credit growth had been strong over 2021. Members continued to emphasise the importance of
 maintaining lending standards and borrowers having adequate buffers.
The Board had previously announced that it would make a decision about the bond purchase program at this
 meeting. Three possible options were discussed. The first option was to reduce the pace of purchases from
 mid-February with an expectation of a likely end point in May 2022. The second option was to reduce the
 pace of purchases and review it again in May 2022. The third option was to cease purchases altogether in
 mid-February. These options reflected the expectation that the economy would continue to bounce back. In
 discussing the options, members noted that the stimulus associated with the stock of bonds already
 purchased in the program would continue to provide significant support to the economy for some time.
Members reviewed the previously agreed criteria that guided the bond purchase program – namely, the
 actions of other central banks, the functioning of the Australian bond market, and actual and expected
 progress towards the Board's goals for employment and inflation. Most other central banks had already
 completed their bond-buying programs, or would do so soon. Members noted the staff's assessment that
 although the Australian bond market could accommodate further bond purchases by the Bank, there would be
 a rising probability of additional strains emerging.
Most importantly, since November 2021 better-than-expected progress towards the Board's goals had been
 made. Members observed that the achievement of the goals was within sight for the first time in several
 years. The unemployment rate was at its lowest level since 2008 and underlying inflation was in the
 middle of the target range for the first time since 2014. In these circumstances, members agreed that it
 was the right time to draw the bond purchase program to a close.
Members then discussed the reinvestment of the proceeds of maturing bonds. They noted that, in Australia,
 there are large gaps in the maturity profile of government bonds, which is not the case in many other
 countries. The next maturity of an Australian Government bond is not until July 2022, which provides the
 Board with additional time to make a decision. Members agreed that a decision about reinvestment would be
 made in May 2022, with the key considerations being the state of the economy and the outlook for
 inflation and unemployment.
Turning to the decision for the cash rate, members remained committed to maintaining highly supportive
 monetary conditions to achieve the objectives of a return to full employment and inflation consistent
 with the target. As previously agreed, the Board will not increase the cash rate until actual inflation
 is sustainably within the 2 to 3 per cent target band. While inflation had picked up,
 members agreed it was too early to conclude that it was sustainably within the target band. There were
 uncertainties about how persistent the pick-up in inflation would be as supply-side problems were
 resolved. Wages growth also remained modest and it was likely to be some time before aggregate wages
 growth would be at a rate consistent with inflation being sustainably at target. The Board is prepared to
 be patient as it monitors how the various factors affecting inflation in Australia evolve.
The decision
The Board decided upon the following policy settings:
maintain the cash rate target at 10 basis points and the interest rate on Exchange Settlement
 balances at zero per cent
cease further purchases of government securities under the bond purchase program, with the final
 purchases to take place on 10 February 2022.
