BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Minutes
TITLE: 3 May 2022
DATE: 03/05/2022
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/monetary-policy/rba-board-minutes/2022/2022-05-03.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Sydney – 3 May 2022
Members present
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Michele Bullock (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM,
 Wendy Craik AM, Ian Harper AO, Carolyn Hewson AO,
 Steven Kennedy PSM, Carol Schwartz AO, Alison Watkins AM
Others present
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial
 Markets)
Penelope Smith (Deputy Secretary)
Alexandra Heath (Head, International Department), Bradley Jones (Head, Economic Analysis
 Department), Marion Kohler (Head, Domestic Markets Department)
International economic developments
Members commenced their discussion of international developments by noting that inflation had risen
 further in recent months, and in many advanced economies was higher than it had been in several decades.
 The strong recovery in global demand, ongoing disruptions to global supply chains and increases in
 commodity prices following Russia's invasion of Ukraine had contributed to inflation significantly
 exceeding earlier forecasts and being well above central banks' targets. As a result, central banks
 had hastened the pace at which they were withdrawing policy accommodation. Members noted that inflation
 developments over prior months had clouded the global outlook and, alongside the effects of the war in
 Ukraine, had prompted a significant downgrade in global growth expectations.
Real wages in advanced economies had fallen over the preceding year as consumer prices increased by more
 than wages despite the tightening in labour markets. Members noted that this reduction in household
 purchasing power had contributed to sharp falls in consumer sentiment in a number of economies –
 particularly in the euro area and the United Kingdom, where electricity and gas prices had risen
 markedly. Further declines in real wages were likely as prices continued to increase more rapidly than
 wages. Members observed that this created additional uncertainty about the outlook for household
 consumption, despite some countries employing fiscal measures to address cost-of-living pressures and
 household balance sheets generally being in good shape. The effects on consumption from the sharp
 increases in food and energy prices were likely to be largest for low-income households, particularly in
 commodity-importing economies.
Members noted that commodity prices remained high and volatile. The disruptions to global energy supplies
 resulting from Russia's invasion of Ukraine had occurred at a time when supply chains were already
 strained, in large part owing to strong underlying demand; global shipping costs had risen further as oil
 prices increased. While analysts' forecasts and market pricing had indicated that energy and
 non-energy commodity prices were expected to decline over the course of 2022, this was to levels that
 were still substantially higher than before the war. Prices for some agricultural products, particularly
 wheat, had risen further. A sharp increase in fertiliser prices had raised concerns about rationing by
 farmers, which could depress agricultural output and sustain upward pressure on some food prices in the
 period ahead. Other commodity price movements had been mixed and most metals prices had eased from recent
 highs.
Members agreed that the economic outlook in China had become significantly more challenging. The risk of
 further disruptions to global goods supply had increased, as restrictions on mobility were imposed in
 parts of China following recent outbreaks of
COVID-19
. The authorities had
 continued with actions to suppress the virus while easing fiscal and monetary policy in support of the
 recently announced growth target for 2022. Timely indicators suggested that mobility restrictions were
 weighing on consumer spending, manufacturing activity and movements through Chinese ports. And while the
 effects on Chinese exports had been modest to date, members noted that disruptions to goods production
 and distribution networks would become more evident if there were further outbreaks of
COVID-19
. In such an event, there would be additional pressure on global
 supply chains and the price pressures for globally traded goods would persist.
Members observed that the recent downgrade to the outlook for global growth had followed a strong rebound
 in activity. In advanced economies, this strength had been underpinned by the relaxation of mobility
 restrictions and accommodative policy settings. Consumption of goods remained strong, even as the
 consumption of services normalised. The recovery in economic activity in many emerging market economies
 was well underway, but less advanced. The robust recovery in activity in many advanced economies had seen
 unemployment rates decline to around generational lows and high levels of job vacancies indicated strong
 ongoing demand for labour. Economies with very tight labour markets, such as the United States and the
 United Kingdom, were experiencing particularly rapid increases in labour costs and broad-based price
 pressures.
Domestic economic developments
Turning to domestic economic conditions, members observed that price pressures were intensifying and there
 was upward pressure on wages. Activity and conditions in the labour market had been resilient in the face
 of global and domestic supply shocks, and strong underlying momentum was expected to be sustained over
 the course of the year.
The key domestic development since the previous meeting was that inflation had increased to its highest
 rate in many years. Headline inflation was 2.1 per cent in the March quarter and
 5.1 per cent over the year. Fuel and new dwelling costs accounted for around half of the
 quarterly increase. Trimmed mean inflation had increased to 1.4 per cent in the quarter and
 3.7 per cent in year-ended terms. This increase in underlying inflation was consistent with a
 broadening of inflationary pressures.
Information from the Bank's liaison program indicated that upstream price pressures were increasingly
 being passed on to final consumer prices of many goods, as supply chain pressures persisted and demand
 remained strong. Members noted it was possible that firms' price-setting behaviours were undergoing a
 change from the pre-pandemic period, with businesses becoming more confident that raising prices would
 not significantly reduce demand or erode their competitive position.
The forecasts for inflation had been revised materially higher compared with those presented three months
 earlier. Headline inflation was expected to peak at around 6 per cent in year-ended terms, and
 trimmed mean inflation at around 4¾ per cent, in the second half of the year. Headline
 inflation was expected to be boosted by large increases in the prices of fuel and new dwellings over the
 remainder of 2022, and to remain higher than underlying inflation for some time. As supply-side
 disruptions eased, both headline and underlying inflation were forecast to moderate to around the top of
 the 2 to 3 per cent target range by mid-2024. The underlying drivers of inflation were
 anticipated to evolve over the forecast period, with the effects of global supply-side disruptions and
 dwelling cost inflation easing while domestic labour costs picked up. These forecasts were based on an
 assumption of further increases in interest rates, in line with expectations derived from surveys of
 professional economists and financial market pricing.
In their discussion of the labour market, members noted that conditions had strengthened further since the
 start of the year and were the tightest in many years. The unemployment rate had been steady in March but
 had declined over the first quarter as a whole, and the participation rate and employment-to-population
 ratio were both at historically high levels. High vacancy rates and other leading indicators of labour
 demand suggested that employment growth was likely to remain strong over the remainder of the year. As a
 result, the unemployment rate was forecast to decline to around 3½ per cent in early 2023, a
 little lower than previously expected, and to remain around this level for some time. This would be the
 lowest rate of unemployment in almost half a century.
Members observed that information received over the preceding month, particularly through the Bank's
 liaison program, had indicated that labour costs were rising at a faster pace and that this was likely to
 continue. Liaison indicated that many firms were having difficulty hiring workers with the right skills.
 Given the tight labour market and increase in job mobility, more firms were having to pay higher wages to
 attract and retain staff, and labour costs were picking up at a faster rate than over the preceding year.
 Looking ahead, growth in the Wage Price Index (WPI) was forecast to be around 3¾ per cent by
 the end of the forecast period, which would be the fastest pace since 2012. The outlook for broader
 measures of labour costs had also been revised up; average earnings were expected to increase at a faster
 pace than the WPI, as firms turned to bonuses, allowances and other measures to attract and retain
 workers. While the inertia arising from multi-year enterprise agreements and current public sector wages
 policies would continue to weigh on aggregate wages growth in the near term, a period of faster growth in
 labour costs overall was in prospect.
Turning to activity, the disruptions of the Omicron outbreak and the east coast floods had caused the
 economic recovery to slow in the March quarter. However, strong growth was expected to resume over the
 remainder of the year as household spending patterns continued to normalise and incomes rose. The
 significant increase in commodity prices was set to see the terms of trade peak later and at a higher
 level than previously assumed, boosting national income. Overall, the growth outlook remained positive
 for the current and subsequent year. Output was expected to expand by 4¼ per cent in 2022, in
 line with previous forecasts. Growth was then expected to moderate to 2 per cent in 2023 as the
 recovery matured and the extraordinary policy support put in place during the pandemic was withdrawn.
Timely indicators suggested that household consumption had been resilient to disruptions in the March
 quarter. The outlook was for consumption to grow at a solid pace in the current and subsequent year,
 supported by strong household balance sheets and a further increase in disposable income. The household
 saving rate, which was still high, was expected to decline over coming years. However, higher interest
 rates, higher inflation and slower growth in household wealth (including housing prices) were expected to
 weigh on consumer spending in the period ahead. Members also noted that the pressure on household budgets
 from recent increases in fuel and food prices would be felt most acutely by lower-income households,
 which typically have smaller savings buffers and spend a larger share of their income on essential items.
The outlook for dwelling and business investment remained positive, although capacity constraints related
 to materials and skilled labour shortages was a growing challenge for firms. Dwelling investment had been
 curtailed by supply disruptions, including poor weather conditions on the east coast, but was expected to
 remain at a high level given the large pipeline of work. Non-mining business investment had also been
 disrupted by supply issues in late 2021, but was expected to pick up momentum in the period ahead. Mining
 investment had remained subdued despite the strength in commodity prices; however, a modest increase was
 expected over the forecast period, owing to sustaining investment for some major iron ore and energy
 projects, as well as increased exploration and production for some metals and minerals. The pipeline of
 public engineering work was anticipated to support a high level of public investment for several years.
Members noted that housing market conditions had become more varied across the country in preceding
 months. Prices had declined a little in Sydney and Melbourne alongside falling auction volumes and
 clearance rates. However, in most other capital cities and regional areas, price growth remained strong,
 supported by a low number of properties for sale. Growth in advertised rents had also been particularly
 strong in these parts of the country, consistent with very low vacancy rates. The flooding events in
 recent months were expected to add short-term pressure to rental markets in affected regions on the east
 coast.
Public spending had declined at the end of 2021, but was expected to increase strongly over the first half
 of 2022 and remain at a high level over the forecast period, in line with projections in the latest state
 government updates and the Australian Government Budget.
Members noted that the recovery in services trade would boost both exports and imports, although overall
 net trade was expected to reduce output growth slightly over the forecast period. Resource exports had
 been adversely affected over the second half of 2021 by weather and maintenance-related disruptions, and
 manufactured exports continued to be affected by global supply-chain disruptions. The recent strength in
 rural exports was expected to continue on account of favourable growing conditions and strong global
 demand for grains amid supply disruptions in Eastern Europe. A recovery in travel and education exports
 was in train following the reopening of Australia's international border. Import volumes were
 expected to increase at a solid pace in the period ahead, in line with the strength in domestic demand
 and recovery in travel imports.
Members concluded their discussion of the outlook by noting several sources of risk and uncertainty.
 Globally, it remained uncertain how and when supply-side problems would be resolved. Recent events
 – including Russia's invasion of Ukraine and the responses to
COVID-19
outbreaks in China – posed additional upside risks to inflation
 and downside risks to global growth. Another source of uncertainty related to how household spending in
 advanced economies, including in Australia, would respond to a period of rising interest rates and the
 decline in real wages. Some Australian households had incurred more debt than previously and many had
 never experienced rising interest rates. Housing prices in Australia could also be more sensitive to
 rising interest rates than assumed, which would be likely to result in lower household wealth and
 consumption. At the same time, there was also potential for consumer spending in Australia to be stronger
 than forecast, given that households in aggregate had not begun to draw down on the savings accumulated
 during the pandemic and the high household saving rate could normalise more quickly than assumed. Another
 source of domestic uncertainty related to the behaviour of prices and labour costs at unusually low
 levels of unemployment, given the limited recent historical experience to draw on. The extent to which
 the reopening of the international border would alleviate acute areas of labour shortages was also
 uncertain, given that the border reopening would also add to demand in the economy.
International financial markets
Global financial conditions had become less accommodative over the preceding month, reflecting
 surprisingly high inflation outcomes and upward revisions to the expected paths of policy rates for most
 advanced economies.
Most central banks had begun to withdraw some of the substantial monetary stimulus that had been put in
 place in response to the pandemic. Several central banks had raised their policy rates. The Bank of
 Canada and the Reserve Bank of New Zealand had both raised their policy rates by 50 basis points
 during the preceding month. Members noted that Sveriges Riksbank had increased its policy rate by
 25 basis points, in response to higher-than-expected inflation, having indicated as recently as
 February that it did not expect to increase its policy rate until at least 2024. A number of other
 central banks – including the US Federal Reserve and the Bank of England – were expected to
 raise their policy rates again in early May. Members noted that expectations for the European Central
 Bank's first rate increase had been brought forward and that many market participants thought this
 could occur as early as July.
Several central banks in advanced economies had indicated that they were seeking to return policy rates to
 a neutral setting quickly, and may increase policy rates further thereafter, to avoid the risk of a rise
 in longer-term inflation expectations to levels that would be inconsistent with their inflation targets.
 Members noted that there was significant uncertainty around estimates of what level of policy rates would
 be consistent with a neutral setting and that these estimates could change over time.
In addition, several central banks had decided to allow their asset portfolios to decline gradually as
 bonds matured, or they planned to start that process soon. The US Federal Reserve had indicated that it
 was likely to start allowing its bond holdings to begin declining following its May meeting at a faster
 pace than market participants had expected earlier in 2022. By contrast, the European Central Bank had
 indicated that it was likely to cease asset purchases in July, but would maintain the size of the
 portfolio for an extended period after it had commenced raising its policy rate. The Bank of Japan had
 increased its purchases of 10-year government bonds to maintain its target of 0 ± 25 basis points
 for 10-year yields.
Since the beginning of the year, government bond yields had risen substantially, driven by expectations of
 higher inflation and the withdrawal of monetary policy stimulus. The relatively large increase in US
 Treasury yields had contributed to a significant appreciation of the US dollar since the beginning
 of the year, while the relative stability of yields on Japanese Government bonds had contributed to a
 depreciation of the yen. Members noted that the Australian dollar had also depreciated since the previous
 meeting, but had remained above its levels at the beginning of the year on a trade-weighted basis.
Credit spreads on corporate debt had increased, although investors expected borrowers to be generally well
 placed to withstand higher interest rates. Most major equity markets had declined, reflecting revisions
 to the expected path of monetary policies and a deterioration in the near-term outlook for growth in
 China. Equity prices in Australia had been little changed since the beginning of the year, as the
 resources sector had benefited from the high level of commodity prices.
Monetary policy in China had been eased a little further amid headwinds to growth. Chinese equity markets
 had declined significantly since the start of the year and the renminbi had depreciated noticeably over
 the preceding month; this was consistent with the declining differential between interest rates in China
 and the United States, and signs that growth in China had slowed. Members also noted that there had been
 a net outflow of foreign portfolio investor capital from China in 2022.
Domestic financial markets
Domestic financial conditions had remained very accommodative, although a range of market interest rates
 had risen further. Yields on 10-year Australian Government Securities had risen by around 40 basis
 points since the previous meeting, exceeding 3 per cent for the first time since 2015. Members
 observed that market participants had brought forward their expectations for an increase in the cash rate
 following the Board's decision at the April meeting, the minutes from that meeting and the
 higher-than-expected CPI outcome. Market pricing implied expectations of an increase in the cash rate of
 at least 15 basis points at the present meeting, and a further 25 basis point increase in June.
 Market participants expected the cash rate to increase to around 2½ per cent by the end of
 2022. Most market analysts also expected an increase in the cash rate target at the present and
 subsequent meetings.
Wholesale funding costs for banks (which are linked to money market interest rates) had risen, but
 banks' overall funding costs and lending rates had remained low. The sharp rise in long-term yields
 had also seen fixed rates for new loans rise further, although competitive pressures had seen both new
 and average outstanding variable mortgage rates drift down to new lows. Growth in total credit had
 remained close to its fastest pace of the preceding decade, and demand for housing finance had remained
 robust. Growth in housing credit to owner-occupiers had eased slightly, although growth in credit to
 housing investors had picked up further. Growth in business debt had remained high, driven by the
 borrowing of larger firms. Members noted the importance of banks maintaining their lending standards.
Considerations for monetary policy
In considering the policy decision, members noted the underlying strength of the Australian economy and
 its ongoing resilience. The monetary and fiscal policy measures that had been put in place to support the
 economy through the pandemic, alongside the rapid development of
COVID-19
vaccines, had contributed to this positive outcome.
The Australian economy was being supported by household and business balance sheets that were generally in
 good shape, an upswing in business investment and a large pipeline of construction work. Macroeconomic
 policy settings also remained supportive of growth and national income was being boosted by higher
 commodity prices.
The resilience of the Australian economy was particularly evident in the labour market. Members noted that
 the unemployment rate had declined over prior months to multi-decade lows and labour force participation
 had increased to a record high. The Bank's central forecast was for a further decline in the
 unemployment rate to around 3½ per cent by early 2023. Members noted that aggregate wages
 growth had been subdued during 2021 and was no higher than prior to the pandemic. However, more timely
 evidence from liaison and business surveys indicated that labour costs were rising in a tight labour
 market and a further pick-up was likely over the period ahead.
Inflation in the March quarter had increased substantially and was above the target range of 2 to
 3 per cent. Although the rise in inflation largely reflected global factors, members noted that
 strong domestic demand and capacity constraints were also playing a role. This was evident in the
 broadening of inflationary pressures, with firms more prepared to pass through cost increases to consumer
 prices. Inflation was expected to increase further in the near term but decline back towards the top of
 the target range by mid-2024 as supply-side disruptions are resolved. These forecasts were based on a
 technical assumption of the cash rate increasing to around 1¾ per cent by the end of 2022 and
 around 2½ per cent by the end of 2023.
The Board considered whether the condition that it had earlier set for an increase in the cash rate had
 been met. This was for actual inflation to be sustainably within the 2 to 3 per cent
 target range, which was likely to require a faster rate of wages growth than had been experienced over
 the preceding years.
Inflation was now above the target and was not forecast to return to the target range until mid-to-late
 2024. While the significant rise in inflation had been largely the result of global factors, which were
 likely to have a more temporary effect on inflation, the flow of information on inflation and wages over
 the preceding month had been consistent with more persistent inflationary pressures arising from limited
 spare capacity in the domestic economy. Members observed that it would be more difficult to return
 inflation to the target if the inflation psychology in Australia were to shift in an enduring way.
Members considered whether it was necessary to wait for March quarter data on the Wage Price Index and
 broader measures of wages growth from the national accounts to be published. They agreed that this
 information would be helpful; however, the recent evidence on wages growth from the Bank's liaison
 and business surveys was clear.
Members agreed that the condition the Board had set to increase the cash rate had been met. They also
 agreed that further increases in interest rates would likely be required to ensure that inflation in
 Australia returns to the target over time. In making its decisions, the Board agreed that it will
 continue to be guided by the evidence on both inflation and the labour market, while noting that
 significant uncertainties remain.
Globally, it was not yet clear how the various supply-side problems will be resolved. Domestically, there
 was uncertainty about how household spending would respond to the erosion of real wages, as wages have
 not kept pace with consumer prices. There is no contemporary experience as to how labour costs and prices
 in Australia would behave at an unemployment rate below 4 per cent. Members also considered how
 households would respond to rising interest rates, given the high level of household debt and the
 significant increases in financial buffers over the preceding couple of years. The Board will continue to
 monitor these and other issues closely as it determines the timing and extent of future interest rate
 increases.
Members considered three options for the size of the rate increase at the present meeting – raising
 the cash rate by 15 basis points, 25 basis points or 40 basis points. Members agreed that
 raising the cash rate by 15 basis points was not the preferred option given that policy was very
 stimulatory and that it was highly probable that further rate rises would be required. A 15 basis
 point increase would also be inconsistent with the historical practice of changing the cash rate in
 increments of at least 25 basis points. An argument for an increase of 40 basis points could be
 made given the upside risks to inflation and the current very low level of interest rates. However,
 members agreed that the preferred option was 25 basis points. A move of this size would help signal
 that the Board was now returning to normal operating procedures after the extraordinary period of the
 pandemic. Given that the Board meets monthly, it would have the opportunity to review the setting of
 interest rates again within a relatively short period of time, based on additional information.
Members also discussed the reinvestment strategy for bond maturities of the stock of bonds purchased by
 the Bank during the pandemic. Although only a small value of government bonds held by the Bank would be
 maturing in 2022, the value of maturing bonds held by the Bank would start to rise with the April 2023
 bond maturity.
One option was to reinvest bonds as they matured, which would maintain the stimulus associated with the
 stock of bonds held by the Bank, but would be inconsistent with the strength of the economy and the high
 level of inflation. By contrast, the option of not reinvesting bonds as they matured would mean the
 stimulus associated with bond purchases would be removed gradually and predictably. Members also noted
 that, while selling bonds would remove the stimulus provided by the Bank's balance sheet more
 quickly, that effect would be modest compared with the effect of increases in the cash rate. Moreover,
 the Bank's balance sheet would start to diminish quite quickly in 2023 as a significant share of the
 Term Funding Facility would roll off by September 2023, and the remainder would roll off by June 2024.
The Board decided that it would not reinvest the proceeds of maturing government bonds, consistent with
 the decision to start withdrawing from extraordinary monetary policy settings. However, the Board did not
 currently plan for the Bank to sell the government bonds it had purchased during the pandemic and it
 intended to allow the portfolio to run down in a predictable way as bonds mature. While contributing to
 the withdrawal of monetary stimulus, this would also recognise that the cash rate remains the primary
 tool for achieving the desired stance of monetary policy.
Members noted that in some years' time, after the Bank's balance sheet had reduced further, the
 Board would need to consider the broader issue of the longer-term optimal size and composition of the
 balance sheet, including the size of Exchange Settlement balances. In this context, it might consider the
 use of longer-term bond holdings, although this would be driven by the appropriate operating framework in
 light of evolving conditions and would not have implications for, or have a bearing on, the stance of
 monetary policy.
The decision
The Board decided to increase the cash rate target by 25 basis points to 35 basis points and to
 increase the interest rate on Exchange Settlement balances from zero per cent to 25 basis
 points.
The Board decided that the Bank would not reinvest the proceeds of maturing government bonds that it had
 purchased during the pandemic and had no current plans for the Bank to sell these bonds.
