BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Minutes
TITLE: 1 March 2022
DATE: 01/03/2022
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/monetary-policy/rba-board-minutes/2022/2022-03-01.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Hybrid – 1 March 2022
Members participating
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Guy Debelle (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM,
 Wendy Craik AM, Ian Harper AO, Carolyn Hewson AO,
 Steven Kennedy PSM, Carol Schwartz AO, Alison Watkins AM
Others participating
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial
 Markets), Tom Rosewall (Deputy Head, Economic Analysis Department)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), Penelope Smith (Deputy Secretary)
Alexandra Heath (Head, International Department), Bradley Jones (Head, Economic Analysis
 Department), Marion Kohler (Head, Domestic Markets Department)
International economic developments
Members commenced their discussion of international developments by focusing on Russia's invasion of
 Ukraine, observing that it was devastating for the people of Ukraine. The invasion had also created
 additional uncertainty about the global outlook and was an adverse supply shock that would result in
 lower growth and higher inflation. Members acknowledged that the economic implications of the war
 depended on the scale and duration of the conflict and the nature of any second-round effects.
Members recognised that the war in Ukraine would pose a significant setback for the recovery in Europe,
 particularly through the effects of disruptions to energy supply and higher energy prices. It was noted
 that European gas imports are mostly sourced from Russia, and natural gas prices in Europe had surged.
 While some gas exports could be redirected from the United States and the Middle East to Europe, this
 would take time; moreover, capacity constraints and the long-term nature of many gas contracts meant
 there were limits to the extent to which energy sources could be diverted to Europe.
More broadly, members noted that the surge in prices for energy and other commodities, including food
 commodities, was a substantial relative price shock, with effects that would fall unevenly across
 economies. It would redistribute income from energy-importing countries to energy-exporting countries.
 The energy intensity of many economies had fallen substantially over recent decades, and this would
 cushion the effects of the energy price shock compared with the 1970s. Even so, the net effect would be
 lower global output than otherwise. At the same time, further disruptions to global supply chains would
 lead to higher global inflation in the period ahead.
Members noted that, prior to the invasion of Ukraine, developments in international supply chains had been
 mixed; supply chains for some goods remained strained or had deteriorated further amid ongoing strong
 demand, while conditions had eased in other areas. Alongside broad-based price increases in
 energy-related commodities in recent months, prices for base metals had increased further. Inventories of
 base metals had been run down because smelters had cut capacity in response to high energy costs.
 Domestic distribution and production networks had also been significantly disrupted by record-high
 numbers of workers having needed to isolate because of illness. However, there were other indicators
 suggesting that supply-chain disruptions had begun to ease: supplier delivery times had edged lower,
 semiconductor prices were noticeably below previous peaks and motor vehicle production was showing signs
 of recovering. Members acknowledged that it would take time for supply issues in the global economy to be
 resolved. The war in Ukraine was adding to these challenges.
Members noted that, before the invasion of Ukraine, the global economy had continued to recover from the
COVID-19
pandemic. Accommodative policy settings and strong private sector
 balance sheets in advanced economies were supporting the global recovery. Growth in Australia's major
 trading partners had increased to an above-trend pace in the final quarter of 2021, resulting in output
 being a little above its pre-pandemic level. The effects of the Omicron variant on the global economy
 were expected to be short-lived; the rate of new infections had already declined across much of the world
 and mobility had started to rebound. Consumption of services was picking up in advanced economies with
 more opportunities for discretionary spending.
Members noted that growth in China had picked up in the December quarter, following an earlier
 regulation-induced slowing in growth. Manufacturing output had strengthened, infrastructure construction
 had stabilised and consumption growth had remained resilient despite targeted lockdowns to control local
COVID-19
outbreaks. Demand for iron ore had been boosted by recent policy
 easing measures by Chinese authorities, which were expected to support steel-intensive growth, including
 from infrastructure construction; partly in response, iron ore prices had increased substantially since
 November. Another indicator of the more supportive policy environment since late 2021 had been the sharp
 increase in issuance of local government special bonds.
Labour market conditions had tightened further in advanced economies. Labour demand was strong and
 unemployment rates were near or below pre-pandemic levels. Despite this, wages growth remained contained
 in most economies, with the United Kingdom and the United States two key exceptions. Stronger wages
 growth in these economies reflected reduced labour supply in the context of strong labour demand,
 increased job mobility and flexible wage-setting mechanisms.
Members noted that many economies had been experiencing high inflation before the surge in energy prices
 arising from the invasion of Ukraine. This complicated the task for policymakers in several
 jurisdictions. In the United States, inflation had reached a 40-year high, and a number of other advanced
 economies had recently recorded their highest rates of headline and core inflation in some years. In most
 advanced economies, this mainly reflected unusually strong goods price inflation (most notably in the
 United States), although services price inflation had also picked up and was now running above rates
 prevailing before the pandemic. Price rises for housing services had continued to increase. Inflation had
 also picked up further in some higher-income Asian economies in recent months; however, inflation
 remained low in Japan and some emerging Asian economies, where output was generally still some way below
 pre-pandemic paths.
Domestic economic developments
Turning to domestic economic conditions, members observed that the Australian economy had been resilient
 in the face of the Omicron outbreak. This had followed a period of particularly strong momentum in
 activity and the labour market at the end of 2021.
COVID-19
case numbers and
 hospitalisations had both fallen steadily after reaching a peak in mid-January, health-related
 restrictions had eased and indicators of mobility had recovered sharply. In line with the international
 experience, the main adverse effect of the Omicron outbreak on the domestic economy had been on labour
 supply. But these disruptions had been short-lived, with timely data on spending and information from the
 Bank's business liaison program having suggested that activity and hours worked had begun to recover
 from late January.
Members noted that firms' investment intentions, as reflected in the Capital Expenditure Survey,
 implied moderate growth in business investment over the following year or so. Similarly, firms in the
 Bank's business liaison program had indicated that their investment intentions remained at or above
 average levels. Business surveys had indicated that around half of firms were experiencing supply-chain
 disruptions, although the majority of the disruptions were having only a small effect on business
 operations, and business confidence had picked up in January.
Members noted that conditions in the housing market had been solid overall, if a little more uneven.
 Approvals for new detached housing and alterations and additions had remained strong over recent months.
 A large pipeline of work would continue to support housing construction over the following quarters,
 although supply-chain issues and labour availability were constraining how quickly this pipeline was
 reduced.
National housing price growth had moderated over recent months, with conditions varying across the
 country. In the established housing market, new listings in Sydney and Melbourne had picked up and prices
 had levelled off in recent months. However, in some smaller cities and regional areas, total listings had
 still been low and price growth had remained strong. Advertised rents continued to increase steadily
 across many areas of the country, supported by low vacancy rates.
Members noted that labour market conditions were the tightest since 2008 and the outlook remained
 positive. While the Labour Force Survey had indicated that total hours worked fell by
 9 per cent in January, this reflected a higher-than-usual number of employees who were on leave
 or otherwise unable to work because of illness or the need to isolate. A strong bounce-back in hours
 worked was expected in the following months alongside further increases in employment, which had been
 resilient in January. The unemployment rate was unchanged in January at around the lowest level in
 14 years. Forward-looking indicators of labour demand, such as job advertisements and employment
 intentions, including from the Bank's business liaison program, had suggested that a further
 tightening in labour market conditions was likely in the period ahead. Many firms were continuing to
 report that the availability of labour had been constraining their ability to expand output. Job mobility
 had increased, but not to the extent seen in some other economies.
Wages growth had picked up, but only to around its pre-pandemic rate. The Wage Price Index increased by
 0.7 per cent in the December quarter to be 2.3 per cent higher in year-ended terms.
 Private sector wages had increased by 2.4 per cent in year-ended terms, with most industries
 experiencing wages growth around this rate; including bonuses and commissions, private sector wages
 growth had increased further to be 3 per cent higher in year-ended terms. Members agreed this
 was consistent with a tightening in labour market conditions and firms using alternative measures to
 raising base wages in an effort to attract and retain staff. Public sector wages growth had picked up to
 2.1 per cent in year-ended terms, led by scheduled increases in enterprise agreements for
 several large state employers in New South Wales and Queensland, following a period when wage freezes had
 applied.
Across industries and states, wages growth outcomes had been unusually tightly clustered in the
 low-to-mid 2 per cent range. While the share of jobs recording wage increases of
2–3
per cent had recently returned to around pre-pandemic
 levels, the share of jobs with wage increases above 3 per cent had been little changed in
 recent quarters. The share of jobs that experienced a wage change was higher than usual for the December
 quarter in both the public and private sectors, but this largely reflected catch-up following
 pandemic-related delays to regular pay increases. Information from the Bank's business liaison
 program had suggested that the distribution of firms' wages growth expectations over the coming year
 remained similar to the pre-pandemic pattern. Surveys of unions' expectations had also been
 consistent with wages growth of around 2½–3 per cent over the year ahead. Members agreed that
 the risks to the outlook for wages growth were skewed to the upside, reflecting the low rate of labour
 underutilisation; at the same time, there was a high degree of uncertainty about the behaviour of nominal
 and real wages at historically low levels of unemployment.
Members concluded their discussion of domestic economic conditions by noting that non-labour input cost
 pressures remained widespread across industries, but were most acute for goods-importing industries.
 Information from the Bank's business liaison program had suggested that firms were increasingly
 prepared to pass these higher costs onto their customers, particularly in the construction, manufacturing
 and retail industries, where upstream cost pressures had been most acute. High international shipping
 rates had remained a source of cost pressure for firms across many industries. Members agreed that a key
 issue for the inflation outlook was whether recent price adjustments represented a one-off shift in the
 level of prices or the beginning of a period of ongoing price increases.
International financial markets
Russia's invasion of Ukraine had adversely affected sentiment in financial markets. Members noted
 there had been an increase in market volatility. Major equity markets had declined despite generally
 positive earnings announcements from listed companies. By contrast, the Australian equity market had
 increased in February, driven by the financial, energy and materials sectors.
In Russia, the market reaction had been pronounced, largely in response to the step-up in global
 sanctions. Sanctions on the Central Bank of Russia (CBR) had significantly curtailed its ability to use
 its foreign exchange reserves to support the rouble. The CBR had increased interest rates from
 9.5 per cent to 20 per cent after the rouble had depreciated by
 30 per cent. Meanwhile, equity prices in Russia had declined significantly and government bond
 yields had increased sharply.
Over the preceding month, expectations for how quickly central banks in advanced economies would withdraw
 monetary stimulus had increased because inflation in many advanced economies had continued to be higher
 than expected. The increase in prices for oil and European natural gas following the invasion of Ukraine
 had added to near-term inflationary pressures. However, the pace of expected policy rate increases had
 been pared back modestly.
The US Federal Reserve had indicated that it expected to commence raising its policy rate in March. Market
 pricing had suggested that the federal funds rate may be increased by as much as 125 basis points
 during 2022. Similar increases in policy rates were expected to occur this year in Canada, New Zealand
 and the United Kingdom. In light of the change to the inflation outlook, market participants had expected
 the European Central Bank to cease its asset purchases this year and to begin increasing its policy rate.
 By contrast, the Bank of Japan had reaffirmed that it would maintain its highly accommodative policy
 settings – including the target for 10-year government bond yields – because it was still
 some way from achieving its inflation target.
Government bond yields had risen further in most markets over the preceding month, reflecting higher
 expected policy rates and inflation expectations, especially for shorter maturities. Globally, yields on
 corporate debt had increased by a little more than those on government bonds over the period. Members
 noted that increasing risk aversion following the invasion of Ukraine had resulted in a decline in
 sovereign yields over the week preceding the meeting.
The major currencies had been little changed in prior months, following an appreciation of the
 US dollar during the second half of 2021. The Australian dollar had appreciated a little over the
 preceding month, but had remained around the lower end of its range over the previous year on a
 trade-weighted basis.
Domestic financial markets
Members observed that the Board's decision to cease purchases under the bond purchase program in
 February had been widely anticipated and there had been little reaction to the announcement. Yields on
 10-year Australian Government Securities had increased along with those on global sovereign bonds during
 the preceding two months and were at their highest level in three years. Meanwhile, measures of market
 functioning had improved. Demand to borrow Australian Government bonds from the Bank, which was
 supporting market functioning, had increased further.
Shorter-term inflation expectations implied by market prices had increased, while implied longer-term
 inflation expectations had been little changed. Expectations for policy tightening had increased. Money
 market pricing had implied that the cash rate would begin to be increased from around the middle of the
 year, to reach about 1 per cent by the end of 2022 and around 2 per cent by the end
 of 2023.
While some elements of banks' funding costs had risen, overall they had remained close to historic
 lows. In particular, bank bond yields and some new term deposit rates had risen, although a high
 proportion of banks' funding costs were linked to three-month bank bill swap rates, which remained
 very low. Even though interest rates on new fixed-rate loans had increased sharply over prior months, in
 line with swap rates, the average rate paid on outstanding housing loans had declined a little further.
 Growth in credit to owner-occupiers remained strong, while growth in credit to investors had picked up
 further in prior months. Business credit growth had eased a little in January but remained at high
 levels, reflecting continued strong growth in lending to large businesses.
Members noted that the Bank planned some operational changes to its regular open market liquidity
 operations as conditions evolved in a financial environment of substantial system liquidity. These would
 be operational changes, and would not have any implications for the future path for monetary policy.
Considerations for monetary policy
In considering the policy decision, members noted that the global economy was continuing to recover from
 the pandemic. However, the war in Ukraine was a major new source of uncertainty. Inflation in parts of
 the world had increased sharply as a result of large increases in energy prices and disruptions to supply
 chains at a time of strong demand. In this environment of higher inflation, the prices of many
 commodities had increased further.
The Australian economy remained resilient and spending was expected to pick up further after the Omicron
 outbreak. The economic outlook was being supported by household and business balance sheets that were
 generally in good shape, a large pipeline of construction work to be completed and an expected recovery
 in business investment. Members agreed that macroeconomic policy settings remained supportive of growth.
Members acknowledged the ongoing resilience of the labour market. The rates of both unemployment and
 underemployment were at their lowest levels since 2008. Forward-looking indicators of labour demand
 remained strong, and the staff's central forecast would see the unemployment rate fall to levels not
 seen since the early-to-mid-1970s. Members observed that wages growth had picked up, but at the aggregate
 level was only around the relatively low levels prevailing prior to the onset of the pandemic. Wages
 growth and broader measures of labour costs were expected to increase as the labour market continued to
 tighten. The pick-up was expected to be only gradual, although members noted the uncertainty about the
 behaviour of wages as the unemployment rate declined to historically low levels.
Inflation in Australia had picked up, but was still lower than in many other countries. In year-ended
 terms, underlying inflation was expected to increase further over coming quarters before moderating as
 supply problems are resolved. However, the war in Ukraine and the associated increase in energy prices
 had created additional uncertainty about the inflation outlook. Members noted headline inflation would
 increase by more than underlying inflation in the near term because of the effect of global developments
 on petrol prices.
Members agreed that financial conditions in Australia remained highly accommodative. Interest rates
 remained at very low levels, although some fixed rates on new housing and business lending had risen
 recently. The Australian dollar exchange rate was around its lows of the preceding year or so. Housing
 prices had risen strongly, although the rate of increase had declined and, in some cities, prices had
 been steady or declined a little. Members observed that high rates of household saving meant many
 households had built substantial buffers. Members continued to emphasise the importance of maintaining
 lending standards and borrowers having adequate buffers.
Turning to the decision for the cash rate, members remained committed to maintaining highly supportive
 monetary conditions to achieve the objectives of a return to full employment in Australia and inflation
 consistent with the target. As agreed at previous meetings, the Board will not increase the cash rate
 until actual inflation is sustainably within the 2 to 3 per cent target band. While
 inflation had picked up, members agreed it was too early to conclude that it was sustainably within the
 target band. There were uncertainties about how persistent the pick-up in inflation would be given recent
 developments in global energy markets and ongoing supply-side problems. Wages growth also remained modest
 and it was likely to be some time before aggregate wages growth would be at a rate consistent with
 inflation being sustainably at target. The Board is prepared to be patient as it monitors how the various
 factors affecting inflation in Australia evolve.
The decision
The Board decided to maintain the cash rate target at 10 basis points and the interest rate on
 Exchange Settlement balances at zero per cent.
