BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Minutes
TITLE: 6 December 2022
DATE: 06/12/2022
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/monetary-policy/rba-board-minutes/2022/2022-12-06.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Hybrid – 6 December 2022
Members participating
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Michele Bullock (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM,
 Wendy Craik AM, Ian Harper AO, Carolyn Hewson AO,
 Steven Kennedy PSM, Carol Schwartz AO
Members had granted leave of absence to Alison Watkins AM, in accordance with section 18A of the
Reserve Bank Act 1959
.
Others participating
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial
 Markets)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), David Jacobs (Deputy Secretary)
Jonathan Kearns (Head, Domestic Markets Department), Marion Kohler (Head, Economic Analysis
 Department), Penelope Smith (Head, International Department)
International economic developments
Members commenced their discussion by observing that global inflation remained high. However, inflation
 appeared to have peaked in a number of countries as oil prices declined, supply-chain pressures eased and
 economic growth slowed. Activity in most advanced economies was growing only modestly, and had begun to
 contract in the United Kingdom. The Chinese economy also continued to face challenges, particularly due
 to ongoing
COVID-19
containment measures there.
The monthly inflation data for October showed an easing in the pace of core inflation in the United States
 and Canada. Headline inflation had also eased as energy prices had fallen, although food price inflation
 remained strong. Forward indicators pointed to a further moderation in goods price inflation as supply
 chains continued to normalise. The data suggested that inventories were returning to more typical levels,
 supplier delivery times were becoming shorter and shipping costs were continuing to fall.
By contrast, inflation in the services sector remained high, underpinned by strong demand and rapid wages
 growth, and, while services inflation appeared to have levelled out recently, it was unlikely to abate
 quickly. Members also noted that the situation in Europe was less encouraging, with little sign of
 inflation easing amid very strong energy price rises.
Most advanced economies grew modestly in the September quarter, supported by the ongoing recovery in
 services consumption and business investment. The clearest signs of the effect of rising interest rates
 were in the housing sector; residential investment had contracted and housing prices had been steady or
 were declining across a range of economies. That said, surveyed business conditions had also softened
 over preceding months and investment intentions had fallen below longer run average levels. Slower growth
 in advanced economies had seen labour demand ease modestly and wages growth start to level out at a high
 rate, although labour markets remained very tight in most countries. Demand for exports from east Asian
 economies had also fallen in preceding months.
Members discussed the significant challenges facing the Chinese economy from the management of
COVID-19
. A number of large cities – including Beijing, Guangzhou and
 Chongqing – had imposed containment measures, which had slowed mobility and economic activity.
 While Chinese authorities had announced some adjustments to their
COVID-19
containment strategy, the measures being implemented remained stringent by international standards.
Demand for housing in China remained weak, which was affecting residential construction and the financial
 viability of numerous developers. Private fixed-asset investment had been little changed in preceding
 months, with the weakness in property investment offsetting growth in the other components of investment.
 Members noted that the Chinese authorities had recently announced a package of measures to support
 financing of the property sector. While the package was unlikely to lift demand for property
 significantly, it had nevertheless helped boost market sentiment regarding the property sector in China;
 this, in turn, had supported a rise in iron ore prices over the prior month, although prices remained
 well below the levels seen earlier in the year.
Base metals prices had also risen over November. Energy prices had generally declined owing to a mild
 European winter and in response to the weak outlook for global growth. The main exception had been the
 price of gas in Europe, where a decline in October had been reversed in November with the onset of colder
 weather. Gas prices, however, were still well below their August peaks.
Domestic economic developments
Turning to the domestic economy, members observed that the recent data were largely in line with the
 assessment of the economy at the November meeting. Labour demand remained strong but employment growth
 had slowed in recent months. The tightness in the labour market and high inflation had led to a further
 increase in wages growth. This was particularly the case in the private sector, where the latest
 indicators of wages growth suggested that the balance of risks had shifted to the upside. The monthly
 Consumer Price Index (CPI) indicator for October showed that inflation had remained high and broadly
 based, although the annual rate of inflation had declined a little. The various indicators of activity
 suggested the economy had grown solidly in the September quarter, supported by household consumption, and
 demand appeared to have held up into the December quarter.
Members noted that average monthly employment growth over the three months to October had been half that
 in the first half of the year. With vacancies still very high, some of this slowing was likely to reflect
 the limited amount of spare capacity remaining in the labour market. Full-time employment had continued
 to outpace part-time employment, and average hours worked had risen strongly. The unemployment rate had
 edged back down to 3.4 per cent in October – the equal lowest rate since September 1974.
 Broader measures of spare capacity had also declined slightly over October, to remain around multi-decade
 lows, and the rate of participation in the labour force was close to its recent record high. Firms in the
 Bank’s liaison program continued to report that labour availability remained a key challenge,
 although there were tentative signs this had started to ease a little.
Tight labour market conditions and high inflation were leading to a further pick-up in wages growth. The
 Wage Price Index had increased by 1 per cent in the September quarter, to be
 3.1 per cent higher over the year, slightly above the Bank’s forecast in November. Members
 observed that the pick-up in wages growth had been driven by the private sector, while wages growth in
 the public sector had remained relatively subdued. The weighted-average increase for those private sector
 jobs that had received a pay rise in the September quarter was 4.2 per cent; the flow-through
 of the Fair Work Commission’s Annual Wage Review decision to minimum and most award rates of pay had
 contributed to this strong outcome. A range of more timely measures – such as recently lodged
 enterprise agreements and information from the Bank’s liaison – indicated that wages growth
 had continued to pick up in the December quarter. Around 35 per cent of firms in liaison had
 reported wage increases of greater than 5 per cent in October and November.
The monthly CPI indicator for October confirmed that inflation had remained high into the December quarter
 but, at 6.9 per cent over the year, the outcome was a little below market expectations. Members
 acknowledged that the monthly series was still new and needed to be interpreted with caution. Some of the
 strength in services inflation expected in the December quarter – including in electricity prices,
 which are measured only once per quarter – would be picked up in the monthly series only in the
 final month of the quarter, which is released at the same time as the quarterly series. Fruit and
 vegetables prices had declined in October for the second successive month as production had recovered
 from the effects of the earlier floods; however, these prices were likely to increase again in the months
 ahead, following the most recent flooding in south-eastern Australia. Petrol prices had increased by
 7 per cent, reflecting the unwinding of the temporary reduction in fuel excise. Rent inflation
 continued to rise sharply, but the pace of increase in home-building costs had slowed.
Some signs were emerging of easing supply-chain pressures flowing through into reduced actual and expected
 retail price inflation. In liaison, firms reported that some retailers had become less willing to accept
 price increase requests from suppliers and were not passing through cost increases in full, given
 concerns about remaining competitive. More generally, most measures of medium- and long-term inflation
 expectations remained consistent with the inflation target.
Members noted that, while household consumption had been supported by the strong labour market conditions,
 growth in consumption appeared to be easing. Retail sales had declined in October, but some other
 components of household consumption appeared to have held up. In liaison, retailers had reported mixed
 results for ‘Black Friday’ sales in November. More broadly, there was some evidence of shoppers
 trading down to less expensive stores and brands. Some retailers had expressed concern about the outlook
 for 2023, reflecting the effect of rising interest rates and cost-of-living pressures, together with weak
 consumer sentiment and the wealth effect of declining housing prices. These factors were also weighing on
 demand for new housing.
Housing prices had fallen further across most capital cities in November, to around 6 per cent
 below their recent peak, although they were still above pre-pandemic levels. Members noted that rental
 markets remained very tight and that this was flowing through to growth in CPI rents. A number of demand-
 and supply-side factors were contributing to the current tightness in the domestic rental market, with
 further large increases in rents expected over coming years as population growth picks up.
The National Accounts for the September quarter were scheduled to be released the day after the meeting.
 GDP was expected to have grown solidly in the quarter, with growth in domestic demand led by household
 consumption. Strong demand for overseas travel by Australians and the filling of order backlogs was
 expected to have resulted in strong growth in imports.
The outlook for business investment had softened a little but remained positive. The September quarter ABS
 Capital Expenditure Survey, conducted in October and November, indicated that non-mining firms were
 expected to increase investment in the
2022/23
financial year, driven
 by investment in both machinery and equipment and non-residential construction. Capacity utilisation
 remained very high across most industries. Members noted that business confidence had declined slightly
 in October, though reported business conditions remained above average.
International financial markets
Members observed that central banks had continued to raise policy rates and signal that further increases
 are likely to be needed to return inflation to target. However, some central banks, including the US
 Federal Reserve, were signalling reductions in the size of future increases, noting early signs of a
 moderation in economic activity and inflation; some had also cited the risk of over-tightening given lags
 in the transmission of monetary policy.
Market participants’ expectations were still for policy rates to peak in mid-2023 and then gradually
 decline. Expectations for peaks were generally little changed over the prior month, but policy rates were
 expected to decline more quickly from the peak in response to lower-than-expected inflation in some
 economies, most notably the United States. Members observed that market expectations for peak policy
 rates were highest for countries where wages pressures had been strongest – including Canada, New
 Zealand, the United Kingdom and the United States. The Reserve Bank of New Zealand had communicated that
 a significant reduction in demand would be necessary to return inflation to target over the forecast
 period.
Members noted that the speed and strength of the various channels of the transmission of monetary policy
 differed across advanced economies. A key variation was the speed of pass-through of policy rates to the
 interest rates paid by households on their mortgages. In particular, average outstanding mortgage
 interest rates had increased at a faster rate, and by more, in Australia than in comparable countries,
 owing to the much higher share of variable-rate mortgages in Australia.
Longer term government bond yields had declined in most economies over the prior month, driven by the
 decline in longer term policy rate expectations amid signs that inflation may have peaked and the
 weakening economic outlook. Market-based measures of longer term inflation expectations were little
 changed at between 2 to 3 per cent in most advanced economies, including Australia. Bond
 yields had remained volatile, although less so than during the prior month.
Private sector financial conditions had also eased a little. Equity prices in most advanced economies had
 been rising since mid-October. In China, equity prices had risen with the announcement of further support
 for the property sector and signs of an easing of
COVID-19
restrictions
 supporting sentiment.
Members noted that the US dollar had depreciated over the preceding month or so, most notably
 following lower-than-expected inflation in the United States. The Australian dollar had appreciated on a
 trade-weighted basis since mid-October alongside the lower US dollar, higher commodity prices and
 some improvement in risk sentiment, to be little changed since the start of 2022.
Domestic financial markets
Members noted that financial market pricing implied around a 75 per cent likelihood of a
 25 basis point increase in the cash rate at the December meeting. The market-implied path for the
 cash rate was slightly lower over 2023 than it had been at the previous meeting. This decline had mostly
 occurred alongside movements in expectations for tightening by other central banks. Market pricing
 implied that the cash rate in Australia was expected to peak just above 3½ per cent in the
 second half of 2023. Market economists expected a similar peak in the cash rate, but that it would be
 reached by March next year.
Households with mortgages had continued to add to their offset and redraw accounts. Members were informed
 that these excess payments were accumulating at a slower rate than in the preceding two years when
 consumption opportunities had been constrained. In aggregate, between April and September 2022,
 households in all income quintiles had been adding to their excess payment buffers.
Taking into account the increase in mortgage rates implied by financial market pricing for the cash rate
 and the roll off of fixed-rate loans, required mortgage payments relative to income were expected to
 increase in 2023 to be equal to their previous peak in 2008. As a share of income, expected required
 payments in 2023 would also be close to the average level of actual mortgage payments – both
 required and excess mortgage payments – in 2022.
Equity prices had increased from early October. The total return on Australian equities had been positive
 since the start of 2022, in contrast to many other countries. In part, this reflected the larger share of
 resource companies and a smaller technology sector in the Australian equity market. Financial market
 inflation expectations in Australia were still high in the near term, but remained consistent with the
 inflation target in the medium and longer term.
Considerations for monetary policy
In considering the policy decision, members began by noting that inflation in Australia remained too high.
 That was largely attributable to global factors, but strong domestic demand relative to the ability of
 the economy to meet that demand was also playing a role. While the easing in the monthly pace of
 inflation had been welcome, the monthly indicator was still new and needed to be interpreted with
 caution, and some further strengthening in inflation was expected in coming months. However, a sustained
 decline in inflation was expected in 2023, as global supply-side issues continue to be resolved, the
 recent declines in commodity prices work their way through to consumer prices and growth in demand slows.
 Medium-term inflation expectations remained well anchored, both in Australia and abroad, reflecting
 expectations that central banks would do what was needed to reduce inflation. Members noted that it was
 important that this remained the case.
The Australian economy was continuing to grow solidly. Economic growth was, however, expected to moderate
 over the following year as the global economy slowed, the bounce-back in spending on services ran its
 course and growth in household consumption slowed in response to tighter financial conditions.
Members observed that the labour market remained very tight. The unemployment rate remained at its lowest
 level in nearly 50 years, and job vacancies and ads remained high. Wages growth had continued to
 pick up from the low rates of recent years and information from the Bank’s liaison indicated that it
 was expected to pick up further. Members discussed the upside risk to wages growth, which stemmed largely
 from the tight labour market and high inflation.
The Board considered several options for the cash rate decision at the December meeting: a 50 basis
 point increase; a 25 basis point increase; or no change in the cash rate.
The arguments for a 50 basis point increase stemmed from the fact that inflation remained too high
 and the economy continued to operate with excess demand. Some other economies had earlier been in a
 similar situation to Australia and had subsequently seen wages growth pick up strongly, which risked high
 inflation becoming entrenched. In these cases, returning inflation to target was likely to involve a
 period of very weak demand, and possibly a recession. Australia was not yet in such a situation, but the
 inflation mindset was shifting, with firms more willing to put up prices than a year earlier and upside
 risks to wages growth potentially building. Moreover, the cash rate was not yet at a high level
 historically and, if the Board ultimately needed to move to a more restrictive policy stance, it would
 take some time for this to dampen demand. These factors supported an argument for taking more pre-emptive
 action.
The arguments for a 25 basis point increase also recognised the need to bring demand and supply in
 the economy more into balance, but acknowledged that there had already been a significant cumulative
 increase in interest rates and that the full effects of this adjustment would take time to occur.
 Moreover, it was possible that the policy changes might be transmitted to the economy more slowly than
 usual, given the higher share of mortgages taken out with fixed interest rates, households’ large
 savings buffers and a summer holiday season without social restrictions for the first time in several
 years. Nevertheless, the policy changes would begin to have more of an effect through the course of 2023.
In addition, members noted that the share of household income being spent on required mortgage payments
 would reach around its previous highest level in late 2023, based on the market path for the cash rate
 and the effect of existing fixed-rate mortgages rolling off onto higher rates over the course of the
 following year. Furthermore, real incomes had been declining and housing prices and sales volumes had
 also fallen. Together, these factors were expected to weigh on consumption in the year ahead, while
 global demand was also likely to weaken. An easing of demand pressures in the economy and the ongoing
 resolution of supply-side problems could be expected to alleviate the risks of a price-wage spiral,
 particularly given that medium-term inflation expectations remained well anchored.
Finally, the arguments for no change in the cash rate placed further emphasis on the lagged effects of the
 large policy adjustment to date, and the value in proceeding cautiously in an uncertain environment.
 However, members noted that the Bank’s most recent forecasts had indicated that, even with further
 increases in the cash rate as incorporated into the November forecasts, inflation was expected to take
 several years to return to the target range. Incoming information had not warranted a reassessment of
 that broad outlook. Moreover, members noted that no other central bank had yet paused.
Members acknowledged that there were arguments in favour of each of these courses of action. They
 concluded that the case to increase the cash rate by 25 basis points at the present meeting was the
 strongest one. A further increase in the cash rate was likely to be necessary to achieve a more
 sustainable balance of demand and supply, but there had already been a material increase in the cash rate
 in a short period of time and there were lags in the operation of policy. Members also noted the
 importance of acting consistently, and that shifting to either larger increases or pausing at this point
 with no clear impetus from the incoming data would create uncertainty about the Board’s reaction
 function.
The Board expects to increase interest rates further over the period ahead, but it is not on a pre-set
 path. Members noted that the size and timing of future interest rate increases would continue to be
 determined by the incoming data and the Board’s assessment of the outlook for inflation and the
 labour market.
Members noted that there was considerable uncertainty about the outlook. While household spending was
 expected to slow over the period ahead, the timing and extent of this slowdown was uncertain. Another
 source of uncertainty was the outlook for the global economy, which had deteriorated. The Board would
 also continue to play close attention to the price-setting behaviour of firms and the evolution of labour
 costs, given the importance of avoiding a price-wage spiral. The Board is seeking to keep the economy on
 an even keel as it returns inflation to target, but these uncertainties mean that there are a range of
 potential scenarios. Members agreed that the path to achieving the needed decline in inflation and
 achieving a soft landing for the economy remained a narrow one.
Recognising this uncertainty, members noted that a range of options for the cash rate could be considered
 again at upcoming meetings in 2023. The Board did not rule out returning to larger increases if the
 situation warranted. Conversely, the Board is prepared to keep the cash rate unchanged for a period while
 it assesses the state of the economy and the inflation outlook.
Members emphasised that the Board’s priority is to re-establish low inflation and return inflation to
 the 2 to 3 per cent target range over time. High inflation damages the economy and makes
 life more difficult for people. The substantial cumulative increase in interest rates since May has been
 necessary to ensure that the current period of high inflation is only temporary. The Board remains
 resolute in its determination to return inflation to target and will do what is necessary to achieve that
 outcome.
The decision
The Board decided to increase the cash rate target by 25 basis points to 3.1 per cent. It
 also increased the interest rate on Exchange Settlement balances by 25 basis points to
 3 per cent.
