BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Minutes
TITLE: 2 May 2023
DATE: 02/05/2023
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/monetary-policy/rba-board-minutes/2023/2023-05-02.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Perth – 2 May 2023
Members present
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Michele Bullock (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM,
 Wendy Craik AM, Ian Harper AO, Carolyn Hewson AO,
 Steven Kennedy PSM, Carol Schwartz AO, Alison Watkins AM
Others present
Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial Markets), David Jacobs (Head, Domestic Markets
 Department), Marion Kohler (Head, Economic Analysis Department)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), David Norman (Acting Deputy Secretary)
International economic developments
Members commenced their discussion of the global economy by noting that headline inflation had passed its
 peak in most advanced economies and core inflation had moderated. The easing in inflation had occurred as
 the supply-demand balance in goods markets had improved and earlier increases in energy prices had
 reversed. However, members acknowledged that inflation remained high and the decline in core inflation
 had slowed in recent months. Services prices were quite persistent and being underpinned by wages growth
 above rates consistent with inflation targets in several economies. Members discussed the implications of
 this for Australia, given the high degree of commonality in inflation globally since the
COVID-19
pandemic. Most central banks expected inflation to return to their
 targets, but not in the year ahead.
Growth in advanced economies had slowed over the preceding six months or so, but by less than had been
 expected. Conditions in the services sector had remained resilient. Household consumption was being
 supported by ongoing increases in employment and wages, as well as relatively strong household balance
 sheets owing to the savings buffers that had been built up in preceding years. Real household disposable
 incomes had also stopped falling in most major advanced economies as headline inflation had declined.
 Timely indicators suggested that demand for labour had eased, but unemployment rates remained close to
 their historical lows.
Members noted that growth in Australia’s major trading partners was expected to remain below trend
 over the coming years, in the range of 3½ to 3¾ per cent, compared with growth of around
 4½ per cent prior to the pandemic. However, growth in 2023 was expected to be a little stronger
 than previously forecast, and the trough in growth in advanced economies was expected to occur later. The
 risks to growth were perceived to be tilted slightly to the downside; in particular, members observed
 that the outlook for monetary policy remains uncertain, as central banks balance uncertainty about the
 pace of disinflation with the possibility of further stress in the financial sector.
The forecast for growth in China in 2023 had been revised higher, reflecting information that the economy
 had been less affected by, and bounced back more strongly from, the
COVID-19
restrictions imposed during 2022 than had been expected. The bounce-back in growth in China had been
 driven by a strong recovery in consumer spending on services and ongoing robust growth in infrastructure
 investment. In contrast to most other economies, inflation in China was still below the authorities’
 target.
Members noted that, while property developers in China remain under financial pressure and demographic
 trends continue to be unfavourable, there were clearer signs that demand for property may be
 strengthening. Housing demand had increased, with new sales well above their recent trough and prices for
 new housing rising in most cities. Despite this, concerns about the outlook for Chinese steel production
 had affected iron ore and coking coal prices received by Australian exporters over the preceding month.
 Global oil and gas prices had also fallen during April.
Domestic economic conditions
Turning to the domestic economy, members noted that inflation had eased in the March quarter, confirming
 the staff assessment that inflation had passed its peak. Despite this, inflation in Australia remained
 too high and broadly based. Headline inflation had declined to 7 per cent over the year to the
 March quarter and underlying inflation had declined to 6.6 per cent. Inflation had eased in the
 quarter for a number of goods-related categories, including consumer durables, groceries and new dwelling
 purchases. However, input cost pressures (both labour and non-labour) and strong demand continued to
 contribute to strong price increases for many services. Rent inflation in the CPI continued to rise, with
 an influx of net overseas arrivals over preceding months adding pressure to rental markets that were
 already strained.
The staff forecasts were for inflation to return to around the top of the target band by the end of the
 forecast period in mid-2025, consistent with the forecasts from three months earlier. Further
 disinflation in goods prices was expected to lead to a further decline in overall inflation, as was
 below-trend growth in aggregate demand. However, growth in unit labour costs, which had been strong in
 prior quarters, was expected to be a key driver of underlying inflation over the forecast period. Energy
 costs were also expected to increase over the coming years, although the Government’s Energy Price
 Relief Plan would reduce the size of the increase in
2023/24
and
 provide targeted support to low-income earners and small businesses. Rent inflation was expected to
 continue to pick up over the coming year or so and add materially to inflation over the forecast period,
 including because of the recent increase in net overseas migration. Members considered a scenario in
 which goods prices fell over coming years, unwinding a portion of the preceding rise; in this scenario,
 inflation would return to the middle of the target band by mid-2025. However, this outcome was not
 considered particularly likely given trends to date and the absence of broad-based falls in goods prices
 internationally.
Members noted that a range of indicators suggested that wages growth was running at an annual rate of
 around 3½ to 4 per cent in the March quarter. The Wage Price Index was expected to peak at
 around 4 per cent later in 2023, before easing slightly. The forecasts incorporated information
 that suggested strong wage outcomes for some workers were likely in the period ahead. Members noted that
 unit labour costs had been growing strongly, owing in part to the very limited productivity growth over
 the preceding three years. Various factors might explain the weak productivity outcomes, including
COVID-19
-related disruptions and strong growth in employment in
 government-funded services, where achieving productivity increases is often difficult. Members discussed
 the importance of unit labour costs in determining inflation over the forecast period and that a rise in
 productivity growth would be needed to ensure consistency of the wages growth forecast with the
 Bank’s inflation target.
The tightening in monetary policy over the preceding year had contributed to a slowing in output growth.
 Timely indicators suggested that growth in the March quarter had been subdued, especially in per capita
 terms. Population growth had been stronger than expected, reflecting a strong pick-up in net overseas
 migration as foreign students and working holiday makers returned. Despite the pick-up in population
 growth, output growth was expected to reach its trough in the second half of 2023 at
 1¼ per cent and to pick up gradually after that as the effect of earlier policy tightening
 starts to wane, inflation moderates and housing prices recover.
Turning to the labour market, members noted that employment growth was very strong in the month of March
 and that growth in the March quarter had been concentrated in full-time employment. Members discussed how
 much of this persistent strength was because employment typically lags output and how much reflected
 ongoing strength in activity in the services sector. The unemployment rate remained near historical lows,
 at 3½ per cent, but was expected to reach 4½ per cent by late 2024. Conditions in the
 labour market were not as tight as a few months earlier, with some easing in indicators of hiring
 intentions and a modest decline in vacancies. The increase in numbers of overseas arrivals had supported
 strong growth in employment in prior months and had also helped alleviate labour shortages in some areas.
 Even so, labour shortages remained a constraint for many firms, including in the construction sector.
Recent indicators suggested that consumer spending was subdued in the March quarter. Information from the
 Bank’s liaison contacts pointed to a further modest decline in retail spending in April, with
 evidence continuing to suggest that some consumers had been trading down to cheaper items. Consumer
 sentiment remained weak, particularly among households with mortgages on their homes. Household
 disposable income had also been falling in real terms, given high inflation, rising interest rates and
 the effect of ‘bracket creep’ on income tax payments as nominal incomes rise. While the
 significant decline in housing prices over the preceding year had constrained consumption spending,
 housing prices had recently stabilised and some increases had been recorded. In recognition of this, the
 forecast for consumption growth by mid-2025 had been revised a little higher.
Demand for new housing had been weak but was expected to be supported by strong fundamentals in the medium
 term, including population growth over coming years. Despite higher rental yields, incentives to expand
 residential building had been impeded by high construction costs, the increase in interest rates and
 construction delays, including because of labour shortages. Building approvals, greenfield land sales and
 new home sales were all at their lowest levels in a number of years. As a result, building activity was
 expected to decline once the backlog of construction is worked through. A shortfall in supply relative to
 strong demand had translated into upward pressure on rents, which was expected to continue for some time.
In the business sector, the outlook for non-mining investment over the coming years had softened a little
 but remained positive. While non-residential construction activity was expected to be supported by a
 large pipeline of projects, a shortage of skilled tradespeople would constrain how quickly these projects
 can be undertaken. The outlook for mining investment growth was subdued and little changed from three
 months earlier.
Members noted that public demand was expected to remain at a high level over the next few years, even as
 pandemic-related expenditure fades. Spending would be supported by a substantial program of public
 engineering works and a general expansion of public consumption, as the population increases and due to
 specific schemes (including the National Disability Insurance Scheme). Export volumes were expected to
 grow further over the year ahead, driven by services exports. The forecast for services exports had been
 revised up owing to a significant upgrade in the expected number of students living in Australia and the
 expected return of international travel to pre-pandemic levels.
International financial markets
Members noted that international financial markets had stabilised in prior weeks as banking concerns had
 eased somewhat, although fragilities had again come to the fore with the failure of First Republic Bank
 in the United States. Alongside the earlier banking concerns, deposits had shifted into money market
 funds because of the safety of the short-dated government assets in which those funds invest. This
 accelerated a trend that had begun in 2022 as savers were attracted by the higher returns on those funds
 relative to bank deposits. Nevertheless, the recent actions of policymakers continued to support
 confidence in the broader stability of the global banking system. Banks’ share prices had picked up
 somewhat but remained lower than earlier in the year, while the broader equity market had been supported
 by corporate earnings, which had generally been better than expected.
Market participants’ expectations for the path of policy rates had shifted up a little for most
 central banks over the preceding month. Members observed that some central banks, including the Reserve
 Bank of New Zealand and Sveriges Riksbank, had increased policy rates further, emphasising the need to
 address persistent inflationary pressures. The US Federal Reserve, the European Central Bank and the Bank
 of England were expected to raise their policy rates further in the period ahead. Several central banks
 had also emphasised that policy rates were unlikely to decline later in the year, in contrast to
 market-implied expectations. Despite moving a little higher in the period leading up to the May meeting,
 the expected paths of policy rates generally remained below their levels before the collapse of Silicon
 Valley Bank. This partly reflected an expectation that the recent bank stresses would result in some
 tightening of broader financial conditions, especially in the United States, which by itself would weigh
 on demand and thereby help to reduce inflationary pressures.
In most advanced economies, government bond yields had risen somewhat as banking concerns had eased,
 although they were still lower than earlier in the year. The Australian dollar had depreciated a little
 further and was lower against the US dollar and on a trade-weighted basis than earlier in the year.
In China, financial conditions remained accommodative, with bond yields having declined recently as
 inflation remained lower than expected. Credit growth had increased, aided by policy measures in support
 of infrastructure spending and the property sector. However, many highly leveraged property developers
 still faced considerable financial stress.
Domestic financial markets
Members noted that the earlier increases in the cash rate had continued to pass through to broader
 financial conditions. Scheduled mortgage payments, which comprise interest and scheduled principal
 payments, had risen to almost 9 per cent of household disposable income in the March quarter
 – an increase of around 1¾ percentage points from a year earlier. Scheduled payments would
 continue to rise even if the cash rate remains unchanged, given the large number of low-rate fixed-rate
 loans that will roll-off over the year.
Extra mortgage payments (over and above scheduled payments) had increased a little in the March quarter,
 resulting in a notable increase in total mortgage payments. By contrast, extra payments had declined
 materially over the prior year, which had offset much of the rise in scheduled payments over that time.
 Members discussed several potential interpretations of the recent increase in extra payments. It could
 reflect: a transfer of other forms of savings into mortgage redraw and offset accounts, as fixed-rate
 mortgages converted to variable-rate mortgages; or households constraining their non-essential spending
 to avoid running down the savings they had built up during the pandemic, particularly given that higher
 interest rates provide an additional incentive to save; or quarterly variation around a downward trend,
 as had been seen in the past.
Consistent with the effects of tighter monetary policy, credit growth had continued to slow. However,
 members observed that a range of indicators suggested that conditions in the housing market were
 stabilising. This partly reflected a rise in population growth, although shifting expectations for the
 outlook for monetary policy may also have contributed.
Market pricing suggested that no further increases in the cash rate were expected, which was little
 changed from the previous meeting. The decision to leave the cash rate unchanged in April had been widely
 anticipated by market participants. Most market economists expected no change at the May meeting,
 although some expected one or two more quarter-point increases in the months ahead based on a need to do
 more to address inflationary pressures. Those economists who expected no further increases noted that
 consumption growth had slowed, labour market tightness had eased a little and inflation had peaked; they
 also noted that the Board’s approach was to bring inflation back to target in a measured fashion to
 preserve gains in the labour market.
Members reviewed the Bank’s approach to reducing its holdings of government bonds, which had been
 purchased during the pandemic to support markets and provide stimulus. As had been decided by the Board a
 year earlier, the strategy was to hold these bonds until maturity rather than selling them prior to that.
 This approach recognised that the Bank’s balance sheet was already set to decline rapidly given the
 maturity of funding under the Term Funding Facility, and that bond sales might complicate
 governments’ bond issuance and reduce the effectiveness of any future quantitative easing program.
Members agreed that this approach remained appropriate for the time being. However, they noted that the
 initial tranche of Term Funding Facility maturities would occur in coming months and would provide
 information on how financial markets respond as the Bank’s balance sheet declines. More generally,
 the Bank’s large holdings of government bonds exposed its balance sheet to a significant level of
 interest rate risk. Accordingly, members agreed it was appropriate to review the current approach
 periodically.
Considerations for monetary policy
In turning to the policy decision, members noted that inflation was still very high but had peaked,
 consumption growth was forecast to remain subdued for some time, and the unemployment rate was low and
 expected to rise gradually. Members judged that the forecasts were still consistent with the economy
 remaining on the narrow path on which inflation comes down steadily and the unemployment rate increases
 but remains below pre-pandemic levels. At the same time, members acknowledged that there were significant
 uncertainties, and that history highlights the challenges of staying on such a path.
Members discussed two options: holding the cash rate unchanged; or increasing the cash rate by
 25 basis points.
The case for holding the cash rate unchanged rested on several arguments.
Members noted that inflation had peaked and was showing signs of slowing further. They considered the
 possibility that inflation could return to the centre of the inflation target band earlier than forecast
 if there was a reversal of some of the significant increase in goods prices recorded over preceding
 years. Members also noted that while wages growth had increased, it was still consistent with the
 inflation target if productivity growth picked up to its pre-pandemic rate. Further, indicators from
 liaison contacts and private sector surveys signalled that wages growth was stabilising.
Members observed that the outlook for consumption was weak and had been revised a little lower in the near
 term. They noted that consumption per capita was not expected to rise over the year ahead and discussed
 the possibility that consumption could turn out weaker than expected. Many households were experiencing
 significant financial pressures associated with the higher cost of living and increased mortgage
 payments, and a further increase in aggregate mortgage payments was expected as fixed-rate loans
 progressively expire. Subdued growth in consumption was expected to lead to a moderation in inflation,
 and it was possible that the forecast increase in unemployment could result in inflation slowing more
 quickly than expected.
Finally, members noted that the lags associated with monetary policy transmission and the extent of policy
 tightening over the prior year created additional uncertainty around the outlook for the economy. Given
 this, there was a case to continue to hold the cash rate steady in order to gather additional
 information.
On the other hand, there were several arguments supporting an increase in the cash rate.
While the staff’s central forecast had inflation declining, inflation was not expected to reach the
 top of the target band until mid-2025. Members noted that, although this was consistent with the
 Bank’s mandate and objectives, it left little room for upside surprises to inflation given that
 inflation would have been above the target for around four years by that time.
In this context, members discussed the potential for upside risks to inflation. They noted the persistence
 in services price inflation in many other countries and discussed the possibility that Australia might
 have the same experience. Strong population growth and low rental vacancy rates could also see rents grow
 even faster than the central forecast envisaged.
Another upside risk to inflation was the possibility that productivity growth remains very weak. Members
 observed that the forecast for inflation to return to the top of the target band by mid-2025 was
 predicated on productivity growth returning to around the modest pace recorded prior to the pandemic. If
 this did not occur, growth in unit labour costs would be uncomfortably fast.
A related upside risk was the possibility that a prolonged period of high inflation leads to a shift in
 inflation expectations and a change in price- and wage-setting behaviour. If so, this would make it more
 difficult to bring inflation back to target within a reasonable timeframe. It would require even larger
 increases in interest rates and involve a worse outlook for the labour market.
Members also reviewed recent developments in asset markets – in particular, they noted the
 depreciation of the exchange rate and the increase in housing prices. While several factors had
 contributed to these developments, the decision to hold interest rates steady in April was likely to have
 contributed. Although the Board does not target asset prices, members agreed that movements in asset
 prices provide relevant information and need to be considered when assessing the outlook for activity and
 inflation.
Members discussed the economic data over the prior month and their implications. They particularly noted
 the strong growth in employment in March, the high rate of services price inflation in the March quarter
 CPI, further evidence of persistent services sector inflation abroad, and some easing in the stresses in
 global banking markets.
In weighing up the two options, members recognised that the arguments were finely balanced but judged it
 was appropriate to increase interest rates at this meeting.
The information available over the prior month had confirmed that the labour market remained tight and
 that inflationary pressures were significant. That information also pointed to upside risks to the
 outlook for inflation. If these risks materialised, they would further delay the return of inflation to
 target, with the prospect of a damaging shift in inflation expectations. Further, members noted that the
 forecasts presented at the meeting were predicated on a technical assumption for the path of the cash
 rate that involved one further increase.
In reaching their decision, members acknowledged that there were still significant uncertainties
 surrounding the economic outlook, particularly for household consumption. But, on balance, given the
 Board’s strong commitment to price stability and the importance of ensuring that inflation
 expectations remain anchored, members judged that a further increase in interest rates was warranted.
Members discussed how best to communicate the Board’s decision. They concluded that it was important
 to emphasise the implications of the recent data releases as well as the updated set of forecasts and the
 evolving nature of the risks, including from weak productivity growth. Members reaffirmed the
 Board’s determination to do what is required to bring inflation back to target, while emphasising
 that it is still seeking to traverse the narrow path. Members also agreed that further increases in
 interest rates may still be required, but that this would depend on how the economy and inflation evolve.
The decision
The Board decided to increase the cash rate target to 3.85 per cent and to increase the interest
 rate on Exchange Settlement balances to 3.75 per cent.
