BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Minutes
TITLE: 4 April 2023
DATE: 04/04/2023
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/monetary-policy/rba-board-minutes/2023/2023-04-04.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Sydney – 4 April 2023
Members present
Philip Lowe (Governor and Chair), Michele Bullock (Deputy Governor), Mark Barnaba AM,
 Wendy Craik AM, Ian Harper AO, Carolyn Hewson AO,
 Steven Kennedy PSM, Carol Schwartz AO, Alison Watkins AM
Others present
Luci Ellis (Assistant Governor, Economic), Bradley Jones (Assistant Governor, Financial System),
 Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial Markets)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), David Norman (Acting Deputy Secretary)
Andrea Brischetto (Head, Financial Stability Department), David Jacobs (Head, Domestic Markets
 Department), Marion Kohler (Head, Economic Analysis Department), Penelope Smith (Head,
 International Department)
International economic developments
Members commenced their discussion of the global economy by noting that inflation remained high and well
 above central banks’ targets. Inflation in many economies had declined from earlier peaks but
 progress in returning inflation to target had slowed. Recent monthly core inflation data had been higher
 than expected in a range of advanced economies. Nevertheless, inflation in advanced economies was still
 expected to decline over coming quarters as economic activity slowed and input price pressures continued
 to dissipate.
Indicators of domestic demand across advanced economies had been mixed. Retail sales had increased in
 early 2023 in a few economies, although volumes generally remained below their peaks. The housing sector
 remained subdued in many economies, reflecting the tightening of monetary policy over the prior year.
 Most of these indicators pre-dated the financial stability concerns and financial market volatility
 prompted by bank failures in the United States and Switzerland. However, members observed that very
 timely measures of activity in the services sector had been resilient; survey measures of services output
 had remained solid in March in many countries and household sentiment in the United States had been
 little affected. At the same time, some commodity prices had declined.
Members noted that labour markets had remained tight, but less so than a few months earlier. Employment
 growth had moderated in a number of advanced economies over the preceding six months. Although job
 vacancy rates had declined, they remained unusually high. Central banks and Consensus Economics’
 panel were forecasting that unemployment rates would increase gradually from their multi-decade lows in
 many advanced economies. Wages growth had slowed in the United States and United Kingdom but remained
 above rates consistent with their central banks’ inflation targets.
Domestic economic activity in China had begun to recover rapidly in the early part of the year from
 earlier
COVID-19
-related disruptions. Services sector activity, retail sales
 and industrial production had all recovered strongly in the first two months of 2023. Leading indicators
 suggested an improvement in property-related activity was under way following an extended period of
 weakness; new housing sales had increased sharply in preceding months and new property prices had
 increased in most cities. Chinese authorities had announced a target for output growth in 2023 of
 ‘around 5 per cent’.
Members observed that commodity prices had mostly declined over the prior month, alongside heightened
 volatility in financial markets and the associated increase in uncertainty about the economic outlook.
 Oil prices had initially declined but had reversed following an announcement by the Organization of the
 Petroleum Exporting Countries in early April of forthcoming production cuts; oil prices remained around
 30 per cent below their peak level following Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in February
 2022. Coal and gas prices had also declined, but they remained well above levels that had prevailed in
 the years prior to the invasion. The iron ore price had declined a little and base metals prices had been
 broadly stable.
Domestic economic developments
Turning to the domestic economy, members noted that while inflation in Australia remained too high, the
 tighter monetary policy stance was gradually flowing through to the real economy. The labour market
 remained tight, but less so than a few months earlier. Recent data releases on employment, retail trade
 and business surveys had been broadly in line with expectations. However, estimates of population growth
 had been revised up, owing to stronger net overseas migration. This would have implications for the
 outlook for economic activity and the housing market, and possibly the labour market. Members also
 considered the impact this would have on inflation.
Recent prices data had remained consistent with the assessment that headline inflation peaked at the end
 of 2022. According to the monthly CPI indicator, which can be volatile, inflation had been
 6.8 per cent over the year to February, compared with a peak of more than 8 per cent
 over the year to December 2022. Members noted that goods price disinflation had been an important driver
 of the moderation in outcomes in the monthly CPI indicator, consistent with the experience overseas.
 Other partial indicators of inflation from surveys, liaison and company earnings calls also showed that
 pricing pressures had eased somewhat since mid-2022. Nonetheless, inflation remained high and broadly
 based and services inflation had continued to increase. Long-term inflation expectations remained
 consistent with the inflation target.
Members noted that electricity prices would increase sharply in the September quarter. Regulators had
 released their draft determination of the default offers for retail electricity prices, with default
 offers expected to rise by
20–30
per cent in most states. If
 these increases flowed through to the market offers as expected, energy prices (for both electricity and
 gas) were expected to add ¼ percentage point to headline inflation over the
2023/24
financial year (after accounting for the estimated impact of the
 bill relief measures in the Australian Government’s Energy Price Relief Plan).
Members observed that the labour market remained tight, although the balance between labour demand and
 supply had improved. A strong increase in employment and hours worked and a decline in the unemployment
 rate to 3.5 per cent in February confirmed that the soft outcomes in January were the result of
 changes in seasonal patterns rather than underlying weakness. Indicators of future labour demand had
 moderated since mid-2022 but remained high. While some measures of job advertisements had risen modestly
 in early 2023, the ABS measure of vacancies had continued to decline. Firms in the Bank’s liaison
 program continued to report moderately positive hiring intentions and that finding suitable labour had
 become less of a challenge.
Members observed that timely indicators suggested wages growth remained solid. Wages measures derived from
 banking data and advertised salaries for newly listed jobs pointed to a further pick-up in wages growth
 in the March quarter. Firms in the Bank’s liaison program expected annual wages growth in the
 private sector to level out at a little below 4 per cent. Wages growth in the public sector was
 likely to increase in coming quarters as recently announced state government wages policies take effect.
 Of note, the Fair Work Commission had awarded wage increases to NSW rail workers above the state wage cap
 and had commented that significant declines in real wages would occur under the existing NSW Government
 wages policy. The Australian Government had indicated that it supported increases in the minimum wage in
 line with inflation.
Measures of business conditions and capacity utilisation generally remained high. Even so, survey measures
 of business confidence and of forward-looking metrics, such as orders, painted a softer picture. The
 staff’s assessment of information from the Bank’s liaison program also suggested that private
 final domestic demand had moderated.
Growth in household consumption had remained sluggish in early 2023. Members acknowledged that higher
 interest rates, lower housing prices and declining real household incomes – reflecting the rising
 cost of living – were all dampening household consumption. Looking through recent volatility, the
 monthly value of retail sales had been little changed over the preceding six months or so. Card spending
 data and information from retailers pointed to subdued spending outcomes in March. Consumer sentiment
 remained at very low levels, particularly for the one-third of households with a home loan. The softness
 in consumer spending implied even weaker underlying demand in per capita terms, given the sharp increase
 in population growth.
Members noted that demand for new dwellings had fallen noticeably and that this would weigh on dwelling
 investment once the backlog of residential construction had been worked through. Construction firms faced
 a challenging combination of a weaker outlook for demand, longer construction timelines for existing
 projects due to staff shortages, and significant increases in input costs. Against this backdrop,
 information from the Bank’s liaison program indicated that cash flow had become difficult to manage
 for some construction firms and more insolvencies in the industry were expected.
National established housing prices had steadied in March, following an 8 per cent decline from
 their peak around a year earlier. Members observed that it was possible that housing prices would
 stabilise earlier than previously expected and at a level above the previously forecast trough. Stronger
 fundamentals, including growth in population and nominal incomes, were likely providing an offset to the
 higher cost of credit. Housing prices in Sydney had increased modestly while the rate of decline had
 eased in most other capital cities. Rental markets remained very tight and this was continuing to flow
 through to growth in CPI rents. Residential vacancy rates in Sydney and Melbourne had seen the largest
 declines to be below their long-run average levels. The average household size had increased slightly in
 capital cities in preceding months and had been increasing for some time in regional areas.
International financial markets
Members noted that the recent banking system problems in the United States and Switzerland had created
 stress and volatility in financial markets, especially bond markets. The US Federal Reserve (the Fed) and
 the Swiss National Bank (SNB) had acted to restore confidence in banks by providing extraordinary
 liquidity support to banks.
Members observed that many central banks, including the Fed and the SNB, had nevertheless increased policy
 rates further to slow the pace of inflation in their countries. At the same time, financial stability
 concerns had caused market-implied expectations of the path of policy rates to decline sharply. Market
 pricing was consistent with participants ascribing some probability to a wide range of scenarios. These
 included the possibility of a sharp slowdown in economic activity related to further strains in the
 banking system and other scenarios where problems in the banking system are contained and central banks
 need to tighten policy further to address high inflation.
Government bond yields had declined and their volatility had increased significantly, particularly for
 shorter term maturities, as market participants adjusted their expectations for the path of policy rates
 and demand for liquidity increased. Lower sovereign yields had partly offset a broader tightening in
 global financial conditions associated with higher spreads on corporate debt, particularly for
 lower-rated issuers, and a decline in equity prices. Members noted that there had been very little
 issuance of corporate bonds rated below investment grade in the United States and Europe in the wake of
 the problems in the banking system. While equity prices had since largely recovered for the broader
 market, equity prices of banks were still noticeably lower amid concerns about their future earnings.
 Banks may have reduced capacity to expand their lending to households and businesses as investors had
 become more cautious about providing funding to banks and via markets more generally. Members noted that,
 although financial stability concerns had eased somewhat over the week preceding the meeting, the overall
 tightening of financial conditions would be an additional headwind for the global economy.
Members noted that conditions in foreign exchange markets had remained relatively stable. The Australian
 dollar had depreciated a little following the monetary policy decision at the previous meeting and again
 as global financial stability concerns had emerged. However, over the preceding year or so the Australian
 dollar had been steady on a trade-weighted basis. The cost of funding US dollars through foreign
 exchange swap markets had increased for some currencies following the failure of Silicon Valley Bank,
 especially for the yen and the euro, but the increase had subsequently been largely reversed following
 coordinated action by several central banks to improve the provision of liquidity. This included offering
 liquidity via standing US dollar swap line arrangements. The price of Australian dollar swaps had
 been little changed over the prior month.
Domestic financial markets
Developments abroad had led to volatility in Australian financial markets. Members noted that these
 markets had continued to function and that conditions had subsequently improved. Banks had been well
 advanced with their funding plans prior to the episode, so they had been able to pause their issuance of
 securities during the period of strain in global markets around mid-March. They had since resumed
 issuance both domestically and offshore, and overall volumes were ultimately above average in March.
 Similar trends were also evident in the domestic mortgage- and asset-based securities markets, which are
 an important source of funding for non-banks.
Members observed that there had been only a small effect on banks’ funding costs from higher risk
 premiums in global markets. Spreads on banks’ bonds had risen slightly, and by much less than had
 been seen during the pandemic or the global financial crisis, suggesting a high level of confidence in
 markets about the creditworthiness of Australian banks. Similarly, equity prices had declined a little
 for Australian banks but by much less than for other major banking systems.
Accordingly, banks and other Australian deposit-taking institutions (ADIs) remained well placed to repay
 loans from the Term Funding Facility (TFF) as these began to mature from early April. The TFF had lowered
 funding costs during the pandemic and the repayments would add a little to banks’ overall funding
 costs. However, the TFF accounted for only a small portion of ADIs’ overall funding. Some of the
 effect of the rise in the cash rate so far on the cost of this funding had also already occurred because
 ADIs had hedged at least part of their TFF funding back to short-term interest rates.
Members considered the effect of the monetary policy tightening to date and noted that the earlier
 increases in the cash rate had continued to flow through to household mortgage payments. This was one of
 a number of channels through which tighter monetary policy was affecting the economy. Required mortgage
 payments, which encompass interest and scheduled principal payments, had reached around
 9 per cent of household disposable income. Members noted that, based on the current cash rate
 and as a share of household disposable income, these required payments were projected to be around an
 historic high later this year and reach around 10 per cent late in 2024. The further increase
 reflected variable-rate mortgages taking a little time to adjust to earlier cash rate movements and the
 further expiration of fixed-rate loans. Banks had announced further increases to advertised deposit rates
 in February and March, although the cumulative increase in overall deposit rates remained less than the
 increase in the cash rate.
In aggregate, the rate at which households were making extra mortgage payments in addition to their
 scheduled payments had slowed, suggesting less free cash flow. However, members noted that these payments
 tended to be lower in the second half of the financial year compared with the first half and that
 mortgage holders still had a large stock of additional savings buffers.
The Board’s decision to increase the cash rate in March had been widely anticipated and the
 accompanying communication had moderated expectations for future increases. Market-implied expectations
 for the cash rate subsequently fell further, in tandem with moves in other advanced economies, following
 developments abroad. Members noted that current market pricing suggested that the cash rate was expected
 to be unchanged in coming months before being lowered later in the year. However, as was the case abroad,
 market pricing reflected an average of both upside and downside scenarios. Market economists had
 expected, in roughly equal number, either a pause in the cash rate at the current meeting or a further
 increase of 25 basis points, although most had expected one or two further increases in the cash
 rate at some point over the months ahead.
Financial stability
Members discussed the Bank’s regular half-yearly assessment of financial stability risks.
Members noted that financial stability risks had increased globally despite loan arrears remaining very
 low. The failure of some regional banks in the United States in March had occurred because of weaknesses
 in their business models and risk-management practices. The vulnerabilities that had left these banks
 susceptible to a run on their deposits were not systemic across larger US banks and other banking systems
 (including in Australia). Nonetheless, the heightened risk aversion, increased volatility in some
 financial markets and deterioration in liquidity conditions had caused liquidity stress to be transmitted
 to other parts of the international banking system. This had contributed to the regulator-facilitated
 takeover of Credit Suisse by UBS, following a lengthy period where concerns had been raised about Credit
 Suisse’s underlying profitability, risk controls and governance practices.
Members observed that the broader global banking system had remained resilient in the face of these
 stresses. While financial conditions had subsequently stabilised, supported by the actions of authorities
 and earlier reforms to ensure that large banks maintain high levels of capital and liquidity, banking
 regulators and policymakers more generally were considering the lessons to be drawn from recent events.
 This included how best to ensure banks remain resilient to shocks in the digital era, including because
 deposit withdrawals can occur more rapidly than in the past.
Members noted that if further banking stresses were to materialise, a more marked tightening in global
 financial conditions would ensue. This would increase borrowing costs further and reduce the supply of
 credit to households and businesses, which could accelerate a downturn in the broader credit cycle.
 Members noted that the combination of tighter monetary policy, high inflation and slowing economic growth
 was already putting financial pressure on some households and businesses in many countries. There also
 remained a risk that any disruptions in the functioning of financial systems could be amplified by
 liquidity mismatches at leveraged non-bank financial institutions, as had occurred on a number of
 occasions in preceding years.
While volatility in Australian financial markets had also increased in response to the recent global
 events, members observed that Australian banks were strongly positioned to weather this and continue
 lending to households and businesses. This reflected that fact that Australian banks are well regulated,
 strongly capitalised, profitable and highly liquid. Nonetheless, the Australian Prudential Regulation
 Authority had intensified its oversight of domestic financial institutions following recent events and,
 together with the Bank and other agencies of the Council of Financial Regulators, had been closely
 monitoring developments for any adverse effects on the financial system as a whole.
Turning to the financial position of Australian households and businesses, members noted that most were
 well placed to manage the impact of higher interest rates and inflation, supported by continued strength
 in the labour market and high savings buffers. However, this resilience was unevenly distributed. Some
 households and businesses were already experiencing financial stress, and the pressure on household
 budgets was likely to continue. Members noted that those households on lower incomes, including renters
 and relatively recent borrowers with larger debts relative to their income, were among those most
 affected. Smaller businesses, which tend to have more variable-rate debt and volatile income compared
 with larger firms, were more exposed to rising interest rates. Some building construction firms had faced
 ongoing margin pressures as a result of fixed-price contracts written before the sharp increase in input
 and labour costs. These firms had accounted for a large proportion of the recent pick-up in insolvencies
 to their pre-pandemic level. Banks’ non-performing business loans had remained low as a share of
 total business lending.
Lenders were expecting an increase in the share of households and firms falling into arrears on their
 loans in the period ahead, but from a very low level. Further, the share of banks’ housing loans in
 or close to negative equity was very low, reflecting the generally sound lending standards and large
 run-up in housing prices prior to the more recent declines. This would limit the losses for borrowers and
 banks in the event of default. Members noted that if unemployment were to rise more sharply than
 expected, the share of households and businesses falling into loan arrears would increase further.
 However, stress-testing exercises had suggested that banks would be well placed to continue lending to
 households and businesses even in the face of a substantial deterioration in economic conditions.
Members noted that commercial real estate valuations had recently declined from high levels in Australia
 and abroad, and that further declines were in prospect. The potential for a deterioration in underlying
 tenant demand, in response to slowing economic activity, was a source of downside risk to valuations for
 offices. However, Australian banks’ exposures to commercial property were small and generally
 characterised by conservative lending standards. Non-bank institutional investors and foreign bank
 branches were more exposed to commercial real estate in Australia. While non-bank lenders also had some
 exposure to commercial real estate, and on slightly different terms from banks, their small size helped
 to limit potential risks to the financial system.
Finally, members noted the ongoing focus of regulators and financial institutions on a range of threats to
 financial stability arising from outside the financial system. These included the increasing intensity of
 cyber-attacks on financial institutions, the potential for an escalation in geopolitical tensions, which
 could result in disruptions to trade and international capital flows, and potential climate-related
 disruptions to parts of the financial system.
Considerations for monetary policy
In turning to the policy decision, members noted that inflation remained too high, the unemployment rate
 was very low and surveyed business conditions were still strong. At the same time, there had been a
 material slowing in the growth of consumer spending. Members noted that Australia’s banking system
 was unquestionably strong and that the underlying issues that had sparked bank failures abroad were not
 present domestically because of the different structure of Australian banks and adherence to more
 stringent regulatory arrangements. They also noted that most households were well placed to navigate the
 financial challenges associated with higher prices and interest rates, especially if employment remained
 resilient. However, there were parts of the household sector that are under financial stress and, as a
 result, would have to scale back their spending to minimise the need to draw upon savings. Members also
 observed that financial market pricing implied an expectation that the cash rate would be unchanged for
 some time, but that this reflected the weighted average of a range of different scenarios.
Members began their discussion of what these factors meant for the policy decision by noting that it was
 still possible to navigate the narrow path of bringing inflation down in a timely way while keeping the
 economy on an even keel. They agreed that this remained the Board’s aim but acknowledged that the
 path was a narrow one.
Members first discussed the case for a further 25 basis point increase in the cash rate target at
 this meeting. This case was again founded on the observation that inflation remained too high and the
 labour market was very tight. Members noted that the forecasts produced by the staff in February had
 inflation returning to the target range only by mid-2025 and that it would be inconsistent with the
 Board’s mandate for it to tolerate a slower return to target. These forecasts were conditioned on
 monetary policy being tightened a little further. Overseas experience in preceding months also raised a
 concern that high inflation could be more persistent than had been expected. In addition, members noted
 that imbalances between demand and supply in the housing and energy markets may limit how quickly
 inflation declines. Members considered the argument that, in these circumstances, it was better to
 continue to raise interest rates to ensure inflation is brought back to target faster, noting that
 monetary policy could be eased quickly if an adverse shock caused inflation and economic activity to slow
 by more, or more rapidly, than forecast.
Members also noted that most households were in a strong financial position and would be able to absorb
 higher prices and interest rates without needing to materially draw down on their savings, although some
 households were already having to do so. Only a few households with mortgages were at risk of having
 negative equity in their homes, even if prices were to fall somewhat further.
Two other pieces of information accumulated since the previous meeting were relevant to the case for
 tightening monetary policy further.
One was the upgrade to near-term projections for population growth. Members noted that this could put
 significant pressure on Australia’s existing capital stock, especially housing, which would in turn
 manifest in higher consumer prices. They observed that there were already signs that the recent fall in
 housing prices might be smaller and more short-lived than expected. Although higher immigration might
 reduce wage pressures in industries that had been experiencing significant labour shortages, members
 noted that the net effect of a sudden surge in population growth could be somewhat inflationary for a
 period. Members acknowledged that the rise in population growth was to some extent temporary and follows
 a period of very weak population growth.
The second piece of information was the increased risk of larger wage increases in parts of the economy,
 including in the public sector, later in the year. Members observed that the flowthrough to inflation
 from wages in social and public sector industries is somewhat diffuse, given the prevalence of
 administered prices, but judged that it was nonetheless likely to have some impact. Overall, wages growth
 remained consistent with the inflation target, provided there was some pick-up in productivity growth.
Members then discussed the case for not changing monetary policy at this meeting. This case rested on the
 observation that monetary policy had already been tightened significantly in a short period. The full
 effects of this on the economy were yet to be observed, given the lags in the transmission of monetary
 policy. Members judged that monetary policy was already restrictive. For example, given the current cash
 rate, required repayments on home loans, as a share of disposable income, were anticipated to rise to
 around their highest level on record. Members discussed the uncertainties surrounding the impact that
 this historically rapid increase in interest rates would have on the economy. They noted that there were
 already signs that tighter monetary policy had contributed to a slowdown in the housing market, a
 material slowing in consumption growth, and financial pressure for a segment of households with housing
 loans.
Members assessed the value of pausing at this meeting to gather more information on the economic outlook.
 Over the coming month, members observed that they would receive another quarterly reading on inflation,
 additional monthly readings on the labour market, household spending and business conditions, and further
 information on developments in the global economy and financial markets. The staff were also due to
 present a full set of updated forecasts at the following meeting. This suite of additional information
 would be valuable in reassessing the economic outlook and the extent to which monetary policy would need
 to be tightened further, especially given the range of uncertainties surrounding the outlook. Members
 also noted that pausing after a run of monetary policy changes would be consistent with the typical
 pattern of policymaking before the pandemic.
Members recognised the strength of both sets of arguments, but, on balance, agreed that there was a
 stronger case to pause at this meeting and reassess the need for further tightening at future meetings.
 Members agreed that it would be helpful to have additional data and an updated set of forecasts before
 again considering when and how much more monetary policy would need to be tightened to bring inflation
 back to target within a reasonable timeframe.
In considering communication of the Board’s decision, members observed that it was important to be
 clear that monetary policy may need to be tightened at subsequent meetings and that the purpose of
 pausing at this meeting was to allow time to gather more information. Members also agreed that the
 strength of the Australian banking sector meant that financial system resilience was not a consideration
 in the decision to pause at this meeting. They thought that the Board’s future cash rate decisions
 would depend on developments in the global economy, trends in household spending and the outlook for
 inflation and the labour market. The Governor noted that his speech to the National Press Club the
 following day would provide an opportunity to explain these issues in more detail. He would also affirm
 that the Board remains resolute in its determination to return inflation to target and will do what is
 necessary to achieve that outcome.
The decision
The Board decided to leave the cash rate target unchanged at 3.6 per cent. It also decided to
 leave the interest rate on Exchange Settlement balances unchanged at 3.5 per cent.
