BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Minutes
TITLE: 7 November 2023
DATE: 07/11/2023
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/monetary-policy/rba-board-minutes/2023/2023-11-07.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting of the Reserve Bank Board
Hybrid – 7 November 2023
Members participating
Michele Bullock (Governor and Chair), Ian Harper AO, Carolyn Hewson AO,
 Steven Kennedy PSM, Iain Ross AO, Elana Rubin AM,
 Carol Schwartz AO, Alison Watkins AM
Others participating
Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial Markets), Marion Kohler (Acting Assistant
 Governor, Economic)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), David Norman (Deputy Secretary)
Penelope Smith (Head, International Department), Tom Rosewall (Acting Head, Economic Analysis
 Department), Carl Schwartz (Acting Head, Domestic Markets Department)
International economic developments
Members commenced their discussion of international economic developments by observing that high inflation
 remained the primary concern for central banks in advanced economies. Headline inflation had edged higher
 over recent months in several countries because of increases in fuel prices. Core inflation had declined
 in year-ended terms, but core services inflation generally remained high. Although inflation in the
 prices of services other than housing had likely passed its peak and demand in the services sector had
 started to ease, the overall disinflation process was viewed as likely to take some time.
The Israel-Hamas war had increased uncertainty about the global economic outlook. Members noted that the
 conflict could present an upside risk for global inflation if it were to lead to a disruption in energy
 supply from the region. Prices for liquified natural gas had already increased significantly following
 the shutdown of Israel’s Tamar gas field. Oil prices had been volatile since the beginning of the
 conflict but had not increased in a sustained way. Members also noted that the ongoing El Niño event
 presented an upside risk to global food price inflation.
Output growth had slowed in many advanced economies, in response to tighter monetary policy and
 cost-of-living pressures. But the slowing had been less than anticipated in some economies and labour
 markets remained tight; economic activity in the United States was particularly strong in the September
 quarter. Growth in G7 economies was expected to slow further in the coming year because of tighter
 financial conditions.
Members discussed the near-term outlook for Australia’s major trading partners. Output growth was
 expected to slow from 3½ per cent in 2023 to 3 per cent in 2024, well below the
 average growth rate in the decade prior to the pandemic. This outlook was largely unchanged from the
 August meeting. Members observed that the economic outlook in China remained uncertain. The economy there
 had continued to recover in the September quarter, driven by activity in the services sector, but the
 level of GDP remained below the trend expected by many observers prior to the pandemic. Government
 stimulus had provided support to growth this year, particularly through the financing of infrastructure
 investment. However, the property sector remained very weak, which was expected to weigh on Chinese
 growth in the year ahead. Members considered the risk that fragility in the property sector might have a
 more pronounced adverse effect on the Chinese economy as a whole.
Domestic economic conditions
Turning to the domestic economy, members observed that inflation had continued to decline in year-ended
 terms in the September quarter. However, underlying inflation was stronger than expected a few months
 earlier and, on a quarterly basis, had picked up slightly. When considered with other information, the
 assessment of the staff was that higher inflation reflected demand pressures in the economy being
 stronger than had been expected. Stronger-than-expected inflation was evident for a broad range of
 services, reflecting a high level of domestic demand and continued pressure from the costs of both labour
 and domestic non-labour inputs (including factors such as rents, electricity and insurance). Housing rent
 inflation over the prior six months had been running at around 10 per cent in annualised terms,
 reflecting low vacancy rates and strong growth in population and aggregate income. Meanwhile, goods price
 inflation had eased further in the September quarter – largely in line with expectations –
 because of an easing in supply chain pressures and raw materials prices.
Members observed that a range of indicators of activity over preceding months supported the conclusion
 that domestic demand pressures had been a little stronger than previously thought. Consequently, the
 outlook for output growth and inflation had been revised up over the forecast period, with the largest
 revisions being for the year ahead. Inflation was expected to decline at a more gradual pace than
 previously expected, because of the greater-than-expected persistence in services price inflation. As
 demand and cost pressures progressively ease, inflation was expected to decline to a little below
 3 per cent by the end of 2025.
Output growth was expected to remain below trend over 2023 and 2024, and GDP per capita was expected to
 decline over 2023. Inflation and high interest rates continued to weigh on demand, particularly via their
 effect on people’s real incomes and, consequently, growth in household consumption. Even so, the
 outlook for output growth had been revised up in the near term compared with the previous forecasts. This
 partly reflected stronger-than-expected population growth, which had been revised higher over successive
 prior quarters, and more strength in private and public investment than had previously been expected.
Members observed that subdued growth in consumption had persisted into the second half of 2023, based on a
 range of timely indicators. However, recent retail sales data suggested that spending had held up better
 than had been expected a few months earlier. Real household disposable income was expected to decline
 over 2023, reflecting the combined effects of high inflation and the rise in interest rates and tax
 payable. As these effects begin to fade during 2024, household consumption growth was forecast to pick
 up. Furthermore, housing prices had increased over the preceding nine months (regaining their April 2022
 peak) and this additional wealth was expected to provide some support to consumption (though possibly
 less than in the past given the low rates of housing turnover and credit growth).
Spending in the economy had been supported by the rebound in international student and tourist arrivals
 (whose spending is recorded as services exports in the national accounts). This was supporting demand for
 consumer-facing firms, partly offsetting the decline in spending by residents. A recovery in residential
 investment was also expected further out, supported by strong population growth, the continuing recovery
 in housing prices and shortening construction times.
The outlook for non-mining business investment remained favourable, given a high level of capacity
 utilisation, strong population growth and an easing in supply constraints. Both business investment and
 public demand had contributed to the resilience in demand in the first half of 2023, which was expected
 to continue. Investment was expected to be supported by the large pipeline of private and public
 projects, particularly in infrastructure construction and projects related to the transition to renewable
 energy sources.
Members noted that the labour market had been resilient in 2023, though there had been signs of gradual
 easing in a range of measures. Employment growth had slowed to around the rate of population growth, such
 that the employment-to-population ratio had remained around its multi-decade high. Hours worked had been
 a key margin of adjustment for firms. Average hours worked had declined over preceding months and most of
 the employment growth during that period had been in part-time work. As a result, the underemployment
 rate had picked up a little more than the unemployment rate; however, both remained very low, consistent
 with labour market conditions remaining tight. The stronger outlook for economic activity over the year
 ahead resulted in the forecast rise in the unemployment rate being more gradual than had previously been
 expected. The unemployment rate was anticipated to stabilise around 4¼ per cent from late 2024,
 with employment growing but at a more moderate pace.
Despite the ongoing tightness in the labour market, the outlook for wages growth had been revised a little
 lower in the near term based on the signal from timely indicators. Liaison with firms suggested that
 there had been a moderation in wages growth in some jobs and industries, such as business services and
 construction, where wages growth had been especially strong in the preceding year. However, growth in
 unit labour costs, which incorporated weak productivity outcomes over preceding years, remained very
 high. Members noted that the forecasts assumed that productivity growth would pick up, such that growth
 in unit labour costs eased to a rate consistent with the inflation target.
Members considered the annual review of the Bank’s forecasts. Headline inflation and the unemployment
 rate had been broadly in line with the forecasts a year earlier. On the other hand, underlying inflation
 had been higher than anticipated, reflecting the persistence of broad-based domestic cost pressures in an
 environment of still-robust levels of aggregate demand. Members discussed the relative importance of
 headline and underlying inflation for future inflation, noting that both measures contain relevant
 information.
Over the prior year, there had been offsetting misses within the outlook for GDP growth. Growth in
 consumption had turned out weaker than had been expected and capacity constraints had persisted in some
 industries, particularly construction. However, population growth had turned out substantially higher
 than had been assumed, as the return of students and international visitors had occurred faster than had
 been expected, which had added strongly to spending. Members noted that the upside surprise on population
 growth had added to both demand and supply; as a result, the net effects on inflation had been largely
 offsetting in aggregate but may have varied across sectors. Members also noted the staff’s response
 to the lessons learned from the previous year’s review, which included incorporating more signal
 from overseas developments, expanding the suite of alternative timely indicators and increasing the use
 of scenario analysis.
International financial markets
Central banks in advanced economies had left policy rates unchanged over the prior month. Most had
 communicated that policy rates were restrictive and that the full effect of cumulative policy tightening
 was still to be felt, given the lags with which policy affects the economy. Central banks had also
 continued to communicate that future decisions will depend on incoming data. While commentary from most
 central banks had focused on balancing upside risks to inflation with downside risks to output growth,
 inflation was still above central banks’ targets and most retained a monetary policy tightening
 bias.
Market participants’ expectations for the trajectory of policy rates had generally been little
 changed since the October meeting. The central expectation was that policy rates would be held at or near
 current levels until at least mid-2024, then gradually decline. Members noted that Australia was an
 exception.
Government bond yields in advanced economies had risen over preceding months. Most of the increase in
 longer term yields reflected higher real yields. While there had been a small increase in longer term
 market-implied inflation expectations, these remained consistent with inflation targets. Shorter term
 bond yields had generally been stable in the major advanced economies, reflecting expectations that
 policy rates would remain around current levels for an extended period. In Japan, yields had risen after
 the Bank of Japan adjusted its yield curve control policies.
Members discussed possible reasons why real longer term bond yields in advanced economies had risen. One
 explanation was that market participants had increased their estimates of neutral interest rates in light
 of the resilience of economic activity and the persistence of inflation. Estimates of term premia had
 also risen and uncertainty over the future path of inflation and interest rates was likely to have
 contributed to this. The increase in term premia had occurred alongside expectations of rising government
 debt levels – especially in the United States – and as central banks reduced their asset
 holdings. Higher term premia implied a tightening in financial conditions independent of monetary policy.
 Members noted that the economic significance of this tightening was somewhat lower in Australia, given
 that bond markets are less important for corporate finance in Australia than in the United States.
Conditions in private funding markets had tightened over preceding months. Corporate bond yields had
 increased together with the rise in government bond yields and a modest widening of credit spreads.
 Equity prices in the United States and Europe had declined, in part owing to higher interest rates.
 Levels of these asset prices suggested that investors did not anticipate significant declines in
 corporate profits or a large rise in corporate defaults, despite significant increases in policy rates to
 levels judged to be restrictive.
In China, property developers remained under extreme stress. They had very limited access to funding from
 capital markets and banks had been hesitant to extend loans as defaults had risen. Stress in the property
 sector had been contained thus far, but there were ongoing concerns about possible spillovers to other
 parts of China’s financial sector. Chinese authorities had taken measures to stabilise the property
 market, in addition to fiscal and monetary policy measures to support the recovery more broadly. The
 renminbi had stabilised around multi-decade lows.
The Australian dollar had appreciated a little on a trade-weighted basis and against the US dollar
 since the October meeting. This had been underpinned by increases in Australian government bond yields
 relative to other advanced economies and higher commodity prices.
Domestic financial markets
Members noted that financial conditions in Australia were restrictive. The average outstanding variable
 home loan rate had increased by around 330 basis points over the monetary tightening phase. This was
 less than the 400 basis point increase in the cash rate because of competition for customers among
 banks, although there were signs that this competition was easing at the margin. Housing loan commitments
 had increased in preceding months to be 9 per cent above the low point in February 2023.
 Nonetheless, housing loan commitments remained almost 30 per cent below their peak in January
 2022, consistent with the effect of higher interest rates on maximum borrowing capacity.
Households’ required mortgage payments had increased further over the September quarter to around
 10 per cent of household disposable income. While this remained a little above the previous
 estimated historical peak for mortgage payments, households’ overall debt-servicing costs were
 estimated to be lower than the previous peak as households had substantially reduced their stock of
 personal debt over the preceding 15 years. Required mortgage payments were expected to rise further
 as borrowers with fixed-rate loans roll off onto higher rates. Meanwhile, there was a rise in extra
 payments into offset and redraw accounts in the September quarter, and the share of borrowers drawing
 down these balances had remained stable over the course of the year.
Members observed that longer term government bond yields in Australia had risen, partly reflecting an
 increase in inflation expectations, and that domestic long-term yields had moved above those in the
 United States. Short-term bond yields had also increased, along with market expectations for the cash
 rate, which had risen following the minutes of the October meeting and the higher-than-expected inflation
 data. Market pricing was consistent with participants ascribing around a two-thirds probability to a
 25 basis point increase in the cash rate in November, and some expectation of a further increase by
 mid-2024. The market economists monitored by the Bank were all expecting a 25 basis point increase
 in November, with a small minority expecting a further increase in December.
Considerations for monetary policy
In turning to the policy decision, members noted that underlying inflation had been more persistent over
 the prior few months than had previously been expected. High inflation was being underpinned by
 above-average price rises for a wide range of consumer goods and services. There was clear evidence
 – most notably for services price inflation, which was quite brisk – that this owed to
 domestically generated pressures associated with aggregate demand exceeding aggregate supply. This
 strength in demand was allowing firms to pass on higher costs for labour and non-labour inputs. Data
 released over prior months had also signalled that domestic demand had been more resilient than
 previously expected. This resilience in activity had occurred despite the increases in the cash rate over
 the prior 18 months progressively working their way through the economy. Members noted that the
 experience of other countries over prior months had been similar, and that international experience
 previously had been a useful guide to economic developments in Australia.
Members considered the revised central forecasts produced by Bank staff. They observed that the forecasts
 were for inflation to decline to the top of the target range only in late 2025, a bit later than had been
 envisaged in August. Members also noted that the unemployment rate was still expected to increase, but by
 less than thought in August.
Members considered the implications for monetary policy of developments in financial conditions. They
 noted that the cash rate remained below policy rates in many other countries, despite similar economic
 conditions, although various factors might account for this difference. The rise in longer term bond
 yields over preceding months had fewer implications for Australia than in some other countries, and the
 exchange rate was little changed on a trade-weighted basis. Members also noted that the staff’s
 broader estimates of required household debt repayments (as a share of disposable income) implied that
 the debt repayment burden was not as high as it had been 15 years earlier. More generally, members
 noted that fixed-rate borrowers were tending to roll onto (more expensive) variable-rate loans without a
 noticeable adverse effect on their ability to service their loans. At the same time, housing prices were
 continuing to rise and loan approvals had increased over prior months, both of which might indicate that
 financial conditions are not especially restrictive.
In light of these observations, members considered whether to raise the cash rate target by a further
 25 basis points or to hold the cash rate steady.
The case to raise the cash rate target by a further 25 basis points centred on the risks arising from
 the outlook for inflation being stronger than it had been some months earlier. Members noted that
 underlying inflation in the September quarter had been higher than previously expected, inflationary
 pressures were evident across a broad range of consumer items, and inflation was most apparent in items
 for which inflation typically took longer to subside (such as services). Collectively, these observations
 implied that it would take some time for inflation to return to target.
Members also noted that the greater-than-expected resilience of domestic demand over preceding months had
 implications for the inflation outlook. In particular, the staff’s forecasts for a more modest
 slowing in output growth, and for the unemployment rate to be lower over the forecast profile than
 previously assumed, implied that overall demand would remain higher for a significant period. As a
 result, it would take longer to bring aggregate demand and supply into balance than previously expected.
 Members observed that the forecasts were predicated on there being an additional one to two increases in
 the cash rate over coming quarters and an assumption that productivity growth would recover over the year
 ahead. Moreover, members noted that lowering inflation from its current level would require growth in
 aggregate demand to remain subdued; this was unlike the disinflation achieved to date, which had occurred
 largely because of fading supply shocks. As a result, it was expected to take longer to return inflation
 to target than it had taken so far to reduce inflation from its peak.
Members also observed that, while longer term inflation expectations remained broadly anchored, there had
 been signs of a slight upward drift in some financial market measures of inflation expectations. If
 sustained, this would contribute to higher inflation. Furthermore, members noted growing signs of a
 mindset among businesses that any cost increases could be passed onto consumers. In this environment,
 members assessed that tightening monetary policy at this meeting would help to mitigate the risk of an
 unwelcome rise in inflation expectations. A scenario prepared by the staff illustrated that even a modest
 further increase in inflation expectations would make it significantly more challenging and costly to
 return inflation back to target within a reasonable timeframe.
Collectively, these observations underpinned the case to raise the cash rate target at this meeting to
 mitigate the risk that progress in returning inflation to target is further delayed.
The case to hold the cash rate constant at this meeting was premised on the argument that inflation was
 continuing to decline in year-ended terms, the economy was slowing, and the geopolitical and economic
 outlook was highly uncertain. In that environment, there was a case to wait for additional information
 before determining whether a further adjustment to the cash rate was required. Members noted that an
 escalation of tensions in the Middle East would be likely to dampen consumer confidence and global demand
 (though it could also lead to higher inflation expectations and the impact on economic activity in
 Australia was less clear). In addition, members observed that the surge in population growth in Australia
 over the prior year was making it more challenging to assess the underlying resilience of the economy.
 Given these uncertainties, and the acknowledgement that inflation expectations remained broadly anchored,
 there was a credible case that a somewhat slower return of inflation to target did not warrant a policy
 response at this meeting.
After weighing up these two options, members agreed that the case to raise the cash rate target at this
 meeting was the stronger one. Members noted that the risk of not achieving the Board’s inflation
 target by the end of 2025 had increased and that it was appropriate that monetary policy should be
 adjusted to mitigate this. They observed that delaying such an adjustment would create a risk that a
 larger monetary policy response might be required in coming months, especially if inflation pressures
 turned out to be stronger than expected. More generally, members noted that it was important to prevent
 inflation expectations from increasing significantly, given the costs of that eventuality. They agreed
 there was a risk of inflation expectations increasing if the Board left the cash rate target unchanged at
 this meeting, particularly given the Board’s repeated statements that it has a low tolerance for
 inflation returning to target after 2025. Members also noted that the staff’s inflation forecasts
 would be for higher inflation if they had not been predicated on one or two rate rises.
Members discussed the implications of this decision on household finances. While some households were
 benefiting from rising house prices, substantial savings buffers and higher interest income, others were
 experiencing a painful squeeze on their finances. Members noted that a larger-than-typical share of
 borrowers had been drawing down funds in their offset accounts – even while households in aggregate
 continued to build up balances in offset accounts – which was consistent with those households
 finding it harder to finance their expenditure from current incomes. At the same time, members observed
 that this share had not risen over prior months and that banks had not seen a significant rise in the
 incidence of households experiencing difficulties making their mortgage payments. Nonetheless, financial
 pressures on households would be exacerbated by inflation remaining higher for a longer period than
 forecast.
Members agreed that whether further tightening of monetary policy is required to ensure that inflation
 returns to target in a reasonable timeframe would depend on how the incoming data alter the economic
 outlook and the evolving assessment of risks. In making its decisions, the Board will continue to pay
 close attention to developments in the global economy, trends in domestic demand, and the outlook for
 inflation and the labour market. The Board remains resolute in its determination to return inflation to
 target and will do what is necessary to achieve that outcome.
The decision
The Board decided to increase the cash rate target by 25 basis points to 4.35 per cent and
 to increase the interest rate on Exchange Settlement balances by 25 basis points to
 4.25 per cent.
