BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Minutes
TITLE: 9 December 2025
DATE: 09/12/2025
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/monetary-policy/rba-board-minutes/2025/2025-12-09.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

More on the December 2025 monetary policy decision
Minutes of the Monetary Policy Board Meeting
Hybrid – 8 and 9 December 2025
Members participating
Michele Bullock (Governor and Chair), Andrew Hauser (Deputy Governor and Deputy Chair),

 Marnie Baker AM, Renée Fry-McKibbin, Ian Harper AO, Carolyn Hewson AO,

 Iain Ross AO, Alison Watkins AM, Jenny Wilkinson PSM
Others participating
Sarah Hunter (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial

 Markets)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), David Norman (Deputy Secretary)
Meredith Beechey Osterholm (Head, Monetary Policy Strategy), Sally Cray (Chief

 Communications Officer), David Jacobs (Head, Domestic Markets Department), Michael Plumb (Head,

 Economic Analysis Department), Penelope Smith (Head, International Department)
Financial conditions
Members commenced their discussion of financial conditions by reviewing developments in advanced economy

 equity markets. Market sentiment had deteriorated briefly amid concerns about elevated valuations,

 especially for global technology companies. Equity prices had fallen for a period but there had been a

 subsequent rebound in many countries. In the United States, this partly reflected expectations of

 additional monetary policy easing. However, the decline in Australian equity prices had been more

 persistent than in other markets, reflecting a shift higher in the expected path for the cash rate and a

 reappraisal of valuations in some market segments. Corporate bond yields had increased in some countries,

 but spreads to government bond yields remained low across the world. Members observed that investors in

 equity and corporate bond markets continued to price in a benign global economic and financial outlook

 and appeared willing to accept low levels of compensation for the risk of weaker outcomes.
Members noted that financial market participants expected the US Federal Reserve to cut its policy rate at

 its 10 December meeting, and to continue easing policy in 2026 as the immediate impacts of higher

 tariffs and prior fiscal stimulus waned. By contrast, the European Central Bank was not expected to cut

 rates further and the next move in policy rates in Canada, New Zealand, Sweden and Australia was expected

 to be up. The Bank of Japan was expected to continue gradually raising its policy rate amid persistent

 inflationary pressures.
Members discussed the rise in market-implied expectations for the policy rate in Australia in more detail.

 They noted that expectations had moved significantly higher in prior months, but the pick-up had been

 relatively smooth and progressive as a sequence of data releases showed the domestic outlook had

 strengthened and risks to the global economy had receded. That trend had continued since the previous

 meeting, as markets moved from pricing in a further 25 basis point cut in the cash rate by the end

 of 2026 to pricing in a 25 basis point increase. Members noted that this latest shift was in

 response to both communication by the RBA and the release of data on inflation, the labour market and

 GDP. These data had been interpreted by markets as suggesting that capacity constraints and inflationary

 pressures were building.
Trends in long-term sovereign bond yields had broadly mirrored shifts in policy rate expectations in

 Australia and abroad. Sovereign bond yields had declined in the United States in prior months but had

 increased in Japan, Germany, Canada and Australia. In Japan, the increase in bond yields was in

 anticipation of both fiscal stimulus and further monetary policy tightening by the Bank of Japan. Members

 noted that the rise in short-term bond yields in Australia was consistent with market participants

 expecting both a tighter outlook for monetary policy and higher inflation in the near term. However,

 market measures of long-term inflation expectations had remained anchored and consistent with the

 inflation target, implying that investors expected the Board would respond as needed to the evolving

 inflation outlook.
In China, total social financing had continued to rise faster than nominal GDP. This was driven largely by

 government borrowing, including because of efforts to shift debt from local government financing vehicles

 to local governments. Household demand for credit remained very weak, reflecting ongoing concerns about

 the property market.
Members turned to considering the extent to which current Australian financial conditions were

 restrictive. Taken together, the incoming data had reduced their confidence in their earlier assessment

 that monetary policy was still a little restrictive.
Members considered model-based estimates of the neutral cash rate, which reflect data on inflation, the

 labour market and bond yields. These implied that the cash rate was now around the average of the central

 estimate of its neutral level from the full suite of models maintained by RBA staff. Members acknowledged

 that model estimates of the neutral cash rate were subject to considerable estimation error and provided

 no direct guide to monetary policy.
Members therefore assessed the implications for financial conditions from a range of other indicators. The

 picture remained somewhat mixed but was consistent with a further easing in conditions over the preceding

 month. Extra mortgage payments were still at a high level and the aggregate household savings ratio was

 higher than its pre-pandemic average, both of which were consistent with monetary policy being a little

 tight. However, demand for credit had picked up significantly and household credit was now growing in

 line with disposable incomes, following a period in which households had deleveraged. This was most

 notable for housing credit to investors, which tends to be more responsive to interest rate cuts than

 housing credit to owner-occupiers. Growth in business debt had also remained strong and business debt

 relative to GDP had risen to be around pre-pandemic levels.
Members noted that the Australian dollar had appreciated only a little since the November meeting, despite

 the significant rise in the average interest rate differential between Australia and major advanced

 economies. Members observed that the limited response of the exchange rate to interest rate differentials

 was potentially contributing to easier financial conditions than otherwise. However, the real exchange

 rate had appreciated over preceding years, implying a decline in international competitiveness.
Economic conditions
Members began their discussion of economic conditions by considering trends in inflation. They noted that

 a range of data received since the November meeting pointed to the possibility that inflationary

 pressures could be a little more persistent than had been previously assessed.
Members welcomed the inaugural release of the complete monthly CPI. The new data showed that headline

 inflation over the year to October had increased to 3.8 per cent. Some of that increase

 reflected the cessation of government electricity rebates for some households; members noted that all

 federal and state government electricity rebates would cease by early 2026. Inflation for items such as

 new dwelling costs and market services had remained elevated, as expected by the staff at the time of the

 November projections. However, inflation of durable goods prices had exceeded expectations and inflation

 of domestic travel prices, which can be volatile, was elevated. Overall, the data suggested some upside

 risk to the outlook for underlying inflation in the near term, and it was likely that headline inflation

 would exceed the November forecasts in the near term.
Members noted that it would take time to understand the properties of the new monthly CPI data.

 Furthermore, as the November
Statement
had set out, monthly data are inherently more

 volatile than quarterly data, and the difficulty of seasonally adjusting some components at a monthly

 frequency (owing to their short history) would make the trimmed mean and other measures of the underlying

 monthly inflation rate less reliable for a period. As a result, the staff would continue to rely

 primarily on the quarterly CPI – which has a much longer history and well-understood properties

 – for a while to assess the underlying momentum in inflation. Members noted that inflation data for

 the December quarter would be available prior to the February meeting.
Members discussed a range of other data that were also signalling higher inflationary pressures. These

 data included various price measures from the recently released national accounts. Growth in average

 earnings and unit labour costs had risen in the September quarter and were stronger than had been

 expected. Model-based estimates of capacity pressures in the economy had been revised higher, and the NAB

 business survey measures of capacity utilisation had also increased since the middle of the year.
By contrast, the Wage Price Index (WPI) measure of wages growth had been broadly steady in recent quarters

 (after adjusting for administered wage decisions). Higher public sector wages growth had been offsetting

 an easing in private sector wages growth in the WPI, which had declined to its lowest rate since 2021.
Members considered what a broader range of indicators implied about balance in the labour market. The

 increase in the unemployment rate recorded in September had been unwound in October. Other measures of

 labour underutilisation also remained at low levels. Information from business surveys and liaison

 continued to suggest that a significant share of firms were experiencing difficulty sourcing labour.

 Members were presented with some refinements to how labour market indicators were being incorporated into

 the staff’s assessment of conditions relative to full employment. These refinements included:

 reviewing which labour market indicators provided the best information to assess full employment;

 improving the way in which cyclical movements are identified; and strengthening the methodology for

 aggregating this information to inform an assessment of the extent of labour market tightness. Members

 noted that the results from this new analysis provided additional support for the staff’s existing

 assessment that labour market conditions remained a little tight, rather than changing it significantly.

 The framework will be outlined in the February 2026
Statement
.
Turning to momentum in the economy, members noted that year-ended GDP growth had picked up in the

 September quarter to around the staff’s estimate of potential growth, as had been expected in

 November. The composition of growth had also continued to shift from public to private demand. Members

 noted that the 1.2 per cent increase in private demand had been much stronger than the

 expectation of 0.5 per cent at the time of the November
Statement
, but the impact

 of this on overall GDP growth had been somewhat offset by a large and unexpected drawdown of mining

 inventories, and increased imports. Much of the unexpected strength in private demand was driven by

 investment in components that can be volatile from quarter to quarter and which are largely imported.

 However, members noted that investment in data centres (one component of the strength in the quarter) was

 likely to continue in the coming years and observed that, in turn, this could stimulate additional

 infrastructure investment. Momentum in dwelling investment also appeared to be rising and members noted

 that data revisions meant household incomes now appeared higher than previously recorded. Members

 observed that, while the easing in monetary policy since the beginning of the year had certainly begun to

 support conditions in the private sector, the bulk of the effect on activity was expected to be seen in

 2026, helping to offset the decline in other drivers of growth. Business surveys also supported the

 expectation that the recovery in private demand would be sustained. Members noted that this, in turn,

 would support labour demand.
In the global economy, members noted that production and trade had been relatively resilient over

 preceding months and were again a little stronger than expected. The likelihood of a significant

 tariff-related slowdown in global growth had continued to recede, partly reflecting fiscal and monetary

 policy support in some economies and a significant realignment of trade flows. Very strong investment in

 the United States associated with artificial intelligence and new technologies more broadly had also been

 an important contributor to global economic activity. By contrast, fixed asset investment in China had

 been very weak. While the staff’s central forecast remained that Chinese authorities would provide

 the necessary stimulus to meet their GDP growth target, concerns persisted around excess capacity in some

 sectors of the Chinese economy and how that would be resolved.
Considerations for monetary policy
Turning to considerations for the monetary policy decision, members highlighted three judgements that were

 central to their decision at this meeting: first, the extent to which aggregate demand exceeds potential

 supply, and the implications of this for the persistence of the recent pick-up in inflation; second, the

 outlook for growth in labour demand and economic activity; and, third, whether financial conditions were

 still restrictive. Given the inherent uncertainty around each of these, members considered both their

 central outlook and whether their distribution of risks around the outlook had shifted.
Regarding inflation, members noted that the September quarter CPI release had been well above the forecast

 published in the August
Statement
. Moreover, the detail within the October monthly CPI data

 pointed to the possibility that inflation in the December quarter could also be higher than had been

 expected in the November forecast. Members noted that a range of other data from the national accounts

 were suggesting the possibility of a more broad-based pick-up in cost and price inflation: average

 earnings growth had been strong; unit labour costs had continued to grow quite quickly; and output price

 inflation was above its historical average.
At the same time, members noted several reasons to be cautious about how much signal to draw from these

 data. There was uncertainty around the extent to which the recent pick-up in the CPI inflation data

 across several components would be sustained. Members also noted that both average earnings and unit

 labour costs are typically quite volatile and had been influenced by some one-off factors in the

 September quarter. These considerations all suggested that it was prudent to be cautious before

 extrapolating recent strength in inflation too far into the future.
Turning to the outlook for the labour market, members noted that the rise in the unemployment rate

 reported at the November meeting had since unwound. They agreed that this had reduced the risk of a

 material easing in labour market conditions. Future labour demand was expected to be supported to some

 extent by the recovery in private economic activity. Members pointed to the various signs that suggested

 the lift in private demand would be sustained, including upward revisions to firms’ capital

 expenditure expectations. Members discussed the continued presence of downside risks emanating from the

 world economy and global asset valuations, but noted that global growth and trade had proven materially

 stronger than had been expected. Moreover, the risks to the outlook no longer appeared as pronounced as

 earlier in the year.
Regarding the extent of excess demand, members judged that the recent data and analysis by the staff

 supported greater confidence in their judgement that the labour market was still a little tight and the

 output gap still positive. Indeed, there was some risk that capacity constraints in the labour market

 could prove tighter than expected, especially if the recovery in activity strengthened further. In

 relation to the output gap, members observed that recent data on inflation and output growth had resulted

 in a rise in model-based estimates of excess demand. Members highlighted the independent signal from the

 NAB survey’s indicator of capacity utilisation, which also suggested that capacity constraints had

 increased further above historical averages. Members noted that the forecasts from the November
Statement
had been consistent with the output gap being broadly stable over the coming two

 years, so these developments posed some upside risk to that outlook. They acknowledged, however, that

 some other economic forecasters were more optimistic about the potential growth rate of the economy.
Turning to their judgement about the stance of monetary policy, members agreed that there were conflicting

 signals about whether financial conditions were still restrictive or not, and it was not possible to be

 confident in any assessment. Some members judged that, on balance, financial conditions were perhaps no

 longer restrictive. These members placed a reasonable weight on signs that banks were competing

 aggressively to lend, risk premia in capital markets were low and the response in the housing market to

 policy easing earlier in the year had been quite marked. Other members assessed that, on balance,

 financial conditions were a little restrictive. These members placed more emphasis on the fact that the

 unemployment rate had drifted up over 2025. Members acknowledged that the full impact of the easing in

 monetary policy through 2025 was yet to be seen. However, government bond yields had risen materially in

 prior months and it would be important to evaluate the impact of those changes in the February 2026

 forecasts.
Members expressed their concerns about the recent trend in inflation, the risk it could be more persistent

 than currently assessed and the potential for that persistence, if it crystallised, to contribute to an

 environment in which price increases are more readily accepted and households’ purchasing power

 comes under further pressure. They noted that the November forecast already projected underlying

 inflation to remain above the midpoint of the target range until 2027, albeit on the assumption that the

 cash rate followed the November market path, which envisaged further easing in monetary policy. Members

 noted that the economy appeared to be operating with a degree of excess demand and it was not clear

 whether financial conditions were sufficiently restrictive to bring aggregate demand and supply back to

 balance. Members discussed the circumstances in which, should these trends persist, an increase in the

 cash rate might need to be considered at some point in the coming year.
However, members judged that it was too early to determine whether inflation would be more persistent than

 they had assumed in November, given the uncertainties about the reliability of the signal from the new

 data series at present. If financial conditions were still slightly restrictive, and evidence emerged

 that a material part of the apparent renewed pick-up in inflationary pressures reflected volatile or

 temporary factors, then holding the cash rate at its current level for some time may be sufficient to

 keep the economy close to balance. It was also important to evaluate the impact of the recent material

 rise in market rates at both shorter and longer term maturities. Overall, therefore, while recent data

 suggested the risks to inflation had tilted to the upside, members felt it would take a little longer to

 assess the persistence of inflationary pressures. As a result, they agreed it was appropriate to leave

 the cash rate target unchanged at this meeting and assess at future meetings how their judgements about

 the key considerations had evolved.
In finalising its statement, the Board agreed to continue to be attentive to the data and the evolving

 assessment of the outlook when making its decisions. The Board will remain focused on its mandate to

 deliver price stability and full employment and will do what it considers necessary to achieve that

 outcome.
The decision
The Board decided unanimously to leave the cash rate target unchanged at 3.60 per cent.
