BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Minutes
TITLE: 8 July 2025
DATE: 08/07/2025
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/monetary-policy/rba-board-minutes/2025/2025-07-08.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

More on the July 2025 monetary policy decision
Minutes of the Monetary Policy Board Meeting
Sydney – 7 and 8 July 2025
Members present
Michele Bullock (Governor and Chair), Andrew Hauser (Deputy Governor and Deputy Chair),
 Marnie Baker AM, Renée Fry-McKibbin, Ian Harper AO, Carolyn Hewson AO,
 Iain Ross AO, Alison Watkins AM, Jenny Wilkinson PSM
Others present
Sarah Hunter (Assistant Governor, Economic), Christopher Kent (Assistant Governor, Financial
 Markets)
Anthony Dickman (Secretary), David Norman (Deputy Secretary)
Meredith Beechey Osterholm (Head, Monetary Policy Strategy), Sally Cray (Chief Communications
 Officer), David Jacobs (Head, Domestic Markets Department), Michael Plumb (Head, Economic
 Analysis Department), Penelope Smith (Head, International Department)
Financial conditions
Members commenced their discussion of financial conditions by observing that financial market pricing
 continued to imply a relatively benign outlook for global growth and inflation. Corporate bond spreads
 had fallen back to levels close to those prevailing immediately prior to the US Administration’s
 tariff announcements in early April. Equity prices were at or near record highs and measures of equity
 risk premia were low. The improvement in market conditions in preceding weeks appeared to reflect an
 expectation that the most extreme outcomes for US tariffs were likely to be avoided. However, the final
 scope of tariffs and policy responses in other countries remained unknown; there were persistent
 geopolitical tensions, including conflict in the Middle East and Ukraine; and increasing concerns about
 long-run fiscal sustainability in a number of major advanced economies. Members discussed whether current
 financial market pricing reflected a degree of complacency on the part of market participants about the
 impact of these factors on the outlook for the global economy or suggested that earlier pessimism might
 have been overstated.
Central bank policy rate expectations had generally been little changed since the previous meeting. In the
 United States, financial market participants expected the US policy rate to be reduced only slightly over
 the remainder of 2025, consistent with relatively high near-term market-implied measures of inflation
 expectations, and then by more in 2026. Likewise, policy interest rates in most other major advanced
 economies were expected to be reduced by only a small amount over coming months, following significant
 reductions over the prior year. The Bank of Japan was expected to continue raising its policy rate
 gradually.
Longer term sovereign bond yields had declined a little across most advanced economies since the previous
 meeting but remained higher than around a year earlier. There had been minimal immediate reaction in
 yields to the passage in the US Congress of the Administration’s
One Big Beautiful Bill Act of
 2025
. Nonetheless, the prospect of the passage of the legislation had contributed to growing
 concerns over sizeable fiscal deficits in future. Members noted that yields in Australia had declined by
 more than in the United States, including in response to the market’s interpretation of how incoming
 domestic data might influence monetary policy.
The Australian dollar had been little changed on a trade-weighted basis since the start of 2025, despite
 significant global developments. The decline in yield differentials between Australia and the rest of the
 world since the turn of the year had placed downward pressure on the Australian dollar, but this had been
 offset by the broad-based depreciation of the US dollar from the historical highs reached in 2024.
 The RBA index of commodity prices had been little changed since the previous meeting. Members noted that
 a combination of the higher supply of iron ore and the recent decline in Chinese steel production had
 weighed somewhat on iron ore prices. But this had been offset by rises in the prices of gold, rural and
 other commodities. Model estimates of the Australian dollar exchange rate suggested that the
 trade-weighted exchange rate was close to its long-run equilibrium level.
Members discussed how best to assess the ‘neutral’ cash rate in Australia. The forecasts in the
 May
Statement on Monetary Policy
– which provided the staff’s most recent
 comprehensive assessment of the outlook – suggested that underlying inflation would stay around the
 midpoint of the
2–3 per cent
range and the labour market
 would remain close to full employment, assuming that the cash rate followed the then-prevailing market
 path, which was for a gradual decline to a little over 3 per cent by mid-2026. Those forecasts
 therefore suggested that the current setting of monetary policy was modestly restrictive.
The average of a range of alternative model estimates of the neutral cash rate pointed to a broadly
 similar conclusion. However, members observed that estimates from these models are subject to
 considerable dispersion and uncertainty and the average is sensitive to the choice of models included in
 the range. Against that backdrop, public discussion of the stance of monetary policy had possibly
 overemphasised the inferences that could be drawn from these alternative models, especially for the near
 term.
Another indication of the current restrictiveness of monetary policy could be obtained from trends in
 household credit growth. Members noted that household credit had continued to decline gradually relative
 to household incomes, providing further corroboration of the judgement that monetary policy had been
 modestly restrictive. The recent easing in policy had not yet resulted in a pick-up in demand for housing
 credit, and neither loan applications nor loan commitments had increased materially.
Scheduled household debt repayments had declined as expected following the reductions in the cash rate in
 both February and May. Households’ extra payments into their offset and redraw accounts (relative to
 household incomes) remained above average. This was consistent with the further rise in the aggregate
 household savings ratio in the March quarter and with the current level of interest rates providing an
 incentive to save.
Expectations for the cash rate had moved a bit lower since the previous meeting; around half of that move
 had followed the communication of the Board’s decision in May and the remainder largely reflected
 market interpretations of the subsequent flow of economic data. Members noted that a 25 basis point
 reduction in the cash rate at the current meeting was almost fully priced in by market participants and
 was also expected by most market economists. Market pricing implied that a further two reductions in the
 cash rate over the remainder of the year were expected, one more than had been anticipated prior to the
 May meeting. Members acknowledged that there had been previous occasions when market participants had
 been very confident about the outcome of a monetary policy decision but the (Reserve Bank) Board had
 decided on an alternative course.
International economic conditions
Turning to the global economy, members noted that developments in trade policy settings overall had been
 broadly consistent with the assumptions in the staff’s baseline forecasts published in May. These
 assumptions were for tariffs to settle at lower rates than had been announced in early April, but
 significantly higher than prior to the escalation of trade tensions. Measures of global economic
 uncertainty had fallen somewhat, as reflected in a narrower range of expectations among professional
 forecasters for US GDP growth in late 2025, but the outlook remained highly unpredictable. In part, that
 reflected continued uncertainty over future trade policy. The US President had begun to send letters to
 trading partners setting out new tariff rates to be applied from 1 August and suggesting that these
 rates could be adjusted subject to progress on trade negotiations. The global outlook had also been
 clouded by the 12-day
Iran–Israel
war. While the conflict in the Middle East
 had de-escalated significantly and the overall effects on the global economy had been limited, members
 noted that more persistent shocks to energy prices, should they occur, would affect the prospects for
 global growth and inflation.
Members noted that trade policy developments thus far had had a limited effect on momentum in the global
 economy. Household consumption and business conditions in the United States had been fairly resilient
 amid muted pass-through of higher tariffs to prices. However, the central case remained for US inflation
 to increase and output growth to slow in the second half of 2025 as inventories are run down and
 firms’ capacity to absorb higher tariffs diminishes. Members noted that it was possible that the
 effects could in fact be slower to emerge but more persistently adverse, as had occurred following some
 other changes to global trading arrangements in prior years. The Act was expected to support US economic
 activity in the short term but lead to structurally wider fiscal deficits and higher government debt in
 the long term.
Members considered the outlook for activity in China. They noted that conditions in the property sector
 remained weak, with only tentative signs that the downturn in activity had reached its trough. Growth in
 household credit and business financing consequently remained slow. This was being offset somewhat by
 government spending and programs supporting household consumption and investment. Fiscal policy remained
 the key potential channel for further stimulus, and there had been a significant pick-up in government
 bond issuance. Members discussed the commitment of Chinese authorities to their GDP growth target and the
 ability to achieve the target in the face of potential headwinds. Members also noted that China’s
 exports had changed remarkably, both in speed and scale, in response to the introduction of tariffs. It
 was difficult to assess the extent to which these developments reflected changes in the final destination
 of goods towards alternative markets in Europe and Asia, or changes in the routing of goods to existing
 markets.
Domestic economic conditions
Turning to the Australian economy, members noted there had been little discernible effect from recent
 international developments. Forward-looking consumer and business surveys had not fallen sharply in the
 immediate aftermath of the initial tariff announcements, as they had in other developed economies. And it
 was too soon to see much effect in the data on domestic economic activity. These developments remained
 consistent with the assumptions made in the baseline forecasts in May, which anticipated that the overall
 economic effects would be relatively modest and mostly occur in the second half of 2025 and into 2026.
 Members debated whether such effects might be larger or smaller than assumed in May.
GDP growth in the March quarter had been a little softer than expected in May because of an unanticipated
 fall in public demand. By contrast, the recovery in private demand had been slightly stronger than
 forecast, primarily reflecting the outcomes for household consumption and dwelling investment.
Growth in household consumption had eased in the March quarter, as forecast, but upward revisions to the
 prior quarter meant that growth over the year had been slightly stronger than expected. Members noted
 that assessments of underlying momentum in consumption growth were complicated by factors such as the
 temporary electricity subsidies, increases in promotional sales activity late in 2024 and weather events;
 that said, there were signs that consumption growth had picked up since mid-2024 as real household
 incomes had recovered. Even with this recovery, per capita consumption had been little changed over the
 prior year. Available indicators for the June quarter suggested that growth in household consumption had
 been slightly below the staff’s expectations.
Dwelling investment had been stronger than expected and now showed a clearer upward trend since early
 2024. Activity in the established housing market had also begun to pick up.
Members noted the staff’s assessment that the unexpected decline in public demand in the March
 quarter at least partly reflected volatility rather than a material slowing. Recent government budgets
 remained broadly consistent with the staff’s expectations for growth in public demand in the May
 forecasts.
Employment growth in the non-market sector – which includes health care, education and public
 administration – had started to ease in early 2025 from a rapid pace, while employment growth in
 the market sector had picked up a little in year-ended terms. Members noted that a key consideration for
 the economic outlook was the extent to which any further slowing in growth in non-market sector
 employment and activity would be offset by stronger growth in the market sector. They observed that the
 unemployment rate could hold steady even if this transition occurs with somewhat lower overall employment
 growth, depending on developments in labour force participation.
Members considered the effect of recent developments on the unemployment rate and other measures of spare
 capacity. The unemployment rate was unchanged in May and had been stable over the preceding year, and
 other indicators pointed to little change in the unemployment rate in the near term (compared with the
 staff’s previous expectations for a slight increase). The staff still assessed that labour market
 conditions were tight, though with a considerable degree of uncertainty. This assessment was informed by
 a range of indicators, including the relatively low levels of the unemployment and underemployment rates,
 as well as the share of firms reporting labour as a significant constraint on output and the ratio of job
 vacancies to unemployed workers, both of which remained well above their pre-pandemic levels. Growth in
 unit labour costs – a comprehensive, though volatile, measure of labour costs – remained
 high, mostly because of persistently weak productivity growth. By contrast, members noted that measures
 of job mobility had continued to decline (suggesting an easing in competition among firms to attract and
 retain staff), and year-ended growth in the wage price index and services price inflation had continued
 to moderate over the prior year. Members noted that these factors might imply that supply and demand in
 the labour market were closer to balance.
Members discussed the broad-based slowdown in productivity growth in Australia and other advanced
 economies. The slowing over recent decades reflected structural headwinds, though other factors
 (including a decline in productivity in the mining sector and an expansion in the size of the non-market
 sector) had also weighed on productivity growth in preceding years. The staff’s forecast for output
 growth continued to assume that annual productivity growth would pick up, despite no rise in productivity
 since 2016. Members noted that this assumption materially influences the medium-term outlook for growth
 in the economy’s supply capacity, incomes and demand.
Members noted that the sharp declines in the monthly indicators for headline and trimmed-mean inflation
 were likely to have overstated the easing in underlying inflation momentum. They noted that a measure
 that removes electricity and some other volatile prices from the monthly CPI indicator has had a closer
 relationship with quarterly trimmed-mean inflation over preceding years than the monthly trimmed-mean
 indicator. This exclusion-based measure had not eased as much as the monthly trimmed-mean indicator
 recently. Further, movements in components of the monthly CPI data that contained new information
 suggested that underlying inflation in the June quarter could be slightly higher than the staff had
 forecast in May. This reflected upside surprises to new dwelling costs and consumer durables inflation in
 April.
Underlying inflation over the year to the June quarter was still expected to ease further but remain in
 the upper half of the
2–3 per cent
range. Headline inflation
 over the year to the June quarter was expected to be broadly in line with the May forecast (given the
 impact of declining fuel prices throughout May). Looking ahead, headline inflation was expected to pick
 up temporarily to around the top of the target range in late 2025 and remain there in 2026, reflecting
 the currently legislated unwinding of government energy subsidies to households.
Considerations for monetary policy
Turning to considerations for the monetary policy decision, members noted that inflation had returned to
 the target range and was expected to be around the midpoint once the volatility associated with temporary
 cost of living relief abates. Recent monthly CPI indicator data – which can be volatile and do not
 cover all items in the CPI – were broadly consistent with this expectation. The labour market was
 assessed to have remained tight, with measures of labour utilisation little changed over the prior year.
 Growth in private demand had begun to recover but was still subdued.
Members agreed that the outlook for the global economy was highly uncertain. The probability of the global
 economy evolving in line with the most severe downside scenarios, such as the one considered in the May
Statement on Monetary Policy
, looked to have declined since the previous meeting. However,
 the future state of US trade and other policies was unpredictable and geopolitical tensions remained
 acute.
Members agreed that the stance of monetary policy was still modestly restrictive. However, financial
 conditions had eased over prior months, given the decisions to lower the cash rate target in February and
 May and the subsequent decline in market expectations for the future path of the cash rate.
In light of these developments, and with the May forecasts having been conditioned on further reductions
 in the cash rate in the period ahead, members considered whether to leave the cash rate target unchanged
 at this meeting or to reduce it by 25 basis points.
All members agreed that, based on the information currently available, the outlook was for underlying
 inflation to decline further in year-ended terms, warranting some additional reduction in interest rates
 over time. The focus at this meeting was on the appropriate timing and extent of further easing, against
 the backdrop of heightened uncertainty.
The case to leave the cash rate target unchanged at this meeting rested on a number of considerations. One
 related to what the flow of recent data implied for the economic outlook. Several indicators had been in
 line with, or even slightly stronger than, staff projections, pointing to the benefit of waiting for a
 little more information to confirm that inflation remains on track to be at 2.5 per cent on a
 sustainable basis. Monthly indicators of inflation had been marginally higher than were consistent with
 the staff’s forecast for underlying inflation in the June quarter, growth in private demand in the
 March quarter had been a little stronger than expected and conditions in the labour market had so far not
 eased as anticipated. In addition, the reduced likelihood of the most severe scenarios materialising for
 the world economy meant that more weight could be placed on the baseline forecasts, and less on the
 downside scenario, than had been warranted in May when assessing the medium-term outlook. Members noted
 that the baseline forecasts already incorporated some deterioration in global economic conditions because
 of higher tariffs and policy uncertainty, which was consistent with the evidence currently available on
 how the trade tensions and other factors might be resolved. Moreover, the forecasts had been conditioned
 on a relatively modest and gradual path of further easing of monetary policy over the period ahead.
 Hence, these developments supported the view that the Board could wait a little longer for further
 confirmation of the economy’s trajectory before adjusting policy again.
Members also observed that, if productivity growth proves to have been persistently lower than had been
 the case historically, the recent subdued outcomes for GDP growth may not have been far below the rate of
 growth in supply capacity. Similarly, it was difficult to determine with precision how far interest rates
 needed to fall before monetary policy was no longer restrictive, and so members observed that it might be
 prudent to lower interest rates cautiously as the required degree of policy restrictiveness declines.
The case to lower the cash rate target at this meeting rested on a view that there was already sufficient
 evidence to be confident that inflation was on track to be sustainably back at the midpoint of the target
 range, if not lower. This implied less need to wait before easing policy further, which was a relevant
 consideration given the lags in the effect of monetary policy on economic activity and inflation.
 Uncertainty in the world economy remained pronounced and the material increase in US tariffs – even
 if not as extreme as had been announced in early April – would be a drag on future growth abroad,
 and thereby domestic economic activity and inflation. GDP growth in Australia was already subdued, the
 saving rate had risen, the underlying momentum in wages growth and services price inflation appeared to
 be lower and some concerns were expressed that the recent data suggested a loss of momentum in activity.
 Overall, this might suggest less capacity pressure than embodied in the May baseline projections.
 Moreover, there was uncertainty around whether market sector employment growth would increase by enough
 to offset an expected slowing in non-market sector employment growth to maintain momentum in overall
 employment growth.
Having weighed up the alternative arguments, a majority of members judged that the case to hold the cash
 rate target unchanged at this meeting was the stronger one. They believed that lowering the cash rate a
 third time within the space of four meetings would be unlikely to be consistent with the strategy of
 easing monetary policy in a cautious and gradual manner to achieve the Board’s inflation and full
 employment objectives. While the flow of recent data had been broadly in line with earlier forecasts,
 they judged that some data had been slightly stronger than expected. Therefore, these members argued that
 it would be prudent to wait for confirmation that inflation would sustainably return to target as
 forecast before easing policy further. They noted that the Board would receive important information
 before the next meeting, including another quarterly inflation report and additional information on the
 labour market and how the world economy is evolving, along with a revised set of staff forecasts.
A minority of members judged that there was a case to lower the cash rate target at this meeting. These
 members placed more weight on downside risks to the economic outlook – stemming from a likely
 slowing in growth abroad and from the subdued pace of GDP growth in Australia. That in turn posed a risk
 that underlying inflation would moderate somewhat more rapidly than envisaged in the May projections.
 Therefore, these members considered that easing policy at this meeting would be consistent with the
 Board’s strategy and manage the risk that spare capacity might emerge in future.
In finalising the Board’s statement, members agreed that the effectiveness of the Board’s
 communication would be strengthened by disclosing an unattributed record of votes at this and future
 meetings. They also emphasised the need to be attentive to the data and to be guided by how the data
 shape the evolving assessment of risks. Members agreed that the Board should remain focused on its
 mandate to deliver both price stability and full employment and that it will do what it considers
 necessary to achieve that outcome.
The decision
The Board decided by majority (six in favour, three against) to leave the cash rate target unchanged at
 3.85 per cent.
