BANK: RBNZ
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
DATE: 17/08/2021
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/monetary-policy-statements/2021/mpsaug21.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

08/2021
Monetary Policy
STATEMENT


ii
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
STATEMENT
of the MPC’s monetary policy strategy
The Monetary Policy Committee’s (MPC) monetary policy strategy is its 
overarching plan for how it will formulate monetary policy under different 
circumstances to achieve its objectives.1 It outlines a consistent approach 
to how the MPC intends to achieve its objectives across time, accounting 
for trade-offs and uncertainty. Agreeing on and publishing a strategy 
promotes transparency, public understanding, and accountability.
1	
For a more in-depth discussion of monetary policy strategy in New Zealand, see J. Ratcliffe and R. Kendall (2019), ‘Monetary policy strategy in New Zealand’, 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Bulletin, Vol. 82, No. 3, April.
2	
These economic objectives contribute to the overall purpose of the Act, which is to promote the prosperity and well-being of New Zealanders, and contribute to 
a sustainable and productive economy. See monetary policy framework for more information on New Zealand’s monetary policy framework, including the full 
text of the Remit.
Monetary policy 
framework and objectives
Under the Reserve Bank of 
New Zealand Act 1989 (the 
Act), the MPC is responsible for 
formulating monetary policy to 
maintain a stable general level of 
prices over the medium term and 
to support maximum sustainable 
employment.2 Operational 
objectives for monetary policy are 
set out in the Remit. The current 
Remit sets out a flexible inflation 
targeting regime, under which the 
MPC must set policy to: 
•	 keep future annual inflation 
between 1 and 3 percent over 
the medium term, with a focus 
on keeping future inflation 
near the 2 percent mid-point; 
and
•	 support maximum sustainable 
employment, considering 
a broad range of labour 
market indicators and taking 
into account that maximum 
sustainable employment is 
largely determined by non-
monetary factors.
In pursuing these objectives, 
the Remit requires the MPC to 
have regard to the efficiency 
and soundness of the 
financial system, seek to avoid 
unnecessary instability in the 
economy and financial markets, 
and discount events that have 
only transitory effects on inflation. 
The MPC must also assess the 
effect of its monetary policy 
decisions on the Government’s 
policy to support more 
sustainable house prices.
The Reserve Bank’s flexible 
inflation targeting framework 
and the MPC’s monetary policy 
strategy reflect the fact that: 
•	 low and stable inflation is 
monetary policy’s best long-
run contribution to the well-
being of New Zealanders;
•	 in the short to medium term, 
monetary policy can influence 
real variables such as 
employment, and hence policy 
trade-offs can arise; and
•	 monetary policy is more 
effective if the Bank’s policy 
targets are credible, so policy 
should be formulated in a 
way that ensures credibility is 
maintained.
Key aspects of monetary 
policy strategy
The MPC practises forecast 
targeting, which means that it 
sets monetary policy such that 
it expects to achieve its inflation 
and employment goals in the 
medium term. In most instances 
the MPC aims to return inflation 
to the target mid-point within a 
one to three year horizon. The 
appropriate horizon at each 
policy decision will vary based 
on how different policy paths 
will contribute to maximum 
sustainable employment, whether 
price-setters’ expectations are 
consistent with the inflation 
target, and other considerations 
such as the balance of risks to the 
MPC’s central economic outlook.


iii
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
The MPC does not attempt to 
return inflation and employment 
to target immediately, because 
monetary policy actions take time 
to transmit through the economy. 
Attempting to return inflation to 
target too quickly would result 
in unnecessary instability in the 
economy and financial markets. 
The 1 to 3 percent target range for 
inflation provides the MPC with 
flexibility to ensure that managing 
inflation variability does not come 
at the cost of excessive variability 
in the real economy. For similar 
reasons, the MPC does not 
attempt to offset events that are 
expected to have only transitory 
effects on inflation. 
The MPC takes into account 
both its inflation and 
employment objectives when 
setting policy. In the long run, 
no trade-off exists between the 
MPC’s objectives. In the short 
to medium term, there may be 
situations where monetary policy 
can move one objective closer 
to target only at the cost of the 
other, resulting in a trade-off. 
When a trade-off does arise, the 
MPC will consider outcomes for 
both objectives in setting policy. 
In general, if employment is 
projected to be below its long-run 
sustainable level, the MPC would 
let inflation overshoot the target 
mid-point for a time, and vice 
versa (while staying within the 1–3 
percent target range). 
The MPC responds to both 
deviations above target and 
deviations below target. The 
MPC sets policy to stabilise 
employment near its maximum 
sustainable level, and to return 
inflation near to the target mid-
point, regardless of whether 
inflation is currently below or 
above 2 percent. This approach 
helps to anchor inflation 
expectations at the target mid-
point and promotes sustainable 
growth and employment by 
dampening fluctuations in the 
business cycle.
The MPC considers the balance 
of risks to its objectives that 
arise from uncertainty about 
the economic outlook and 
the transmission of its policy 
decisions. In general, the MPC 
will incorporate likely future 
developments into its central 
economic projections and set 
monetary policy in response. 
However, the MPC will also take 
into account risks to its central 
projections when setting policy. 
Under extreme uncertainty, the 
MPC may choose to publish 
scenarios instead of central 
projections to illustrate the 
range of possible situations and 
economic outcomes that could 
occur when circumstances are 
highly unpredictable.
The MPC has regard to the 
efficiency and soundness of 
the financial system, while 
recognising that in most 
instances prudential policy is 
better suited to leaning against 
risks to financial stability. The 
Reserve Bank takes prudential 
policy settings into account when 
setting monetary policy, and 
vice versa.
Implementation of strategy
The MPC applies the following 
process when formulating a 
policy decision:
1.	 Firstly, it assesses the outlook 
for the economy and the 
implications for its policy 
objectives. It then discusses 
risks to achieving its policy 
objectives.
2.	 Next, it considers which 
stance of monetary policy 
is most consistent with its 
monetary policy strategy given 
the current economic outlook, 
risks, and trade-offs.
3.	 Finally, the MPC decides how 
it will achieve the desired 
stance of monetary policy, 
including whether or not 
to adjust its policy settings 
at the current meeting and 
how it will communicate the 
policy outlook. The MPC has 
a suite of monetary tools to 
achieve its goals, and uses its 
Principles for Monetary Tools 
to make decisions on which 
tools to deploy.


REPORT AND SUPPORTING NOTES PUBLISHED AT:
www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/monetary-policy-statement
Subscribe online: www.rbnz.govt.nz/email-updates
Copyright © 2021 Reserve Bank of New Zealand
This report is published pursuant to section 
15C of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 1989. 
ISSN 1770-4829
rbnz.govt.nz


The projection was finalised on 18 August 2021. The OCR projection incorporates 
an outlook for monetary policy that is consistent with the MPC’s monetary 
policy assessment, which was finalised on 18 August 2021. Other data and 
developments have been incorporated up until 11 August 2021.
08/2021
Monetary Policy
STATEMENT
Contents
Statement of the MPC’s monetary policy strategy	
ii
1.	 Policy assessment	
3
	
Summary – Record of meeting 	
4
2.	 Current economic assessment and risks	
7
	
Box A – House price sustainability 	
17
3.	 Monetary conditions	
21
	
Box B – Transmission of tighter monetary policy 
	
through the household cash flow channel	
24
4.	 Special topics 	
27
	
1.	 The recovery of New Zealand’s labour market	
27
	
2.	The neutral interest rate	
31
5.	 Economic projection	
35
6.	 Appendices	
42
	
Appendix 1: Statistical tables	
42
	
Appendix 2: Chart pack	
47


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and risks
2
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
CHAPTER 
01
Policy 
assessment


Chapter 1 Policy assessment
3
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
CHAPTER 1
Policy assessment
Tēnā koutou katoa, welcome all.
The Monetary Policy Committee agreed to retain 
the current stimulatory level of monetary settings, 
keeping the Official Cash Rate (OCR) at 0.25 per cent 
for now. Today’s decision was made in the context 
of the Government’s imposition of Level 4 COVID 
restrictions on activity across New Zealand.  
The Committee will assess the inflation and 
employment outlook on an ongoing basis, with a 
view to continue to reduce the level of monetary 
stimulus over time so as to best meet their policy 
remit. This follows the recent halting of additional 
government bond purchases under the Large Scale 
Asset Purchase (LSAP) programme in July.  
Global monetary and fiscal settings remain at 
accommodative levels, supporting international 
spending and investment. Rising vaccination rates 
across many countries have provided economic 
impetus. The rise in activity has continued to support 
demand and prices for New Zealand’s export 
commodities. 
However, the need to reinstate COVID-19 
containment measures in some regions highlights the 
serious health and economic risks posed by the virus. 
Persistent and elevated health risks are promoting 
ongoing global supply chain disruptions, and are 
acting to constrain productive capacity and prolong 
inflationary pressures. Today’s re-introduction of 
Level 4 restrictions to activity across New Zealand is 
a stark example of how unpredictable and disruptive 
the virus is proving to be. 
The Committee noted that the New Zealand 
economy had rebounded more strongly than most 
countries, with less domestic disruption caused by 
COVID-19 to date. Employment is currently at or 
above its maximum sustainable level, and consumer 
price inflation expectations remain anchored near 2 
percent, the midpoint of the target range.  
Recent data for the New Zealand economy suggest 
demand is robust and the economic recovery has 
broadened, despite some weakness persisting in 
the sectors most exposed to international tourism. 
Household spending and construction activity are 
at high levels and continue to grow, and business 
investment is responding to increased demand. 
Capacity pressures are now evident in the 
economy, particularly in the labour market where job 
vacancies remain high despite the recent decline in 
unemployment and underemployment. Wages are 
rising consistent with the tight labour market conditions. 
Broader inflation pressures are being accentuated 
in the near term by one-off price rises such as higher 
oil prices, and temporary factors such as supply 
shortfalls and higher transport costs. Near-term 
consumer price inflation is expected to rise above the 
Committee’s target range before returning towards 
the 2 percent midpoint around mid-2022. 
The Committee agreed they are confident of meeting 
their inflation and employment remit with less need 
for the existing level of monetary stimulus. However, 
the Committee remains alert to the supply disruptions 
that COVID-19 can create, and the dampening effect 
this can have on confidence. House prices are also 
above their sustainable level, heightening the risk of 
a price correction as supply increases.
The Committee agreed that their least regrets policy 
stance is to further reduce the level of monetary 
stimulus so as to anchor inflation expectations and 
continue to contribute to maximum sustainable 
employment. They agreed, however, to keep the 
OCR unchanged at this meeting given the heightened 
uncertainty with the country in a lockdown. 
Meitaki, thanks.
Adrian Orr
Governor


4
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
SUMMARY 
Record of meeting 
The Monetary Policy Committee discussed economic developments 
since the May Statement. The Committee noted that the global economy 
has continued to recover, supported by rising vaccination rates in many 
countries, a gradual relaxation of mobility restrictions, and continued 
monetary and fiscal support.
The Monetary Policy Committee 
discussed economic 
developments since the May 
Statement. The Committee noted 
that the global economy has 
continued to recover, supported 
by rising vaccination rates in many 
countries, a gradual relaxation of 
mobility restrictions, and continued 
monetary and fiscal support. 
The Committee noted the 
considerable uncertainty that exists 
regarding the longer-run impacts 
of COVID-19, particularly with 
the emergence of new variants. 
Globally, periods of health-related 
mobility restriction are likely to 
continue for some time, creating 
ongoing short-term economic 
disruptions, supply cost pressures, 
and lower productive capacity.  
The Committee agreed that 
in New Zealand the recent 
economic data suggest domestic 
demand is robust and that 
the economic recovery has 
broadened in recent months. 
While weakness still persists in 
sectors most heavily exposed to 
international tourism, activity in 
most industries now exceeds pre-
COVID levels. 
Domestic economic activity has 
been underpinned by strong 
household spending, high levels 
of construction, and strong 
demand for New Zealand’s 
commodity exports. Recent 
data has also shown a pick-up 
in business investment, which 
broadens the base of aggregate 
demand and suggests businesses 
are responding to emerging 
capacity constraints.
The Committee noted uncertainty 
related to the emergence of 
new cases of COVID-19 in the 
community and the move back into 
Alert Level 4. The reinstatement 
of the Government Wage 
Subsidy Scheme and COVID-19 
Resurgence Support Payments is 
expected to significantly buffer the 
loss of income associated with the 
lockdown.
The Committee agreed that 
capacity constraints were building 
in the economy. Pressures are 
particularly acute in the labour 
market, where job vacancies 
remain high alongside declines 
in unemployment. Falling 
underemployment provides a 
greater level of confidence that 
spare capacity is being absorbed. 
Employment is assessed as 
being at or above its maximum 
sustainable level in the current 
environment.
Wage inflation has increased 
in line with the tightening in the 
labour market, but the Committee 
expressed uncertainty about 
whether higher wage growth will 
be sustained. 
The Committee noted that 
capacity constraints are 
contributing to rising headline 
inflation. Mirroring global 
developments, inflationary 
pressure in New Zealand has 
been accentuated in the near 
term by one-off factors such as 
higher oil prices, and temporary 
factors such as supply shortfalls 
and rising transport costs. This is 
expected to push inflation above 
4 percent in the near term, before 
returning towards the 2 percent 
midpoint of the target band from 
mid-2022. Medium and long-term 
inflation expectations remain 
anchored at 2 percent.
The Committee reflected that 
experience over the past 12 
months has provided more 
confidence about the resilience 
of domestic demand in the face 
of health-related restrictions. 
The Government Wage Subsidy 
proved effective in supporting 
domestic incomes and providing 
job security through periods of 
lockdown, which has enabled 
a rapid recovery in consumer 
spending. This scheme has been 
rapidly reinstated in light of the 
current lockdown. While some 
households suffered income 
losses and accumulated debt, 
many households retain a larger 
buffer of savings, which could 
provide ongoing support to 
consumption. 


5
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
The Committee acknowledged 
that restrictions on the 
movement of people across 
the New Zealand border will 
only be removed gradually, and 
subject to ongoing health-related 
uncertainty. However, they also 
agreed that, to date, increased 
domestic spending has provided 
a significant offset to the loss of 
international tourism earnings. 
The closure of the border has 
also reduced international 
labour mobility, creating capacity 
shortages in some industries that 
have traditionally been reliant on 
migrant labour. 
In light of this experience, 
members expressed caution about 
the level of remaining supply 
capacity in the New Zealand 
economy. The economic 
disruption caused by the ongoing 
global health issues has increased 
skill mismatches, which has likely 
reduced maximum sustainable 
employment in the near term. The 
Committee discussed the risk 
that the productive capacity of 
the economy is lagging domestic 
demand, which could lead to more 
persistent inflation pressure. 
The Committee discussed 
the current, and risk of future, 
outbreaks of COVID-19 in 
New Zealand, and how monetary 
policy should respond. The 
Committee agreed that fiscal 
policy (government spending and 
transfer payments) has proved to 
be a very effective tool to respond 
to any immediate reduction in 
demand in the event of outbreaks. 
A monetary policy response 
may be required if a health-
related lockdown has a more 
enduring impact on inflation and 
employment. 
As required by their Remit, 
members assessed the impact 
of monetary policy on the 
Government’s objective to support 
more sustainable house prices. 
The Committee noted the Reserve 
Bank’s assessment that the 
level of house prices is currently 
unsustainable. Members noted 
that the Reserve Bank is currently 
consulting on further bank lending 
restrictions to help mitigate the 
financial stability risks associated 
with unsustainable house prices. 
The Committee noted that a 
number of factors are expected 
to weigh on house prices over 
the medium term. These include 
strong house building, slower 
population growth, changes to tax 
settings, and the ongoing impacts 
of tighter bank lending rules. 
Rising mortgage interest rates, 
as monetary stimulus is reduced, 
would also constrain house 
prices to a more sustainable 
level.  Members expressed 
uncertainty about how quickly 
momentum in the housing market 
will recede and noted a risk that 
any continued near-term price 
growth could lead to sharper falls 
in house prices in the future.
The Committee reiterated that 
the OCR is currently the preferred 
tool to adjust the level of stimulus 
in the economy. The principles 
governing the suite of monetary 
policy tools will continue to 
guide their use. In line with those 
principles, the Funding for Lending 
Programme (FLP) will remain in 
place under its current terms until 
the drawdown window expires 
next year. The Committee directed 
staff to develop an operational 
strategy to help inform decisions 
regarding the management 
of government and Local 
Government Funding Agency 
(LGFA) bonds purchased under 
the Large Scale Asset Purchase 
(LSAP) programme, consistent with 
the Committee’s desired stance 
of policy and supporting the 
functioning of markets.
The Committee discussed 
the stance of monetary policy. 
Members noted that they now 
had more confidence that rising 
capacity pressures will feed through 
into inflation, and that employment 
is at its maximum sustainable level. 
Members concluded that they 
could continue removing monetary 
stimulus, following their decision 
to halt additional purchases of 
government bonds under the LSAP 
programme at their July meeting. 
The Committee discussed the 
merits of an increase in the OCR 
at this meeting and considered 
the implications of alternative 
sequencing of OCR changes over 
time. The Committee agreed that 
their least regrets policy stance is 
to further reduce monetary policy 
stimulus to reduce the risk that 
inflation expectations become 
unanchored. However, in light of 
the current Level 4 lockdown and 
health uncertainty the Committee 
agreed to leave the OCR 
unchanged at this meeting. 
On Wednesday 18 August, 
the Committee reached a 
consensus to:
•	Maintain the OCR at 0.25 percent;
•	Direct staff to develop an 
operational strategy to inform 
decisions on the management 
of government and LGFA bonds 
purchased under the  LSAP 
programme; and
•	Maintain the existing Funding for 
Lending Programme conditions.
Attendees:
Reserve Bank members 
of MPC: 
Adrian Orr, Geoff Bascand,
Christian Hawkesby, Yuong Ha
External MPC members: 
Bob Buckle, Peter Harris, 
Caroline Saunders
Treasury Observer: 
Bryan Chapple
MPC Secretary: 
Chris Bloor


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and risks
6
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
CHAPTER 
02
Current economic 
assessment
and risks


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and risks
7
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
CHAPTER 2
Current economic assessment 
and risks
The Reserve Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) is 
responsible for setting monetary policy to achieve and maintain 
medium-term price stability, and support maximum sustainable 
employment. These outcomes are the best long-run contribution 
monetary policy can make to the prosperity and well-being of 
New Zealanders.
Key points
•	 Economic growth in New Zealand has 
been stronger and more broad based 
than previously anticipated, with activity 
in most sectors of the economy having 
returned to pre-COVID-19 levels. While 
the recent move to Alert Level 4 will 
restrain activity, the impact will depend 
on the length of time restrictions stay in 
place and the responses of households 
and businesses. 
•	 Much of the economic momentum 
in recent months has been driven by 
strength in spending by households 
and continued strong demand for our 
commodity exports. Businesses are also 
showing increased confidence to invest 
and hire more workers. 
•	 The pressure on available resources in the 
economy is now much greater than was 
assumed in the May Statement. Pressures 
are particularly acute in the labour market, 
where job vacancies remain high despite 
declines in unemployment. Employment is 
assessed as being at or above its maximum 
sustainable level in the current environment. 
•	 When combined with supply-chain 
disruptions and increases in global oil 
prices, capacity pressures in the economy 
have resulted in annual CPI inflation 
increasing to 3.3 percent. Inflation is 
expected to temporarily increase further 
in the near term, and return to the mid-
point of the 1 to 3 percent target band 
over the next three years. 
•	 It is unclear whether recent and expected 
high inflation will become embedded 
in price- and wage-setting behaviour, 
which could lead to sustained inflationary 
pressures.
•	 Other risks to the economic outlook 
remain. The emergence of more 
contagious variants of COVID-19 illustrates 
the vulnerability of the economic 
recovery to further outbreaks. The timing 
and economic effect of easing border 
restrictions are also uncertain, as are 
the longer-term impacts of COVID-19 on 
productive capacity here and abroad.  
•	 Emergency levels of monetary stimulus 
are no longer warranted given the 
strength in employment and rising 
inflationary pressures. Our central 
projection implies that monetary stimulus 
should be reduced to ensure the MPC 
meets its objectives. 


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and risks
8
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
Current economic assessment
Economic growth has been
stronger than expected
Economic growth in New Zealand has 
been stronger and more broad based 
than previously expected (figure 2.1). The 
economy expanded 1.6 percent in the first 
three months of 2021, despite a lack of 
international visitors during what is usually 
the peak tourism season (figure 2.2). 
While activity in the retail, healthcare and 
construction sectors has been particularly 
strong, activity in most sectors has been 
around pre-COVID-19 levels – with the 
exception of mining and those most exposed 
to the loss in international visitors (figure 2.3).
Household spending is underpinning 
much of the momentum
Much of the momentum in economic 
growth has been due to strength in 
household spending, and demand for our 
goods exports. Household consumption 
increased 5.4 percent in the March 2021 
quarter, taking it above pre-COVID-19 
levels despite very low population growth 
(figure 2.4). New Zealanders appear to have 
redirected much of their usual spending on 
overseas holidays towards travelling within 
New Zealand and purchases of durable 
goods.  
Interpretation of the most recent 
consumption data is complicated by the 
impact of border restrictions on households’ 
spending behaviour, such as when and 
where they choose to go on holiday. 
Reflecting this, measures of consumption 
that attempt to account for usual seasonal 
variation in spending are likely to remain 
volatile. 
Figure 2.2
Net New Zealand border crossings
(cumulative, all countries)
Source: New Zealand Customs Service, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.3
Production GDP by industry
(comparison to 2019Q4, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Unallocated taxes are not shown.
Figure 2.1
Quarterly production GDP
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and risks
9
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
However, we do consider there to 
be strong underlying momentum in 
household spending, consistent with higher 
employment, strong growth in household 
incomes, savings accumulated during 
2020, and high house price inflation. Newly 
available national accounts data show that 
aggregate nominal household sector income 
was above pre-COVID-19 levels in the March 
2021 quarter. Household incomes have 
increased significantly since the outset of the 
COVID-19 pandemic. This reflects recovering 
employment – particularly in more recent 
quarters – and social support payments that 
remain higher than previously (figure 2.5). 
Savings accumulated in 2020 are 
expected to support household 
spending going forward 
Household savings rose sharply in 2020, 
especially during periods at Alert Levels 3 
and 4 when spending opportunities were 
limited (figure 2.6). Strong savings were 
aided by government policy measures, most 
notably the Wage Subsidy, which prevented 
a more significant decline in household 
incomes over 2020. While household saving 
has returned to around its usual level, there 
remains a large stock of savings accumulated 
in 2020 that has yet to be drawn upon, 
and this is expected to support household 
spending going forward.
Strong savings were aided by 
government policy measures, 
most notably the Wage 
Subsidy, which prevented a 
more significant decline in 
household incomes over 2020.
Figure 2.5
Nominal household income growth
(cumulative change since 2019Q4, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: Chart shows the change in quarterly nominal household income since 
the December 2019 quarter.
Figure 2.4
Quarterly household consumption expenditure
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ. 
Figure 2.6
Household saving rate
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Note: The household saving rate is defined as net household saving as a share of net 
household disposable income. 


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and risks
10
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
House price inflation has been
higher than expected, but is
assumed to moderate
Household spending has also been 
supported by rapid house price growth, 
which has been stronger than we expected. 
Investor demand appears to have fallen, 
but ongoing demand from owner-occupier 
buyers has supported continued price 
growth. Our central forecast is for house 
price inflation to ease over the coming year 
as prices adjust to reflect significantly lower 
population growth, higher mortgage interest 
rates, increased housing supply (figure 
2.7), and the Government’s housing policy 
measures.
If the Reserve Bank were to further tighten 
loan-to-value ratio (LVR) restrictions, 
as announced for consultation in early 
August, this would also weigh on house 
price inflation. House prices are assumed 
to decline moderately in the latter part of 
the projection (figure 2.8). This reflects 
our assessment that house prices are 
unsustainable at their current levels, although 
the timing and magnitude of price declines 
are highly uncertain (discussed in Box A).  
Global demand for our commodity 
exports is also supporting economic 
growth
The global recovery and continued 
demand for our commodity exports are also 
contributing to current economic momentum. 
The outlook for growth in many of our 
trading-partner economies has improved 
since the start of the year, notably due to 
optimism surrounding the vaccine rollout. 
Growth in China has also been strong, 
although it has moderated more recently. 
While prices have eased at recent Global 
Dairy Trade auctions, dairy prices remain 
high. Meat and log prices are also elevated. 
Strength in our export prices means that 
New Zealand’s terms of trade remain high, 
despite the over 35 percent increase in oil 
prices since the start of the year (figure 2.9). 
The New Zealand dollar trade-weighted 
index (TWI) has remained near its level at 
the time of the May Statement, despite a 
widening in interest rate differentials. This 
has further supported exporter returns. 
Figure 2.9
Dubai oil price
Source: Reuters. 
Figure 2.8
House price inflation 
(annual) 
Source: CoreLogic, RBNZ estimates.  
Figure 2.7
Residential building consent issuance
(number per 1,000 working-age people, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: By regional council area. For New Zealand as a whole, there were 3 consents issued 
for every 1,000 working-age people (aged 15 and over) during the June 2021 quarter. This 
compares to the 5-year average of 2.3.
5-year average
June 2021 quarter


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and risks
11
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
Business investment is recovering
Business investment recovered sharply in 
the March 2021 quarter, after being weak 
for much of 2020. As with household 
consumption, some of the recent increase 
likely reflected timing dynamics, such as 
delays due to supply-chain disruptions.
The recent increase in investment is 
consistent with strong export prices, reduced 
uncertainty, increasing capacity pressures, 
and improved profitability (as reflected in 
stronger-than-expected corporate income 
tax revenue). Nationwide business income 
has recovered to around pre-COVID-19 
levels in nominal terms, although this will 
mask regional and industry divergences 
(figure 2.10). Business sector income 
actually increased during the quarters when 
New Zealand was at higher alert levels, 
once the impacts of the Wage Subsidy and 
other government support programmes are 
included. This explains some of the resilience 
of the business sector since the outset of the 
pandemic, and also why the adverse second-
round effects from the periods at higher alert 
levels were not as severe as initially feared.
Pressure on available resources
is increasing, particularly in the
labour market
Business investment is expected to increase 
further and reinforce economic growth over 
the medium term. A key driver of increased 
business investment is further pressure on 
available resources, with our output gap 
indicator suite suggesting that the degree of 
spare capacity in the economy is much less 
than previously assumed (figure 2.11). Survey 
measures and discussions with businesses 
indicate pressures are particularly 
pronounced in the labour market, with 
businesses citing labour as the factor most 
limiting their production to a degree not seen 
since the 2000s (figure 2.12).
Figure 2.10
Quarterly non-financial business sector income
(indicative, nominal, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The separation of ‘government subsidies’ from ‘operating surplus and mixed income’ 
in this chart is indicative only. It treats all government subsidies as having gone to non-
financial businesses, when some would have been received by other sectors (e.g. the 
financial sector). This does not impact the total or the ‘capital and other income’ series.  
Figure 2.11
Output gap and indicator suite
(share of potential) 
Source: NZIER, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.12
Factors limiting business expansion
(% of respondents, seasonally adjusted)
Source: NZIER, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: Chart shows the share of businesses that reported labour or capital as the main 
factor limiting their ability to expand turnover, when responding to the Quarterly Survey of  
Business Opinion.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and risks
12
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
Employment is at or above its 
maximum sustainable level
Labour constraints partially reflect border 
restrictions and the difficulty in matching 
workers in New Zealand to available jobs, 
due to both regional and skill mismatches. 
Consistent with this, the unemployment 
rate has declined steadily since late 2020, 
whereas job vacancies remain high. Wage 
inflation has begun to increase, consistent 
with the degree of tightness in the domestic 
labour market (figure 2.13). 
We now assess employment as being at 
or above its maximum sustainable level, as 
discussed in more detail in chapter 4. The 
employment rate is expected to increase 
gradually over the coming year, reflecting 
continued strength in economic activity 
(figure 2.14). It is then assumed to ease 
slightly over the second half of the projection, 
as capacity pressures normalise.   
Inflation has increased due
to temporary factors and rising
capacity pressures 
With stronger pressure on resources, high 
housing demand, supply-chain disruptions 
and sharp increases in oil prices, annual CPI 
inflation increased to 3.3 percent in the June 
2021 quarter. While we had anticipated some 
increase in inflation, this increase was larger 
than expected.
Labour constraints partially 
reflect border restrictions 
and the difficulty in matching 
workers in New Zealand to 
available jobs – due to both 
regional and skill mismatches.
Figure 2.13
Annual wage inflation
(Labour Cost Index, private sector) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 2.14
Employment rate
(share of working-age population, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.15
Contributions to annual CPI inflation
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and risks
13
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
The increase in the June 2021 quarter was 
accounted for by both tradable and non-
tradable components (figure 2.15). Supply-
chain disruptions (as discussed in the May 
Statement) are continuing to exert upward 
pressure on prices via much higher shipping 
costs and difficulty sourcing some goods 
(figure 2.16). This is particularly notable in the 
construction sector where inflation is high.
Strong house price inflation has led to 
continued increases in the prices of housing-
related components, including rents. The 
increase in petrol prices contributed 0.6 
percentage points to the annual rate of 
inflation in the June quarter, reflecting 
the increase in global oil prices and the 
sensitivity of headline inflation to oil price 
movements. The latest increase in the 
minimum wage has also contributed to 
higher prices for some products. Looking 
through short-term volatility, measures of 
core inflation have increased after being 
below the mid-point of the target band for 
over a decade (figure 2.17).
CPI inflation is expected to increase 
temporarily in the near term, before 
easing gradually 
CPI inflation is expected to increase further in 
the near term, due to continued momentum 
in the factors already discussed – capacity 
pressures, housing-related components, 
supply-chain disruptions – and additional 
increases in specific factors, such as council 
rates, electricity and petrol prices. Inflation 
is expected to moderate towards 2 percent 
over the next three years, as temporary 
factors unwind and capacity pressures ease 
(figure 2.18). However, there are risks to 
this outlook, as discussed in the following 
section.
Figure 2.16
Shipping costs for consumer goods
(share of import value)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: These series are calculated by taking the value of consumer merchandise imports 
including freight and insurance costs (CIF) and subtracting the value reported for duty 
(VFD), which excludes these costs. It is expressed as a percentage of the VFD figure. 
Figure 2.17
Core inflation measures
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 
Figure 2.18
Annual CPI inflation
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and risks
14
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
Key risks to the
economic outlook
The appropriate monetary policy stance 
depends not only on our central outlook for 
the economy, but also on our assessment 
of the balance of risks to this outlook. 
The risks discussed below are not intended 
to be exhaustive, but instead illustrate some 
factors that could substantially alter the 
economic and monetary policy outlook.
COVID-19 resurgence in
New Zealand
The largest downside risk to the New Zealand 
economy remains a health risk. New Zealand 
managed to eliminate community cases of 
COVID-19, which enabled a return to many 
of our usual activities and ways of working. 
A widespread outbreak of COVID-19 may 
put our economic recovery at risk, especially 
if our vaccination levels are insufficient.  
However, we have learned from past 
experience that the economy is resilient 
to periods at higher alert levels if there is 
significant government support provided, and 
alert levels can be lowered relatively quickly. 
We have seen the effectiveness of the Wage 
Subsidy in keeping people employed and 
preventing significant adverse second-round 
effects (e.g. from periods of prolonged high 
unemployment, and business closures), 
and the ability of businesses to adapt 
their operations to meet social distancing 
requirements. These factors lessen the 
likely impact of COVID-19 outbreaks on our 
inflation and employment objectives.  
Higher inflation becomes 
embedded
We currently assume supply-chain disruptions 
start to ease during 2022. There is a risk that 
these disruptions will last longer, and continue 
to exert upward pressure on headline 
inflation. There is also a risk that high inflation 
outcomes will lead to an increase in expected 
inflation, and become embedded in wage- 
and price-setting behaviour to a greater 
extent than currently assumed. 
While inflation expectations have shifted a 
lot at shorter horizons (expectations tend to 
reflect recent outcomes at these horizons), 
expectations remain anchored over the 
medium and long term (figure 2.19). 


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and risks
15
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
Figure 2.19
Inflation expectations
(annual)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: See ‘Inflation expectations and the conduct of monetary policy in New Zealand’  
(Lewis, McDermott and Richardson, 2016) for a description of the inflation expectations curve. 
Economic effects of easing
border restrictions
The economic effects of easing border 
restrictions are uncertain. In recent quarters 
we have seen capacity pressures return, 
even with our borders largely closed to 
international visitors. This is partly due 
to the onshoring of travel spending by 
New Zealanders. This creates additional 
uncertainty about economic activity once 
border restrictions ease, as we will see more 
international visitors spending here but also 
more New Zealanders spending abroad.
Limited access to global labour has also 
contributed to labour market tightness. While 
easing border restrictions will likely alleviate 
specific labour shortages in some sectors, 
it is unclear whether it will result in a net flow 
of people into New Zealand. 
Uncertainty regarding the longer-
term economic implications of 
COVID-19
The emergence of highly contagious 
variants of COVID-19 reduces the likelihood 
that New Zealand will be able to ease 
border restrictions in the future and be 
COVID-19 free. This will lead to ongoing and 
challenging trade-offs between public health, 
economic outcomes, and mobility. 
New Zealand’s economy has not 
experienced a sustained period of 
community transmission of COVID-19 in the 
absence of significant mobility restrictions.  
Prevalence of the disease may result in 
permanent changes in the way we work and 
interact, which could lower the productive 
capacity of the economy on an enduring 
basis. How the global economy adapts to the 
ongoing presence of COVID-19 will also have 
significant implications for the New Zealand 
economy, via trade, financial, and confidence 
channels.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and risks
16
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
Monetary policy outlook
Monetary policy has been playing a 
supporting role in the economic recovery, 
with fiscal policy taking the lead in bridging 
households and businesses through periods 
at higher alert levels. Given the current and 
expected strength in the labour market and 
increase in inflationary pressures, our central 
projection implies that monetary stimulus 
should be reduced in order for the MPC to 
meet its economic objectives. If economic 
conditions evolve as assumed in our 
projection (see chapter 5), we anticipate that 
the OCR will eventually need to be raised 
to a level where it is neither stimulatory 
nor contractionary (figure 2.20). Chapter 4 
discusses our assessment of the level of this 
‘neutral’ interest rate. 
The decision at the July Review to halt 
purchases of government bonds under 
the large scale asset purchase (LSAP) 
programme implies no more additional 
stimulus is being provided by the flow of 
purchases. However, the stock of assets 
purchased under the programme is assumed 
to continue to provide a degree of stimulus  
(see chapter 3). 
Figure 2.20
Official Cash Rate 
Source: RBNZ estimates.


17
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
Box A
House price
sustainability 
House prices in New Zealand 
have increased rapidly over 
the past year from an already 
elevated level. A confluence 
of factors suggests that house 
prices are above what is 
sustainable. While house price 
inflation has slowed in the past 
three months, momentum has 
been stronger than expected. 
A moderation in house prices 
is expected over coming years, 
but the precise timing of this is 
uncertain.
House prices appear to be 
above their sustainable level
•	 Underlying demand for 
housing due to population 
growth has declined 
significantly since the outbreak 
of COVID-19 last year. While 
New Zealand citizens who 
returned from abroad before 
the pandemic stayed on and 
others returned early in the 
outbreak, this inflow was short-
lived. Border restrictions have 
since limited inward migration, 
and there has been a small 
but steady flow of departing 
residents. Net migration is not 
anticipated to return to pre-
COVID-19 levels over the next 
few years, even as border 
restrictions are eased.
1	
For example, the National Policy Statement on Urban Development directs local authorities to enable greater supply and ensure that planning is responsive to 
changes in demand. It also requires councils to remove overly restrictive rules that affect urban development.
2	
For example, the Auckland Unitary Plan unlocked significant development potential within Auckland. Policy changes following the 2010 and 2011 Canterbury 
earthquakes allowed a rapid recovery in Canterbury’s housing stock. They also enabled more responsive supply, which appears to have suppressed house 
price growth in Canterbury over the past decade.
•	 Meanwhile, house building is 
at record high levels (figure 
A1). Residential building 
consents and discussions 
with construction sector 
businesses suggest there 
is a significant pipeline 
of new housing supply 
coming. Previous large 
increases in housing supply 
in New Zealand, such as that 
during the 1970s, reduced 
real house prices. In recent 
decades, several other 
countries have experienced 
declining house prices 
following significant increases 
in supply. 
Building consents data 
suggest that by the middle of 
next year, the total number 
of houses will be growing at 
its fastest pace since data 
became available in the early 
1960s. Policy changes that 
significantly ease land-use 
restrictions will encourage 
continued strong levels of 
building.1 Previous relaxations 
of land-use restrictions have 
contributed to sustained 
increases in new supply.2
Housing supply has not kept 
up with population growth 
over most of the past decade, 
increasing house prices 
and necessitating larger 
households on average. We 
consider this undersupply to 
already be reflected in current 
house prices. As a result, 
further strong house building 
will put downward pressure on 
house prices, even given the 
historical undersupply. 
Figure A1
New supply of and demand for houses
(indicative, monthly, 12-month moving average)
Source: Stats NZ, Electricity Authority, RBNZ estimates.
Note: ‘Additional houses built’ is based on the change in electricity connections to 
residential properties, while residential building consents are scaled to produce estimates 
prior to 2003 and a projection for the next year. ‘Additional houses demanded’ is 
population growth divided by people per dwelling (see figure A2).


18
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
Consistent with an easing of housing 
market imbalances, household sizes 
are likely to decline (figure A2). As a 
hypothetical exercise, we estimate 
that if population growth and the 
construction of new dwellings 
continue at their current rates over 
the next few years, people per 
dwelling would return to its 2014 
level by the end of 2023.
•	 Meanwhile, a range of other factors 
are likely to moderate demand. The 
return from investment in housing 
will be reduced significantly by the 
removal of the tax deductibility of 
interest from rental income and 
the extension of the brightline test. 
Along with tighter LVR requirements, 
these policy changes have reduced 
investor buying activity in the housing 
market. The share of new mortgage 
lending for investment property 
has declined to 17 percent, from 26 
percent at the beginning of 2021.
•	 Interest rates are low relative to 
their neutral levels, and therefore 
below where they will eventually 
return (see chapter 4). Against the 
backdrop of a long-run downward 
trend in interest rates, monetary 
policy was eased at the outset of 
the COVID-19 pandemic to support 
New Zealand’s economy. As 
interest rates rise in response to the 
improving economic outlook, this 
will dampen demand for housing in 
several ways. 
Higher interest rates will make 
investing in housing relatively less 
attractive than interest-bearing 
assets. Higher interest rates will 
also constrain the ability of new 
buyers to service debt while leaving 
enough income for consumption. 
Households are borrowing more 
relative to their incomes, in part 
because at the current low interest 
rates debt servicing costs are low 
for new buyers. However, if interest 
rates increase back to a more 
neutral level, borrowing capacity 
would be reduced (figure A3). In 
this scenario, demand to purchase 
houses at current prices would fall. 
Figure A3
Estimated debt servicing cost for new 
buyers as a share of income
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: Debt servicing costs include both interest and principal repayments, based on a  
30-year mortgage term. Estimates are for buyers purchasing at the median selling price 
with a 20 percent deposit.
Figure A4
Median house price-to-income scenarios
Source: Stats NZ, REINZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: All scenarios assume that median household disposable income grows at 4 percent 
annually, which is close to the 10-year average annual growth rate. Scenario B assumes that the 
median house price grows at the same rate as our projection for the CoreLogic House Price Index. 
The line for Scenario B ends in the September 2024 quarter, at the end of our projection horizon.
Figure A2
Outlook for people per dwelling
Source: Stats NZ, Electricity Authority, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The people per dwelling ratio is the population over an estimate of the number of dwellings 
based on electricity connections to residential properties. As in figure A1, residential building 
consents are scaled to produce estimates prior to 2003 and forecasts for the coming year.


19
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
We anticipate a realignment 
in house prices
With house prices above what 
is sustainable, some form of 
realignment is anticipated. 
However, as seen recently, 
momentum in house price growth 
can persist even when prices 
look disconnected from the 
fundamental factors that should 
determine them. This reflects 
that sentiment, expectations, and 
prevailing narratives surrounding 
the housing market can have a 
significant bearing on housing 
demand and house prices. The 
further house prices rise above 
their sustainable level, the larger 
the required realignment will 
need to be.
It is not clear when and how a 
realignment of house prices 
will occur. Growth in household 
incomes could lift the sustainable 
level over time to a point 
where current prices would be 
sustainable. However, even if 
house prices stay at their current 
levels and incomes grow as they 
have historically, it would take 
eight years for house prices to 
return to the same level relative 
to incomes as in early 2020 
(figure A4). Alternatively, falls in 
house prices could facilitate a 
faster adjustment towards a more 
sustainable level.
We expect house price inflation 
to moderate significantly over the 
coming quarters, consistent with 
the factors discussed above: low 
population growth, high levels of 
house building, higher interest 
rates, and tax policy changes. In 
our projection, house prices are 
assumed to begin to fall modestly 
from late 2022 (see figure 2.8). 
A more significant fall in prices is 
possible, but at the same time, 
momentum in the market could 
prove more resilient than we 
expect.
Monetary policy is focused 
on employment and inflation 
objectives
The MPC sets monetary policy 
to achieve its inflation and 
employment objectives in the 
Remit. It considers the outlook 
for the housing market because 
house prices can influence 
broader economic activity, 
employment, and consumer price 
inflation (figure A5). Currently, 
even if there is a material slow-
down in house price inflation, 
we anticipate that monetary 
policy stimulus will need to be 
gradually reduced in order to 
meet the Remit objectives. This 
reflects broader momentum 
and inflationary pressures in the 
economy (see chapter 2). 
Housing market outcomes 
can also have a bearing on 
financial stability, which the 
MPC must have regard to 
when setting monetary policy. 
However, the MPC considers 
that macroprudential policy 
should be the primary instrument 
for addressing the risks from 
household indebtedness (see 
chapter 3 of the November 
2019 Statement). The Reserve 
Bank will be consulting on a 
proposal to tighten restrictions 
on mortgage lending at high 
LVRs. It also intends to consult 
on introducing debt-to-income 
(DTI) restrictions and/or floors 
on the interest rates banks use 
in their mortgage serviceability 
assessments. These measures 
are intended to ensure borrowers 
are resilient to a range of 
future economic and financial 
conditions.
The MPC remains focused on 
its inflation and employment 
objectives. The MPC will continue 
to assess the impact of monetary 
policy on sustainable house 
prices, as required in the Remit.
Housing market 
activity
House prices
Housing-related services
• Real estate services
• Financial and conveyancing 
services
• Buyer due diligence
Consumption
• Homeowners’ wealth increases
• Homeowners can borrow more
• Buyers furnish houses
Building activity
• Higher prices encourage house 
building
Housing costs
• Rental costs
• Construction costs
• Housing service costs
Economic activity
Employment
Inﬂation
Figure A5
Flow-on impacts from house prices to the broader economy


Chapter 3 Monetary conditions
20
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
CHAPTER 
03
Monetary 
conditions


Chapter 3 Monetary conditions
21
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
CHAPTER 3
Monetary conditions
During 2020, the MPC cut the OCR to a 
record low level of 0.25 percent, and 
introduced additional monetary policy (AMP) 
tools to support New Zealand’s economy 
through the COVID-19 pandemic (table 3.1). 
These actions were summarised in the 
February 2021 Statement, and have 
influenced economic activity through 
several financial market channels that were 
summarised in the May 2021 Statement. 
A forthcoming Bulletin article will go into 
further detail on the full suite of available 
monetary policy tools.
Table 3.1:
Monetary policy tools used during the COVID-19 pandemic
Tool
Description
Date implemented
OCR
The OCR was lowered from 1.00% to 0.25%.
16 March 2020
Forward guidance
A commitment was made that the OCR would 
not change for at least 12 months from 16 March 
2020.
16 March 2020
Large Scale Asset 
Purchase (LSAP) 
programme
The Reserve Bank undertook to purchase a 
significant amount of New Zealand government 
and Local Government Funding Agency bonds, 
in order to lower long-term interest rates.
23 March 2020 ($30b limit)
7 April 2020 ($33b limit)
13 May 2020 ($60b limit)
12 August 2020 ($100b limit)
Funding 
for Lending 
Programme (FLP)
The FLP is a low-cost funding facility for banks.
It is equivalent in size to 6% of participants’ loans. 
The facility lowers banks’ funding costs directly, 
and also indirectly by reducing the cost of their 
other sources of funding.
7 December 2020
The MPC has determined that
less stimulus is required
Monetary policy remains accommodative (see 
chapter 2). However, the MPC has recently 
reduced the level of monetary stimulus. At 
the July 2021 Review, the MPC halted further 
purchases of government bonds under the 
LSAP programme. This reduced monetary 
stimulus, primarily by bringing forward market 
participants’ expectations of future OCR 
increases. Financial market participants had 
expected purchases to continue for a while 
longer, and for the OCR to increase after 
purchases had ceased.
Our economic projections imply that 
increases in the OCR over the next year will 
be necessary for the MPC to meet its inflation 
and employment objectives. 


Chapter 3 Monetary conditions
22
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
Financial markets have responded 
to strong economic data
Financial conditions have been tightening 
for several months due to expectations of 
OCR increases. Stronger economic data 
and the accelerating vaccine rollout globally 
have increased confidence that economic 
conditions will eventually warrant higher 
interest rates. Accordingly, longer-term 
wholesale interest rates have increased 
since the start of the year, as evidenced by 
increases in the 5-year and 10-year swap 
rates (figure 3.1).
Shorter-term rates remained anchored during 
the first half of this year, but have increased 
during the past two months on the release 
of domestic GDP, inflation, and employment 
data, which have shown that inflationary 
pressures and employment were higher than 
previously anticipated. This has led financial 
market participants to anticipate an earlier 
increase in the OCR than was expected only 
a few months earlier. The 1-year swap rate 
rose by more than 70 basis points in a two-
month period.
Interest rates paid by businesses and 
mortgage borrowers, as well as those paid 
to depositors, have begun to increase in 
response to rising wholesale interest rates. 
Nevertheless, bank interest rates remain low. 
For example, mortgage interest rates remain 
below their pre-pandemic levels (figure 3.2).
The effects of additional monetary 
policy tools will persist
The Reserve Bank currently holds $54 
billion of bonds purchased under the LSAP 
programme. Although the Reserve Bank 
has stopped purchasing bonds, the stock of 
bonds held on the Reserve Bank’s balance 
sheet, and the associated balances in the 
settlement cash system, will continue to 
provide stimulus. 
Furthermore, the FLP remains in place, with 
the initial allocation available until June 2022. 
The additional allocation, which applies 
to banks that grow their lending, is able to 
be drawn upon until December 2022. The 
interest rate on funds borrowed under the 
FLP is set at the OCR, so if the OCR changes, 
so does the cost of funding via the FLP.
Figure 3.1
Swap rates
Source: Bloomberg.
Figure 3.2
Mortgage rates
Source: interest.co.nz.
Note: The rate shown for each term is the average of the latest ‘special’ rates on offer from 
ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac.


Chapter 3 Monetary conditions
23
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
The term of FLP loans is three years, which 
means that some of the low-cost funding 
provided by the FLP could be on banks’ 
balance sheets until 2025, directly reducing 
banks’ funding costs. However, the direct 
effect of the FLP is expected to be relatively 
small. The more significant, indirect effect of 
the FLP – due to the FLP providing a lower-
cost alternative to other funding and therefore 
pushing down its cost – is expected to persist 
only until the end of the periods during which 
the FLP can be drawn upon.
The FLP’s continued downward pressure 
on bank funding costs is demonstrated in 
term deposit rates, which have remained 
low relative to comparable wholesale rates  
(figure 3.3).
An outcome of the ongoing stimulus 
provided by the LSAP programme and the 
FLP is that the OCR will need to be higher 
than otherwise to achieve a given overall 
level of stimulus.
The OCR is the preferred tool for 
adjusting monetary policy
The LSAP programme and the FLP are 
geared towards providing stimulus for a 
sustained period of time. In contrast, the 
OCR is a much more flexible tool, which can 
be adjusted more frequently and calibrated 
more precisely according to the level of 
monetary stimulus required. The OCR is 
currently the preferred tool for adjusting 
monetary policy.  
When setting monetary policy, the MPC will 
continue to take into account how broader 
interest rates are evolving. Given monetary 
policy has tightened, the Reserve Bank will 
consider how previous periods of monetary 
policy tightening have affected the economy, 
and how the economy has changed since 
then. For example, transmission of tighter 
monetary policy to the household sector 
is likely to be influenced by changes in 
household balance sheets and borrowing 
behaviours (see box B). 
Figure 3.3
6-month term deposit spread to 6-month OIS
Source: interest.co.nz, Bloomberg.


24
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
Box B
Transmission of tighter
monetary policy through
the household cash flow channel
One example of how higher 
interest rates will affect the 
economy is through repricing of 
mortgages. The transmission of 
monetary policy depends to an 
extent on the state of household 
balance sheets at the time, as 
this will influence the level of 
household consumption – a key 
source of demand in the economy. 
This box compares the current 
environment to previous periods 
of rising interest rates.
The 1-year mortgage rate has 
so far increased by around 35 
basis points from its recent lows. 
If the OCR returns to the Reserve 
Bank’s current estimate of its 
‘neutral rate’ (see chapter 4) 
the 1-year mortgage rate could 
increase materially. Table B1 gives 
an indication of the increases in 
mortgage payments that may be 
faced by recent borrowers under 
different interest rate scenarios.
OCR increases are passed 
through to mortgaged 
households’ interest payments 
more quickly when borrowers are 
on shorter fixed terms. Compared 
to the beginning of the two most 
recent monetary policy tightening 
cycles (discussed below), the 
distribution of mortgages’ time 
to reprice is broadly similar, with 
around 78 percent due to reprice 
within one year. However, the 
level of debt is higher relative to 
disposable income; the quantity 
of debt due to reprice within one 
year has risen to 120 percent of 
household income (figure B1).
Table B1
Effects of interest rate changes on mortgage payments
(principal and interest for a $700,000 mortgage on a 30-year term)
Interest rate 
(%)
Weekly 
payments 
($)
Increase in 
payments 
 ($)
Annual 
payments 
($)
Increase in 
payments 
($)
Mortgage 
payments % of 
take-home pay*
2.55 
(Current 1-year 
fixed rate)
642
-
33,391
-
36.1%
3.00
681
+39
35,394
+2,003
38.3%
4.00
771
+129
40,076
+6,686
43.3%
Note: $700,000 is a representative loan amount for a recent first-home buyer. We have assumed the borrower has a debt-to-income (DTI) ratio of 5, consistent 
with the average for first-home buyers over the past 12 months. Calculations in the right-hand column therefore assume a dual-income household with gross 
income of $140,000, student loan deductions at the standard rate, and 4% KiwiSaver contributions.


25
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
The high starting point for debt 
means that a given increase in 
the OCR will have larger effects 
on mortgaged households’ 
discretionary incomes than 
in previous tightening cycles. 
However, the quantity of household 
deposits is also higher, leading 
to a greater potential increase 
in interest incomes for those 
households with deposit savings.
By comparison, at the beginning 
of 2004, the quantity of debt 
due to reprice within one year 
was 65 percent of household 
income. The OCR increased from 
5.00 percent to 8.25 percent 
between January 2004 and July 
2007. The 1-year mortgage rate 
increased earlier on anticipation 
of OCR increases; it increased 
from 6.20 percent in July 2003 to 
to 9.95 percent in March 2008. 
During this period, expectations 
that the OCR was near its peak 
began to build, causing longer-
term mortgage rates to become 
lower than shorter-term mortgage 
rates. This lasted for about two 
years, and saw a large portion of 
borrowers fix at longer terms as 
interest rates rose.
The only significant period 
of OCR increases in the past 
decade began in March 2014. 
Banks had begun to increase 
their fixed mortgage rates six 
months prior to the first OCR hike, 
consistent with OCR expectations 
and the Reserve Bank’s 
communications at the time. 
At the beginning of 2014, the 
quantity of mortgage debt due to 
reprice within one year was 97 
percent of household disposable 
income. During this relatively 
short tightening cycle, which 
was subsequently reversed, the 
1-year mortgage rate increased 
by around 80 basis points before 
declining again.
Figure B1
Mortgage debt by time to reprice
(% of household disposable income)
Source: RBNZ.


Chapter 4 Special topics
26
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
CHAPTER 
04
Special topics


Chapter 4 Special topics
27
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
CHAPTER 4 
Special topics 
Prior to each Statement, the MPC is provided with analysis 
of some topical issues.
Topics for the August Statement included:
1.	 the recovery of New Zealand’s labour 
market; and
2.	 the neutral interest rate.
The recovery of New Zealand’s labour market
The labour market has fared better than 
expected since the outset of the COVID-19 
pandemic. Supported by significant fiscal and 
monetary stimulus, businesses have been 
able to retain staff and stay solvent through 
periods at higher alert level restrictions. The 
strong rebound in economic activity, and 
border restrictions that have limited access 
to workers from abroad, have led to a tighter 
labour market than prior to the pandemic. 
The unemployment rate was 4.0 percent 
in the June 2021 quarter, after peaking at 
5.3 percent in the September 2020 quarter 
(figure 4.1). Across sex and ethnicities, except 
Pacific peoples, unemployment rates have 
returned to around pre-COVID-19 levels. 
When considering a broad range of labour 
market indicators, employment is assessed 
as being at or above its maximum sustainable 
level. This assessment takes into account 
that the level of maximum sustainable 
employment (MSE) is likely lower in the 
current environment than it would be if 
border restrictions and limited labour mobility 
were not impinging on the economy.
1
Figure 4.1
Unemployment rate by sex
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ.


Chapter 4 Special topics
28
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
The recovery started off 
uneven and has been driven by 
compositional changes
The COVID-19 pandemic and public health 
response measures have hit tourism-related 
industries particularly hard. As a result, 
employment in most of these industries 
is still below its pre-COVID-19 levels. This 
is particularly the case in retail trade, 
accommodation and transport, as well as 
professional and administrative services, 
which include travel agents and tour 
operators (figure 4.2). The unemployment 
rates in most regions with a greater reliance 
on tourism are also above their pre-COVID-19 
levels (figure 4.3).
The total number of employed people mainly 
comprises paid employees, self-employed, 
and working employers. Paid employment 
has been the most affected by the COVID-19 
pandemic. However, the negative impact 
from the decline in paid employment has 
been partially offset by an increase in 
self-employment (figure 4.4), particularly 
for women. Flexibility between types of 
employment helped limit the increase in the 
unemployment rate over 2020. Since its 
initial increase in the June 2020 quarter, self-
employment has remained elevated. This 
has been the case even as paid employment 
opportunities have recovered across many 
regions and industries, with the number of 
job vacancies at record highs. This suggests 
that switching to self-employment has not 
just been a short-term response, but a more 
deliberate choice by workers.
Figure 4.2
Employment by industry
(cumulative change since 2020Q1, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: The category ‘not specified’ is excluded.
Figure 4.3
Unemployment rate by region
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: Regions marked with an asterisk (*) had tourism expenditure in excess of 10 percent 
of regional GDP in the year to March 2020. Regions are sorted by the difference between 
the red and the blue bars (current minus pre-COVID-19 unemployment rate), with regions 
where unemployment is above pre-COVID-19 levels being on the left.
Figure 4.4
Employment rate by type
(cumulative change since 2020Q1, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 4 Special topics
29
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
Some businesses that faced lower demand 
reduced employees’ hours, partly by 
switching towards part-time from full-
time roles.3 This is a typical response to a 
downturn in New Zealand, with businesses 
trying to avoid redundancies by reducing 
employees’ work hours in the first instance.4 
It has helped to keep people in jobs, but 
initially resulted in a significant increase in 
underemployment (the number of part-time 
employees who want to work more hours). 
However, recent strong labour demand has 
helped lower underemployment towards 
pre-COVID-19 levels, as the labour market 
recovery has become more broad based. 
The underutilisation rate – which includes 
unemployed and underemployed people – 
has nearly returned to pre-COVID-19 levels 
for both women and men (figure 4.5). 
3	
In particular, accommodation and food services as well as rental, hiring, and real estate services (which include car rental) show higher 
ratios of part-time to full-time hours worked compared to pre-COVID-19 levels.
4	
See Culling and Robinson (2020), ‘Employment and hours worked adjustment in New Zealand’s labour market’, Analytical Note, 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand.
Employment is at or above its 
maximum sustainable level
Unemployment and underutilisation have 
recovered quickly and labour demand is 
significantly above pre-COVID-19 levels. The 
number of businesses intending to increase 
their workforces is high, and for many 
businesses insufficient labour is reported as 
being the main factor limiting their ability to 
increase output. Consistent with this, more 
businesses than ever are reporting that it is 
difficult to find skilled and unskilled labour. 
With the exception of hospitality, which 
continues to face reduced tourism demand, 
job vacancies are at or above pre-COVID-19 
levels across all regions and industries. 
While labour demand has been strong, 
employers have not been able to draw 
all the workers needed from the pool of 
unemployed or underemployed, or from 
outside the labour force. This reflects a 
combination of factors:
•	 Border restrictions have made it difficult 
for businesses to source the labour 
needed from abroad.
•	 Aggregate unemployment and 
underemployment have fallen significantly, 
but some pockets of weakness remain, 
in tourism in particular. Consequently, 
additional labour capacity within 
New Zealand seems to be concentrated 
mainly in workers who formerly worked in 
tourism-related industries or who are still 
working in those industries but for fewer 
hours. These people may not always have 
the skills needed for the jobs available, or 
may not be willing or easily able to move 
between regions for work. 
•	 The increase in self-employed workers 
has reduced the pool of labour available 
for businesses needing to fill paid 
positions on a permanent basis. 
Figure 4.5
Underutilisation rate by sex
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ.


Chapter 4 Special topics
30
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
These factors suggest that the level of MSE 
is likely lower in the current environment 
than it would be if these constraints were not 
present. In other words, the labour market 
has been unevenly impacted by COVID-19 
and, while these structural issues remain, 
increasing labour demand (such as through 
monetary policy stimulus) is likely to be less 
effective at lifting employment.
The flipside of a lower level of MSE is higher 
structural unemployment. The Beveridge 
curve is one concept that can show changes 
in structural unemployment (figure 4.6).5 For 
a given level of structural unemployment, 
a higher vacancy rate is associated with a 
lower unemployment rate and vice versa. 
The vacancy and unemployment rates move 
along a specific Beveridge curve. However, 
a Beveridge curve that has changed in 
steepness or position may suggest a different 
level of structural unemployment. Over recent 
quarters the vacancy rate has increased 
significantly, but declines in the unemployment 
rate have not kept pace, despite the sharp fall 
in the June 2021 quarter (the pink line in figure 
4.6). This steepening of the Beveridge curve 
indicates that those who are not currently 
employed are not well matched to what 
employers are looking for in terms of skills 
and locations. This indicates higher structural 
unemployment and a lower level of MSE. 
A lower level of MSE is also consistent with 
increased wage pressures at any given 
unemployment rate. Since the unemployment 
and underutilisation rates have fallen, the 
pool of available labour is even more limited 
and businesses will have to bid up wages to 
attract workers. The latest labour market data 
provide early evidence that this is beginning 
to occur. Annual wage inflation has increased 
to 2.2 percent, above its post-2010 average 
of 1.8 percent, and we expect further wage 
inflation over the coming quarters (see 
chapter 5).
Given that many labour market indicators are 
around their pre-COVID-19 levels and the 
level of MSE is likely lower than it was then, 
employment is currently assessed as being 
at or above its maximum sustainable level 
(figure 4.7). 
5	
Robinson (2020), ‘Vacancies, unemployment and labour market slack in New Zealand’, Analytical Note, Reserve Bank of New Zealand.
Figure 4.6
Job vacancies and unemployment (Beveridge curve)
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, Ministry of Business, Innovation and Employment (MBIE), RBNZ estimates. 
Note: The vacancy rate is defined as the number of job vacancies as a share of the labour 
force. Colours reflect different periods in recent history (pink: COVID-19; black: post-GFC; 
orange: GFC; blue: pre-GFC).
Figure 4.7
MSE indicators
Source: Stats NZ, MBIE, ANZ, NZIER, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The Reserve Bank uses a range of indicators when assessing MSE and regards 
the December 2019 quarter as a period when this selection of indicators pointed to 
employment being at MSE. However, current outturns should not be directly compared to 
2019Q4 as the level of MSE is likely lower. The vertical lines on the left-hand and right-hand 
sides represent the lowest and highest data outcomes since 2000, respectively. A pink 
dot to the right of a black dot means that the latest data outcome was stronger than in the 
December 2019 quarter.


Chapter 4 Special topics
31
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
The neutral interest rate
The neutral interest rate is the short-term 
interest rate at which monetary policy is 
neither expansionary nor contractionary. It 
is determined by the long-run demand for 
capital investment and the supply of savings. 
The neutral interest rate influences the 
level that the OCR and other interest rates 
are expected to return to over the medium 
term, as the MPC meets its inflation and 
employment objectives. 
The exact value of the neutral interest rate is 
unknown, as it cannot be measured directly. 
It also changes over time as factors that 
influence the long-term demand for capital 
investment and the supply of savings evolve. 
Nevertheless, the neutral interest rate is an 
important consideration when forecasting 
the economic outlook and setting monetary 
policy. It influences the broad level around 
which interest rates vary over the business 
cycle and the level we project the OCR to 
return to over time. We can also compare 
the OCR to estimates of the neutral rate to 
assess how stimulatory or contractionary 
monetary policy is at any given time. 
The Reserve Bank uses a suite of indicators 
that combines several models and 
approaches to assess the neutral interest 
rate. Some of the indicators are based on 
expectations of interest rates over the long 
run, as well as other long-run economic 
factors that can influence the neutral interest 
rate. These indicators use expectations 
from professional forecasters and financial 
market participants, as implied by the prices 
of financial instruments (e.g. bond yields). 
Other indicators use information about recent 
economic outcomes, and consider what they 
imply about the level of monetary stimulus 
and the neutral interest rate.
The OCR is below the neutral 
interest rate
Based on our suite of indicators, we estimate 
the nominal neutral interest rate to be about 
2 percent, compared to our current OCR of 
0.25 percent. While there is always a degree 
of uncertainty in the neutral interest rate 
estimate, this uncertainty – as reflected in 
the wide range of estimates from our suite 
– is heightened currently due to the impacts 
of the COVID-19 pandemic (figure 4.8). 
However, we are confident the current level 
of the OCR is below the neutral interest rate, 
consistent with the pace of the economic 
recovery and the OCR being below even the 
lowest indicator in the suite. 
The MPC formulates monetary policy using 
a range of information and indicators. By 
combining several approaches, our indicator 
suite ensures that not too much emphasis 
is placed on any one model or framework. 
More importantly, the MPC regularly reviews 
economic outcomes and policy settings, 
which allows adjustments to be made if 
policy is not having the desired impact on 
the economy. For example, if the true neutral 
interest rate were lower than estimated, 
monetary policy would be less stimulatory 
than expected. Inflationary pressures and 
employment would be lower than anticipated 
and the MPC could respond by easing 
monetary policy if needed. 
2
Figure 4.8
New Zealand neutral interest rate indicator suite
(nominal)
Source: Bloomberg, Consensus Economics, Stats NZ and RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 4 Special topics
32
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
Global neutral rates have been 
trending down over time
Globally, estimates of neutral rates indicate 
they have been declining since at least the 
1980s, a trend accelerated by the global 
financial crisis (GFC).6 The global decline 
in neutral interest rates reflects a number 
of factors that have reduced the long-term 
demand for capital investment or have 
increased the long-term supply of savings. 
Improving life expectancy and decreasing 
fertility rates in developed countries have 
resulted in their populations ageing over the 
past few decades. This has led to a rise in the 
proportion of people who are at a stage in 
their lives when they are more likely to work 
and save, increasing the supply of savings 
globally. 
Subdued productivity growth has also 
contributed by reducing returns on capital 
investment. A shift in the balance of growth 
towards less-capital-intensive industries 
(such as some services sectors) may 
have also contributed to lower demand 
for investment. These trends have been 
compounded by increased risk aversion and 
a desire among households and businesses 
to strengthen their balance sheets following 
the GFC.
Continued changes in demographics, risk 
preferences, and potential growth are 
expected to influence global neutral interest 
rates going forward. The implications of 
future demographic developments are 
complex, and may shift as more people retire 
and start drawing upon their savings.
6	
See online New York Fed: Holston, Laubach, and Williams.
For example, while a drain on savings 
would place upward pressure on the neutral 
rate, a declining labour force could result 
in an increased or decreased demand for 
investment. Assuming no technological 
advances, capital investment could 
decrease as fewer workers would need to 
be equipped. This would create downward 
pressure on the neutral rate, at least in the 
medium term. On the other hand, fewer 
workers, which increases the relative cost 
of labour, could encourage technological 
advancements to improve capital 
productivity. This would put upward pressure 
on the neutral interest rate. 
Other factors that have led to a declining 
demand for capital investment and an 
increased supply of savings over past 
decades may also continue to influence the 
neutral rate. Overall, it is unclear whether 
global neutral interest rates will increase 
or decrease over time as a result of these 
trends, especially as some trends work in 
offsetting directions. 
Global conditions contribute
to declines in New Zealand’s 
neutral interest rate
New Zealand is a small open economy with 
globally integrated financial markets. The 
global demand and supply of investment 
and savings, and by extension global neutral 
rates, have a large bearing on our neutral 
interest rate. In other words, New Zealand’s 
neutral rate will be influenced by trends in 
global neutral rates, especially those of large 
economies such as the United States. 
New Zealand has experienced many of the 
same trends that have reduced global neutral 
interest rates. Like in many other developed 
countries, New Zealand’s population is 
ageing and is expected to do so over the 
next few decades. In 1995, 11 percent of the 
population was aged 65 years or over. This 
proportion is now around 16 percent, and is 
expected to increase to 23 percent by 2045 
(figure 4.9). New Zealand has also seen 
declining productivity growth for some time 
(figure 4.10). 


Chapter 4 Special topics
33
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
The COVID-19 pandemic may 
influence the neutral rate
The COVID-19 pandemic has the potential 
to influence the neutral interest rate. 
Lockdowns and border restrictions 
have reduced the productive capacity 
of New Zealand. Likewise, heightened 
uncertainty at the beginning of the pandemic 
decreased the appetite for businesses to 
invest and encouraged households to save. 
If sustained in the long term, these types 
of change would typically place downward 
pressure on the neutral rate. However, these 
drivers are expected to be largely temporary, 
subsiding as border restrictions ease and 
New Zealand continues its strong economic 
recovery. As these factors are not expected 
to cause significant longer-term changes in 
the behaviour of businesses, households, 
or the structure of the economy, we do not 
believe they will have a significant impact on 
the neutral interest rate. 
However, the pandemic may also have some 
longer-lasting impacts that could influence the 
level of the neutral interest rate. For example, 
the pandemic and the associated global fiscal 
responses have had a significant bearing 
on household, business, and government 
balance sheets, including in New Zealand. 
At the moment, it is not clear whether these 
factors will have net upward or downward 
impacts on the neutral interest rate. 
Figure 4.9
New Zealand’s age profile
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 4.10
Annual labour productivity growth
Source: Stats NZ.


Chapter 5 Economic projection
34
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
CHAPTER 
05
Economic 
projection


Chapter 5 Economic projection
35
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
CHAPTER 5
Economic projection
This chapter summarises the baseline economic projection
that the MPC considered when making its policy assessment.
The projection was finalised on 18 August 2021. The OCR 
projection incorporates an outlook for monetary policy that is 
consistent with the MPC’s monetary policy assessment, which 
was finalised on 18 August. Other data and developments have 
been incorporated up until 11 August. 
This projection relies on a set of key 
assumptions about the global and domestic 
responses to the COVID-19 pandemic and 
the subsequent recovery. Substantially 
different outcomes could eventuate if 
these assumptions do not hold. Significant 
uncertainty surrounds our assumptions about 
the effectiveness of vaccine programmes 
both globally and domestically, the spread 
of highly contagious variants, and their 
impacts on economic activity. There is also 
uncertainty about how the behaviour of 
businesses and consumers will change 
relative to pre-COVID-19 times and the 
effects of significant changes in fiscal policies 
in New Zealand and abroad. 
The projection takes into account recent 
data, which show a strong rebound in 
economic activity in early 2021 and a more 
resilient labour market than previously 
anticipated. The factors underpinning this 
starting point are discussed in chapters 
2–4. The projection also accounts for the 
assumed impacts of developments in 
New Zealand and abroad since the May 
Statement, including the announced pause
of the trans-Tasman bubble. The projection 
assumes that New Zealand is predominantly 
at Alert Level 1 or a lower level of restrictions. 
The majority of New Zealand’s adult 
population is assumed to be fully vaccinated 
by the end of 2021. Although there remains 
a risk of widespread COVID-19 outbreaks 
in New Zealand, we assume outbreaks 
will be sporadic and quickly contained. 
Border restrictions are assumed to ease 
more gradually from the beginning of 
2022, in line with recent Government 
announcements. Employment rises above 
its maximum sustainable level (MSE) over 
the forecast horizon due to intensifying 
capacity pressures, but returns towards MSE 
by the end of the projection as pressures 
ease. Inflation remains above the 2 percent 
target mid-point over the projection due to 
sustained capacity pressures. Inflation is 
boosted by near-term supply shocks that are 
assumed to be transitory. 
The economic outlook means that monetary 
stimulus is projected to be reduced over the 
forecast horizon to ensure the MPC meets 
its medium-term inflation and employment 
objectives. 
Chapter 2 discusses some of the key risks
to this economic outlook. These include:
•	 COVID-19 resurgence in New Zealand;
•	 higher inflation becoming embedded;
•	 the economic effects of easing border 
restrictions; and
•	 uncertainty regarding the longer-term 
economic implications of COVID-19.


Chapter 5 Economic projection
36
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
Table 5.1 
Key projection assumptions
Key factors
Global growth
•	 The annual average GDP growth of our trading partners is 
projected to recover to 6.6% in 2021 and moderate thereafter. 
The global economic recovery is being supported by the ongoing 
vaccine rollout.  
•	 The New Zealand dollar trade-weighted index (TWI) is assumed to 
stay around 74.4, above its pre-COVID-19 level.
•	 The Dubai oil price is assumed to return gradually to around 65 
USD per barrel over the medium term, in line with futures market 
pricing.
Health restrictions 
•	 New Zealand is assumed to predominantly be at Alert Level 1 or 
a lower level of restrictions over the projection. Any COVID-19 
outbreaks are assumed to be sporadic and quickly contained.
•	 The small but positive anticipated impact of the trans-Tasman 
travel bubble on net exports over the projection is assumed to 
be lower due to the suspension of the bubble in the September 
quarter. If the bubble re-starts, uptake is expected to be fairly 
gradual, hampered by concerns over its ongoing stability.
•	 A significant proportion of New Zealand’s adult population is 
assumed to be vaccinated by the end of 2021. Wider border 
restrictions are expected to begin to ease gradually in 2022, 
in line with recent Government announcements.
House prices
•	 Annual average house price growth is assumed to decrease over 
the projection period, from 26.4% in 2021 to 7.9% in 2022. House 
prices are assumed to decline modestly from late 2022 until 
the end of the forecast horizon. This reflects a variety of factors, 
including increases in interest rates, increased housing supply, 
low net immigration, announced changes to tax policy, and the 
reintroduction and tightening of LVR restrictions.


Chapter 5 Economic projection
37
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
Economic 
growth
Production
•	 	Quarterly GDP growth is expected to ease in mid-2021 as 
services growth moderates from its current high level. Annual 
growth rises to 4.0% in the December 2021 quarter, supported by 
strong household income growth and some residual momentum in 
the housing market. 
•	 New Zealand’s productive capacity (potential output) has fallen as 
a result of the domestic and international measures put in place 
to contain COVID-19. Mismatches in labour demand and supply, 
across skills and regions, have resulted in slightly higher structural 
unemployment. These temporary disruptions are expected to 
dissipate as domestic border restrictions ease.
•	 The output gap is starting from a much higher position than 
assumed in the May Statement. This reflects stronger-than-
expected economic growth, a tighter labour market, and surveys 
of businesses that show increased capacity pressures.
Consumption
•	 Consumption is expected to soften in the June 2021 quarter, 
largely reflecting a reversal of higher-than-usual domestic 
spending during the summer.
•	 Nevertheless, consumption is projected to be supported in the 
near term by a more resilient labour market, savings accumulated 
during 2020, and the impacts of recent strong house price 
inflation. The impact of higher interest rates is anticipated to 
provide some offset, particularly over the medium term. 
•	 Consumption remains above pre-COVID-19 levels over the 
projection horizon.
Investment 
•	 Business investment is expected to remain above pre-COVID-19 
levels over the projection horizon due to higher demand, lower 
uncertainty, and increased capacity pressures. 
•	 Residential investment peaks in the September 2021 quarter, 
reflecting strong growth in residential building consent issuance. 
Residential investment is expected to remain elevated over 
coming quarters.
•	 Residential investment is assumed to then soften somewhat from 
the end of 2021 as house price inflation eases. Nevertheless, 
easier urban planning rules are assumed to support residential 
investment over the medium term.
Exports and imports
•	 Improving global demand is expected to underpin demand for 
New Zealand’s exports. This supports stronger, albeit moderating, 
export prices over the projection.
•	 Import prices are higher than previously expected, largely driven 
by higher oil prices and the impact of supply-chain disruptions on 
the cost of goods and services.
•	 The terms of trade are slightly lower than expected in the May 
Statement. The current account balance is assumed to be lower 
due to higher-than-expected import prices and volumes, which are 
partially offset by higher export prices.


Chapter 5 Economic projection
38
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
Labour market
Employment and wages
•	 	The unemployment rate has peaked at 5.3% in the September 
2020 quarter. Over the projection, the unemployment rate is 
assumed to trough at 3.8% in the September 2022 quarter as 
economic activity recovers and capacity pressures remain strong. 
•	 Structural unemployment is assumed to be elevated relative 
to pre-COVID-19 levels, largely reflecting a skills mismatch in 
the New Zealand labour market. This has lowered the level of 
maximum sustainable employment. Currently, employment is 
estimated to be at or above its maximum sustainable level.
•	 Annual LCI private sector wage inflation is assumed to accelerate 
from 2.2% in the June 2021 quarter to 2.7% at the end of the year. 
This reflects a tight labour market. Annual wage inflation peaks at 
2.9% later in the projection as capacity pressures tighten.
•	 Net working-age immigration is projected to be around 1,500 
people over 2021, with the assumption that the trans-Tasman 
bubble has no significant impact on the net flow of migrants. 
Net immigration is assumed to increase gradually as border 
restrictions ease, to a long-run average of about 24,000 people 
per year.
Inflation
Headline 
•	 Annual CPI inflation rises above the 1–3% target band in the near 
term, but declines to the 2% midpoint at the end of the projection 
period.
•	 Headline inflation is projected to peak at around 4% in the 
September 2021 quarter, but some of the factors lifting inflation 
are assumed to be relatively short-lived. Headline inflation is 
expected to stay slightly above 2% over most of the remainder of 
the forecast horizon due to sustained capacity pressures.
•	 Supply-chain and transportation disruptions are anticipated to 
remain over much of 2022, longer than assumed in the May 
Statement. 
Tradables
•	 Annual tradables inflation is expected to increase temporarily 
above 4% in late 2021, largely due to recent increases in oil prices 
and the ongoing impact of supply-chain disruptions.
•	 Over the medium term, moderating oil prices and a relatively 
strong TWI keep annual tradables inflation muted. Annual 
tradables inflation reaches around 0% by the end of the projection.
Non-tradables 
•	 Annual non-tradables inflation remains at or above 3.4% over the 
projection.
•	 High starting-point momentum in house prices and construction 
costs supports housing-related components of non-tradables 
inflation in the near and medium term. Higher council rates also 
boost non-tradables inflation in the near term. Over the projection, 
sustained capacity pressures, including a tight labour market, 
provide support as transitory factors dissipate. 


Chapter 5 Economic projection
39
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
Figure 5.3
Unemployment rate 
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Charts
Figure 5.1
Inflation breakdown
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Dotted lines show the projection from the May Statement.
Figure 5.2
Quarterly production GDP
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 5.4
OCR
Source: RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 5 Economic projection
40
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
Figure 5.7
Business investment
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 5.8
Residential investment
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 5.6
Household consumption
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 5.5
Terms of trade
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 6 Appendices
41
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
CHAPTER 
06
Appendices


Chapter 6 Appendices
42
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
CHAPTER 6
Appendices
Appendix 1: 
Statistical tables
Table 6.1
Key forecast variables
GDP growth 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Annual
TWI
OCR
2019
Mar
0.3
0.1
1.5
74.0
1.8
 
Jun
0.4
0.6
1.7
72.6
1.6
 
Sep
0.9
0.7
1.5
72.0
1.2
 
Dec
0.2
0.5
1.9
71.3
1.0
2020
Mar
-1.5
0.8
2.5
70.9
0.9
 
Jun
-10.8
-0.5
1.5
69.7
0.3
 
Sep
14.1
0.7
1.4
72.0
0.3
 
Dec
-1.0
0.5
1.4
72.9
0.3
2021
Mar
1.6
0.8
1.5
74.9
0.3
 
Jun
0.7
1.3
3.3
74.7
0.3
 
Sep
0.8
1.4
4.1
74.4
0.3
 
Dec
0.8
0.5
4.1
74.4
0.6
2022
Mar
0.7
0.5
3.7
74.4
0.9
 
Jun
0.7
0.5
2.9
74.4
1.2
 
Sep
0.5
0.7
2.2
74.4
1.4
 
Dec
0.3
0.4
2.2
74.4
1.6
2023
Mar
0.3
0.4
2.2
74.4
1.8
Jun
0.3
0.6
2.2
74.4
1.9
Sep
0.4
0.6
2.1
74.4
2.0
Dec
0.2
0.4
2.1
74.4
2.0
2024
Mar
0.3
0.4
2.1
74.4
2.1
Jun
0.4
0.5
2.0
74.4
2.1
Sep
0.4
0.6
2.0
74.4
2.1


Chapter 6 Appendices
43
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
Table 6.2
Measures of inflation, inflation expectations, and asset prices
2020
2021
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Inflation (annual rates)
CPI
1.9
2.5
1.5
1.4
1.4
1.5
3.3
CPI non-tradables
3.1
3.4
3.1
2.6
2.8
2.1
3.3
CPI tradables
0.1
1.5
-0.6
-0.1
-0.3
0.5
3.4
Sectoral factor model estimate of 
core inflation
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.8
1.9
2.0
2.2
CPI trimmed mean (30 percent 
measure)
2.1
2.7
2.1
1.7
2.2
1.7
3.0
CPI weighted median
2.3
2.8
2.4
2.2
2.7
2.3
3.0
GDP deflator (expenditure)
3.6
3.7
2.5
1.6
0.7
0.6
Inflation expectations
ANZ Business Outlook – inflation one 
year ahead (quarterly average to date)
1.7
1.7
1.4
1.4
1.5
1.9
2.2
2.7
RBNZ Survey of Expectations – 
inflation 2 years ahead
1.8
1.9
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.9
2.0
2.3
RBNZ Survey of Expectations – 
inflation 5 years ahead
2.0
2.0
1.8
1.9
1.9
2.0
2.1
2.0
RBNZ Survey of Expectations – 
inflation 10 years ahead
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.1
2.0
2.0
2.0
Long-run inflation expectations*
2.0
1.8
1.8
2.0
2.0
2.1
2.1
2.1
Asset prices (annual percent 
changes)
Quarterly house price index 
(CoreLogic NZ)
4.5
7.7
7.1
10.8
16.9
REINZ Farm Price Index (quarterly 
average)
-0.8
-12.5
-8.0
-3.7
-0.5
6.9
6.3
NZX 50 (quarterly average)
25.7
21.1
6.4
8.6
13.2
14.4
17.1
*Long-run expectations are extracted from a range of surveys using a Nelson-Siegel model. Source: ANZ Bank, Aon-Hewitt Consulting, Consensus 
Economics, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 6 Appendices
44
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
Table 6.3
Measures of labour market conditions	
(seasonally adjusted, changes expressed in annual percent terms)	
2020
2021
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Household Labour Force Survey
Unemployment rate
4.0
4.2
4.1
5.3
4.8
4.6
4.0
Underutilisation rate
10.1
10.4
12.1
13.1
11.8
12.1
10.5
Labour force participation rate
70.4
70.7
69.9
70.1
70.2
70.4
70.5
Employment rate (percentage of 
working-age population)
67.6
67.7
67.0
66.4
66.8
67.1
67.7
Employment growth
1.2
2.5
1.6
0.4
0.7
0.3
1.7
Average weekly hours worked
33.8
34.1
30.7
33.7
34.9
33.9
34.1
Number unemployed (thousand 
people)
114
120
117
151
139
133
117
Number employed (million people)
2.72
2.74
2.73
2.72
2.73
2.75
2.78
Labour force (million people)
2.83
2.86
2.85
2.87
2.87
2.88
2.89
Extended labour force (million 
people)
2.92
2.96
2.96
2.97
2.97
2.99
2.99
Working-age population (million 
people)
4.02
4.05
4.08
4.09
4.09
4.10
4.11
Quarterly Employment Survey – 
QEM
Filled jobs growth
2.9
2.1
0.3
-0.6
0.3
0.5
2.4
Average hourly earnings growth 
(private sector, ordinary time)
2.5
3.2
2.4
3.7
4.6
4.1
4.4
Other data sources
Labour cost index growth, private 
sector
2.4
2.4
1.7
1.6
1.5
1.6
2.2
Labour cost index growth, private 
sector, unadjusted
3.7
3.6
2.8
2.6
2.4
2.8
3.7
Estimated net migration (published, 
thousands, quarterly)
21.4
Change in All Vacancies Index
-4.8
-13.3
-49.8
-19.7
1.7
23.0
166.9
Note: The All Vacancies Index is produced by MBIE as part of the monthly Jobs Online report, which shows changes in job vacancies advertised by businesses
on internet job boards. It is converted to quarterly and seasonally adjusted by the RBNZ. The unadjusted labour cost index (LCI) is an analytical index that reflects 
quality change in addition to price change (whereas the official LCI measures price changes only). For definitions of underutilisation, the extended labour force, 
and related concepts, see Statistics New Zealand (2016), Introducing underutilisation in the labour market. Estimated net migration (published) is the Stats NZ 
outcomes-based measure.


Chapter 6 Appendices
45
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
Table 6.4
Composition of real GDP growth
(annual average percent change, seasonally adjusted, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
Final consumption expenditure
Private
3.9
3.3
4.2
6.5
4.9
4.4
2.8
-0.5
6.2
1.6
0.9
Public authority
2.1
3.4
2.3
2.2
3.4
3.7
6.1
6.2
4.4
1.4
0.7
Total
3.5
3.3
3.7
5.5
4.6
4.2
3.6
1.1
5.7
1.6
0.8
Gross fixed capital formation
Residential
15.2
8.3
7.1
8.8
-1.8
3.0
1.5
2.0
14.2
-2.1
-0.2
Other
7.6
7.9
2.8
0.3
10.7
6.6
1.1
-6.7
12.9
4.3
1.8
Total
9.4
8.0
3.9
2.5
7.3
5.7
1.2
-4.6
13.2
2.6
1.3
Final domestic 
expenditure
4.8
4.4
3.8
4.8
5.2
4.6
3.0
-0.2
7.4
1.8
0.9
Stockbuilding*
-0.2
0.5
-0.3
0.1
0.2
-0.1
-0.5
-0.2
0.8
-0.3
0.0
Gross national 
expenditure
4.5
4.6
3.3
5.0
5.7
4.5
2.4
-1.3
8.3
2.0
1.1
Exports of goods and 
services
0.1
4.7
6.6
1.7
3.6
3.2
-0.3
-15.7
5.6
7.7
5.5
Imports of goods and 
services
8.1
7.7
2.6
5.6
7.8
4.4
1.0
-16.1
16.8
5.4
4.1
Expenditure on GDP
2.1
3.7
4.4
3.8
4.4
4.1
2.1
-0.4
5.2
2.3
1.2
GDP (production)
2.7
3.8
3.7
3.7
3.6
3.3
1.7
-2.3
5.9
2.4
1.3
GDP (production, 
March qtr to March qtr)
3.5
3.8
4.1
3.2
3.6
2.9
0.0
2.4
3.0
1.8
1.2
*Percentage point contribution to the growth rate of GDP.


Chapter 6 Appendices
46
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
Table 6.5
Summary of economic projection
(annual percent change for March years unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
Price measures
CPI 
1.5
0.3
0.4
2.2
1.1
1.5
2.5
1.5
3.7
2.2
2.1
Labour costs
1.7
1.8
1.8
1.5
1.9
2.0
2.4
1.6
2.9
2.9
2.7
Export prices (in 
New Zealand dollars) 
11.5
-9.2
-0.3
3.9
3.2
1.3
7.3
-3.2
4.2
-2.9
-0.2
Import prices (in 
New Zealand dollars) 
-3.0
-3.4
1.2
0.6
1.6
4.0
2.3
-3.2
2.5
-1.6
0.3
Monetary conditions
OCR (year average)
2.5
3.4
2.9
2.0
1.8
1.8
1.2
0.3
0.5
1.5
2.0
TWI (year average)
77.6
79.3
72.6
76.5
75.6
73.4
71.7
72.4
74.5
74.4
74.4
Output
GDP (production, annual 
average % change)
2.7
3.8
3.7
3.7
3.6
3.3
1.7
-2.3
5.9
2.4
1.3
Potential output (annual 
average % change)
2.6
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.1
3.0
2.5
-2.3
4.6
2.0
1.9
Output gap (% of potential 
GDP, year average)
-1.5
-0.8
-0.3
0.2
0.6
0.8
0.1
0.0
1.2
1.6
1.0
Labour market
Total employment 
(seasonally adjusted)
4.0
3.6
2.3
5.9
2.9
1.5
2.5
0.3
1.8
1.0
1.0
Unemployment rate 
(March qtr, seasonally 
adjusted)
5.6
5.5
5.3
4.9
4.4
4.2
4.2
4.6
3.9
3.9
4.1
Trend labour productivity 
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.3
0.5
0.7
0.7
0.7
Key balances
Government operating 
balance (% of GDP, year 
to June)
-1.2
0.2
0.7
1.5
1.9
2.4
-7.3
-4.3
-4.5
-2.6
-2.2
Current account balance 
(% of GDP)
-2.5
-3.5
-2.5
-2.7
-3.2
-3.9
-2.8
-2.2
-4.0
-4.2
-4.5
Terms of trade (SNA 
measure, annual average 
% change)
11.7
-0.3
-3.0
2.6
4.6
-2.5
2.0
-0.7
3.6
-0.9
-1.2
Household saving rate 
(% of disposable income)
1.2
-0.3
0.0
0.3
-0.1
0.5
1.9
5.5
2.4
1.4
0.6
World economy
Trading-partner GDP 
(annual average % change)
3.5
3.7
3.5
3.5
3.9
3.5
1.6
-0.9
6.5
4.3
3.4
Trading-partner CPI 
(TWI weighted)
2.2
1.0
1.2
1.9
1.8
1.4
2.4
0.8
2.4
1.9
2.2


Chapter 6 Appendices
47
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
Appendix 2: Chart pack
Figure 6.1
Composition of CPI inflation
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.2
Output gap
(share of potential)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.3
Unemployment and underutilisation rates
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 6.4
OCR and neutral OCR indicator suite
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: Shaded area indicates the range between the maximum and minimum 
values from a suite of neutral OCR indicators.
Figure 6.5
GDP and potential GDP
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.6
Headline inflation and core inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Core inflation measures exclude the GST increase in 2010.


Chapter 6 Appendices
48
Monetary Policy Statement August 2021
Figure 6.7
Inflation expectations
(annual) 
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: Inflation expectations are estimates from the RBNZ inflation expectations 
curve, based on surveys of businesses and professional forecasters.
Figure 6.9
House price inflation
(annual) 
Source: REINZ.
Source: Stats NZ, Global Dairy Trade, Reuters, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.12
Terms of trade, dairy and oil price indices
Figure 6.10
Mortgage rates
Source: interest.co.nz, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The rates shown for each term are the average of the latest rates on 
offer from ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac.
Figure 6.8
Private sector wage growth
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Private sector wage growth is measured by the labour cost index, all 
salary and wage rates, private sector. Real labour cost index is deflated with 
headline CPI inflation.
Figure 6.11
New Zealand dollar exchange rates
(quarterly average) 
Source: Reuters, RBNZ estimates.
