BANK: RBNZ
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
DATE: 23/11/2021
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/monetary-policy-statements/2021/mpsnov21.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

11/2021
Monetary Policy
STATEMENT


ii
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
STATEMENT
of the MPC’s monetary policy strategy
The Monetary Policy Committee’s (MPC) monetary policy strategy is its 
overarching plan for how it will formulate monetary policy under different 
circumstances to achieve its objectives.1 It outlines a consistent approach 
to how the MPC intends to achieve its objectives across time, accounting 
for trade-offs and uncertainty. Agreeing on and publishing a strategy 
promotes transparency, public understanding, and accountability.
1	
For a more in-depth discussion of monetary policy strategy in New Zealand, see J. Ratcliffe and R. Kendall (2019), ‘Monetary policy strategy in New Zealand’, 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Bulletin, Vol. 82, No. 3, April.
2	
These economic objectives contribute to the overall purpose of the Act, which is to promote the prosperity and well-being of New Zealanders, and contribute to 
a sustainable and productive economy. See monetary policy framework for more information on New Zealand’s monetary policy framework, including the full 
text of the Remit.
Monetary policy 
framework and objectives
Under the Reserve Bank of 
New Zealand Act 1989 (the 
Act), the MPC is responsible for 
formulating monetary policy to 
maintain a stable general level of 
prices over the medium term and 
to support maximum sustainable 
employment.2 Operational 
objectives for monetary policy are 
set out in the Remit. The current 
Remit sets out a flexible inflation 
targeting regime, under which the 
MPC must set policy to: 
•	 keep future annual inflation 
between 1 and 3 percent over 
the medium term, with a focus 
on keeping future inflation 
near the 2 percent mid-point; 
and
•	 support maximum sustainable 
employment, considering 
a broad range of labour 
market indicators and taking 
into account that maximum 
sustainable employment is 
largely determined by non-
monetary factors.
In pursuing these objectives, 
the Remit requires the MPC to 
have regard to the efficiency 
and soundness of the 
financial system, seek to avoid 
unnecessary instability in the 
economy and financial markets, 
and discount events that have 
only transitory effects on inflation. 
The MPC must also assess the 
effect of its monetary policy 
decisions on the Government’s 
policy to support more 
sustainable house prices.
The Reserve Bank’s flexible 
inflation targeting framework 
and the MPC’s monetary policy 
strategy reflect the fact that: 
•	 low and stable inflation is 
monetary policy’s best long-
run contribution to the well-
being of New Zealanders;
•	 in the short to medium term, 
monetary policy can influence 
real variables such as 
employment, and hence policy 
trade-offs can arise; and
•	 monetary policy is more 
effective if the Bank’s policy 
targets are credible, so policy 
should be formulated in a 
way that ensures credibility is 
maintained.
Key aspects of monetary 
policy strategy
The MPC practises forecast 
targeting, which means that it 
sets monetary policy such that 
it expects to achieve its inflation 
and employment goals in the 
medium term. In most instances 
the MPC aims to return inflation 
to the target mid-point within a 
one to three year horizon. The 
appropriate horizon at each 
policy decision will vary based 
on how different policy paths 
will contribute to maximum 
sustainable employment, whether 
price-setters’ expectations are 
consistent with the inflation 
target, and other considerations 
such as the balance of risks to the 
MPC’s central economic outlook.


iii
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
The MPC does not attempt to 
return inflation and employment 
to target immediately, because 
monetary policy actions take time 
to transmit through the economy. 
Attempting to return inflation to 
target too quickly would result 
in unnecessary instability in the 
economy and financial markets. 
The 1 to 3 percent target range for 
inflation provides the MPC with 
flexibility to ensure that managing 
inflation variability does not come 
at the cost of excessive variability 
in the real economy. For similar 
reasons, the MPC does not 
attempt to offset events that are 
expected to have only transitory 
effects on inflation. 
The MPC takes into account both 
its inflation and employment 
objectives when setting policy. In 
the long run, no trade-off exists 
between the MPC’s objectives. 
In the short to medium term, 
there may be situations where 
monetary policy can move one 
objective closer to target only 
at the cost of the other, resulting 
in a trade-off. When a trade-off 
does arise, the MPC will consider 
outcomes for both objectives 
in setting policy. In general, if 
employment is projected to be 
below its long-run sustainable 
level, the MPC would let inflation 
overshoot the target mid-point 
for a time, and vice versa (while 
staying within the 1–3 percent 
target range). 
The MPC responds to both 
deviations above target and 
deviations below target. The 
MPC sets policy to stabilise 
employment near its maximum 
sustainable level, and to return 
inflation near to the target mid-
point, regardless of whether 
inflation is currently below or 
above 2 percent. This approach 
helps to anchor inflation 
expectations at the target mid-
point and promotes sustainable 
growth and employment by 
dampening fluctuations in the 
business cycle.
The MPC considers the balance 
of risks to its objectives that 
arise from uncertainty about 
the economic outlook and 
the transmission of its policy 
decisions. In general, the MPC 
will incorporate likely future 
developments into its central 
economic projections and set 
monetary policy in response. 
However, the MPC will also take 
into account risks to its central 
projections when setting policy. 
Under extreme uncertainty, the 
MPC may choose to publish 
scenarios instead of central 
projections to illustrate the 
range of possible situations and 
economic outcomes that could 
occur when circumstances are 
highly unpredictable.
The MPC has regard to the 
efficiency and soundness of 
the financial system, while 
recognising that in most 
instances prudential policy is 
better suited to leaning against 
risks to financial stability. The 
Reserve Bank takes prudential 
policy settings into account when 
setting monetary policy, and 
vice versa.
Implementation of strategy
The MPC applies the following 
process when formulating a 
policy decision:
1.	 Firstly, it assesses the outlook 
for the economy and the 
implications for its policy 
objectives. It then discusses 
risks to achieving its policy 
objectives.
2.	 Next, it considers which stance 
of monetary policy is most 
consistent with its monetary 
policy strategy given the 
current economic outlook, 
risks, and trade-offs.
3.	 Finally, the MPC decides how 
it will achieve the desired 
stance of monetary policy, 
including whether or not 
to adjust its policy settings 
at the current meeting and 
how it will communicate the 
policy outlook. The MPC has 
a suite of monetary tools to 
achieve its goals, and uses its 
Principles for Monetary Tools 
to make decisions on which 
tools to deploy.


REPORT AND SUPPORTING NOTES PUBLISHED AT:
www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/monetary-policy-statement
Subscribe online: www.rbnz.govt.nz/email-updates
Copyright © 2021 Reserve Bank of New Zealand
This report is published pursuant to section 
15C of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 1989. 
ISSN 1770-4829
rbnz.govt.nz
Cover image: Tunnel Beach. Dunedin, New Zealand.


The projection was finalised on 18 November 2021. The OCR projection 
incorporates an outlook for monetary policy that is consistent with the MPC’s 
monetary policy assessment, which was finalised on 24 November 2021. Other 
data and developments have been incorporated up until 17 November 2021.
11/2021
Monetary Policy
STATEMENT
Contents
Statement of the MPC’s monetary policy strategy	
ii
1.	 Policy assessment	
3
	
Summary – Record of meeting 	
4
2.	 Current economic assessment and risks	
7
3.	 Financial conditions	
23
4.	 Special topics 	
29
	
1.	 Transmission of global developments 
	
	
to New Zealand’s economy 	
29
	
2.	Outlook for New Zealand’s productive capacity	
31
	
3.	 Climate change and inflation	
35
5.	 Economic projection	
39
6.	 The MPC’s risk appetite statement	
45
7.	 Appendices	
50
	
Appendix 1: Statistical tables	
50
	
Appendix 2: Chart pack	
55


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and risks
2
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
CHAPTER 
01
Policy 
assessment
Castlepoint Lighthouse. Wairarapa, New Zealand.


Chapter 1 Policy assessment
3
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
CHAPTER 1
Policy assessment
Tēnā koutou katoa, welcome all.
The Monetary Policy Committee agreed to raise
the Official Cash Rate (OCR) to 0.75 per cent.
The Committee agreed it remains appropriate 
to continue reducing monetary stimulus so as 
to maintain price stability and support maximum 
sustainable employment.
The level of global economic activity continues to 
rise, supported by accommodative monetary and 
fiscal policy settings, and the relaxation of COVID-19 
health-restrictions. The pace of global economic 
growth has ebbed however, due to the elevated 
uncertainty created by the persistent COVID-19 virus. 
Global supply-chain disruptions are causing both cost 
pressures and constraints on production, at a time 
when consumer demand remains strong. Central 
banks globally face the challenge of distinguishing 
between transitory price increases and underlying 
sustained inflation pressures to assess the need for, 
and timing of, reductions in the level of monetary 
policy stimulus.
New Zealand’s public health restrictions are 
easing as the country transitions into the COVID-19 
Protection Framework. The framework will enable 
greater mobility of people, and goods and services. 
With the easing of restrictions, it is anticipated that 
the COVID-19 virus will become more widespread 
geographically, albeit manageable for health 
authorities and less harmful for those vaccinated. 
However, household spending and business 
investment will be dampened in the near term
by these ongoing health uncertainties.  
The recent nationwide health-related lockdown, 
the more prolonged restrictions in Auckland, 
Northland and the Waikato, and the continued 
‘Level 2’ restrictions elsewhere, resulted in a sharp 
contraction in economic activity. Despite these 
lockdowns, underlying economic strength remains 
supported by aggregate household and business 
balance sheet strength, fiscal policy support, and 
strong export returns.  
Capacity pressures have continued to tighten. For 
example, employment is now above its maximum 
sustainable level. A broad range of economic 
indicators highlight that the New Zealand economy 
continues to perform above its current potential. 
Headline CPI inflation is expected to measure above 
5 percent in the near term before returning towards 
the 2 percent midpoint over the next two years. The 
near-term rise in inflation is accentuated by higher oil 
prices, rising transport costs and the impact of supply 
shortfalls. These immediate relative price shocks risk 
generating more generalised price rises given the 
current domestic capacity constraints.  
The Committee noted that further removal of 
monetary policy stimulus is expected over time 
given the medium term outlook for inflation and 
employment. 
Meitaki, thanks.
Adrian Orr
Governor  


4
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
SUMMARY 
Record of meeting 
The Monetary 
Policy Committee 
discussed economic 
developments since 
the August Statement. 
Global economic activity 
continues to recover, as public 
health restrictions ease and 
COVID-19 vaccine rates increase. 
However, the near-term outlook 
for global growth has weakened 
somewhat because of the 
continued spread of the Delta 
variant and related disruptions to 
production.
Global inflation has increased due 
to the rapid recovery in global 
demand combined with significant 
supply chain bottlenecks and 
labour shortages in some 
sectors. An ongoing boost from 
government spending and 
monetary policy stimulus in many 
countries is adding to strong 
demand. There is considerable 
uncertainty about the persistence 
of global inflationary pressures. 
The New Zealand economy was 
in a strong position before the 
national lockdown in August, 
supported by resilient household 
spending, strong construction 
activity, and demand for our key 
dairy and meat exports. This 
had more than offset ongoing 
weakness in hospitality and 
sectors reliant on international 
tourism. While public health 
restrictions to control the spread 
of the Delta variant will result in a 
slowdown over the second half 
of the year, Government support 
for business and jobs has helped 
the economy weather the impact. 
Nevertheless, some customer-
facing businesses in Auckland 
and a range of service sectors are 
suffering acute stress. 
The Committee noted that the 
economy is expected to recover 
as public health restrictions are 
eased as the country moves 
into the COVID-19 Protection 
Framework. However, the 
Committee discussed the risk 
that consumer and business 
confidence weakens as COVID-19 
becomes more widespread 
across the country, dampening 
household spending and 
investment in the near term. 
Despite recent lockdowns, 
capacity pressures in the 
economy have continued to 
tighten. Employment is now 
assessed as being above its 
maximum sustainable level. 
Measures of labour market slack 
such as unemployment and 
underutilisation are at their lowest 
levels in over a decade. This 
has been reflected in stronger 
aggregate wage growth, albeit 
below the rate of CPI inflation. 
The Committee discussed the 
outlook for net migration and how 
this could affect labour supply. 
For example, it is currently easier 
to leave New Zealand than arrive, 
so there could be a net loss of 
labour in the near term. There 
will be ongoing uncertainty as to 
the relative impact net migration 
will have on overall supply and 
demand in the economy.
Rising capacity pressures have 
led to an increase in domestic 
inflation. At the same time, 
continued bottlenecks in global 
and local supply chains and 
further increases in global oil 
prices have added to inflationary 
pressures. Annual CPI inflation 
has increased to 4.9 percent 
in New Zealand, above the 
Committee’s 1 to 3 percent Remit 
target band. Measures of core 
inflation have also increased 
into the top half of the target 
band. The Committee noted that 
inflation is expected to remain 
high in the near term, and return 
to the midpoint of the target band 
over the next two years. 
The Committee assessed that 
near-term risks to inflation are 
skewed to the upside, and 
discussed the risk that higher 
near-term inflation could become 
embedded in price setting 
behaviour. The Committee 
noted that near-term inflation 
expectations tend to move with 
actual inflation. Medium-term 
measures provide a better gauge 
of whether inflation expectations 
remain anchored, and these 
remain close to the target 
midpoint. 
The Committee discussed the 
Reserve Bank’s assessment that 
the level of house prices are 
unsustainable. Members noted 
that higher mortgage interest 
rates, continued strong home 
building, tighter lending rules and 
changes in tax settings should 
all act to moderate house prices 
over the medium term. The 
Committee discussed the risk 
that house prices could keep 
rising in the near term, increasing 


5
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
the risk of a sharper fall later. 
Continued increases in the OCR 
are expected to support more 
sustainable house prices.
The importance of overall 
monetary conditions was 
considered by the Committee, 
including medium-term borrowing 
rates for households and 
businesses, to achieving its price 
stability and maximum sustainable 
employment objectives. In 2020, 
additional monetary policy 
tools were used to support the 
economy by further lowering 
interest rates when the OCR 
was near zero. The Committee 
agreed that higher interest rates 
are now needed to maintain price 
stability and maximum sustainable 
employment, and that the OCR 
remains their preferred tool to
do this.
The Committee noted that the 
Large Scale Asset Purchase 
(LSAP) programme provided 
significant monetary stimulus 
and supported bond market 
functioning through 2020 as the 
Reserve Bank bought government 
bonds as an additional monetary 
policy tool. As bond market 
functioning has improved, the 
impact of the LSAP programme on 
monetary stimulus has fallen, and 
it is assessed that current bond 
holdings are providing a small 
amount of ongoing stimulus.
The Committee expects to 
gradually manage LSAP bond 
holdings down, in a way that 
maintains the smooth functioning 
of financial markets. More details 
on how bond holdings will be 
reduced will be provided early 
next year. 
The Committee discussed that 
funding remains available to 
banks under the Funding for 
Lending Programme (FLP) until 
the end of 2022, as another 
part of the Bank’s additional 
monetary policy toolkit. The 
programme provides banks with 
assured access to some medium-
term funding at the OCR. This 
commitment has been factored 
into banks’ funding plans. Any 
adjustment to the terms of the 
programme would increase 
funding and operational risks for 
banks, and would undermine 
future effectiveness if a similar 
programme is required in the 
future. The Committee agreed 
that changing the terms of 
the programme would not be 
consistent with its risk appetite.
As the OCR is increased, the
cost to banks of borrowing 
through the FLP will rise, helping 
to remove monetary stimulus. 
Since banks have provided assets 
as collateral to access funding 
under the FLP, the scheme does 
not pose material financial risk
to the Crown.
The Committee discussed 
how much monetary stimulus 
needed to be removed over 
the next 12-18 months to meet 
their price stability and maximum 
sustainable employment Remit. 
The Committee expected that 
the OCR would need to be 
progressively increased and, 
conditional on the economy 
evolving as expected, the OCR 
would likely need to be raised 
above its neutral rate.
The Committee discussed how 
fast interest rates need to be 
increased, taking into account 
primary and secondary objectives 
of its Remit. Higher starting point 
inflation and capacity pressures, 
and the risk that higher near-term 
inflation becomes embedded 
in price setting behaviour were 
discussed as factors arguing for a 
more rapid removal of monetary 
stimulus.
However, the Committee 
expressed uncertainty about the 
resilience of consumer spending 
and business investment as the 
country adapts to living with the 
COVID-19 virus in the community. 
The Committee also noted that 
increases in interest rates to 
households and businesses 
had already tightened monetary 
conditions. High levels of 
household debt, and a large share 
of fixed-rate mortgages re-pricing 
in coming months, could increase 
the sensitivity of consumer 
spending to these interest rate 
increases. 
Weighing these factors, the 
Committee assessed risks to 
their price stability and maximum 
sustainable employment 
objectives as being broadly 
balanced over the medium term. 
The Committee judged that 
considered steps in the OCR 
were the most appropriate way 
to continue reducing monetary 
stimulus for now. 
On Wednesday 24 November, the 
Committee reached a consensus 
to increase the OCR to 0.75 
percent. 
Attendees:
Reserve Bank members 
of MPC: 
Adrian Orr, Geoff Bascand, 
Christian Hawkesby, Yuong Ha
External MPC members: 
Bob Buckle, Peter Harris,
Caroline Saunders
Treasury Observer: 
Bryan Chapple
MPC Secretary: 
Chris Bloor


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and risks
6
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
CHAPTER 
02
Current economic 
assessment
and risks
Nugget Point. Otago, New Zealand.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and risks
7
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
CHAPTER 2
Current economic
assessment and risks
The Reserve Bank’s Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) is 
responsible for setting monetary policy to achieve and maintain 
medium-term price stability, and support maximum sustainable 
employment. These outcomes are the best long-run contribution 
monetary policy can make to the prosperity and well-being of 
New Zealanders.
Key points
•	 The New Zealand economy entered 
the recent lockdowns in a strong 
position. Underlying economic growth 
was stronger and more broad-based 
than expected, as reflected in recent 
labour market and inflation data. Much 
of this strength has been due to resilient 
household spending and demand for our 
key exports.
•	 We expect that this underlying strength 
will persist, but be more than offset by the 
impacts of public health restrictions in the 
near term. New Zealand’s time at Alert 
Levels 3 and 4 nationwide and ongoing 
restrictions in Auckland and other parts 
of New Zealand have reduced economic 
activity during the latter half of 2021. 
•	 Underlying pressure on available 
resources in the economy has continued 
to increase, particularly in the labour 
market. Employment is now assessed as 
being above its maximum sustainable 
level, with the unemployment and 
underutilisation rates at their lowest
levels since 2007. There has been
strong demand for more workers in
some sectors, but it has been difficult
for businesses to recruit extra staff.
This has seen wages rise as firms 
compete for workers. 
•	 Strong aggregate demand, shortages
of goods and workers, continued 
disruptions to global and local supply 
chains, and further increases in global 
oil prices have contributed to annual 
consumer price inflation increasing to 4.9 
percent, above the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent 
target band. Measures of core inflation 
have also increased. 


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and risks
8
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
•	 Inflation is expected to remain high in the 
near term, and return to the midpoint of 
the target band over the next three years. 
Nevertheless, there is a risk that high 
inflation becomes embedded in price- 
and wage-setting behaviour, particularly if 
goods and labour shortages carry on for 
longer than assumed.  
•	 COVID-19 is likely to spread widely 
throughout New Zealand over coming 
quarters. While the New Zealand 
economy is starting from a relatively 
strong position, there is considerable 
uncertainty about how the economy 
will evolve once COVID-19 becomes 
widespread. The key factors that will 
determine economic outcomes are the 
frequency with which regions spend time 
with higher public health restrictions and 
how households and businesses respond 
to widespread community transmission.
•	 Monetary conditions have already 
tightened in expectation of further OCR 
increases. Conditional on the current 
assessment of the economic outlook and 
balance of risks, our central projection 
implies that monetary stimulus should 
be reduced further in order for the MPC 
to meet its inflation and employment 
objectives.      


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and risks
9
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
Figure 2.2
Quarterly household consumption expenditure
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.3
Quarterly household saving
(nominal, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 2.1
Quarterly production GDP
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Current economic 
assessment
The New Zealand economy entered the 
recent lockdowns in a strong position.
The economy expanded 2.8 percent in the 
June 2021 quarter (figure 2.1), with much of this 
growth accounted for by the services sector. 
Household sector a key source
of economic momentum
Much of the underlying pick-up in economic 
growth has been due to strength in 
household spending, as well as ongoing high 
demand for our goods exports. Household 
consumption remains well above its pre-
pandemic level, despite low population 
growth (figure 2.2). Strength in household 
consumption has been particularly 
pronounced in spending on goods as 
opposed to services.  
Quarterly income GDP measures show that 
while households spent more than they 
earned on aggregate for the second quarter 
in a row (figure 2.3), the stock of savings built 
up by households during 2020 is largely 
yet to be spent. This stock of savings, in 
conjunction with strong labour earnings, is 
expected to support household spending 
in the future. Consumer spending growth is 
assumed to be temporarily held back over 
2022 as New Zealand households adapt to 
higher levels of COVID-19 in the community. 


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and risks
10
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
Household spending is also being supported 
by continued increases in house prices, 
which contribute to total household wealth. 
House price rises have been stronger 
than anticipated at the time of the August 
Statement. Strong housing demand is being 
reflected in both high house prices and 
more home building. Nationwide residential 
building consents rose 28 percent in the year 
to September, and the level of home building 
is expected to remain high (figure 2.4). This 
reflects the amount of already-consented 
work to be completed, and an expected 
increase in construction of medium-density 
housing due to the recently announced 
changes to land-use restrictions. 
Our central forecast is for house price 
inflation to moderate over the coming 
year as prices adjust to reflect higher 
mortgage interest rates, lower population 
growth, policy measures introduced by the 
Government and the Reserve Bank, and 
more new homes being built. House prices 
are expected to decline moderately towards 
a more sustainable level in the latter part 
of the projection, although the magnitude 
and timing of such a decline remain highly 
uncertain (figure 2.5).
Demand for our goods exports
remains robust
The outlook for growth in some of our major 
trading partners has been revised lower 
in recent months. This partly reflects the 
spread of the Delta variant in Australia and 
heightened uncertainty regarding the growth 
outlook in China. However, demand for 
New Zealand’s key commodity exports – such 
as dairy, meat and logs – remains resilient.  
Figure 2.5
House price inflation
(annual)
Source: CoreLogic, RBNZ estimates. 
Figure 2.4
Residential investment
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and risks
11
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
Underlying drivers of economic 
momentum to be tempered by 
near-term volatility
We expect underlying economic growth 
will continue to be driven by accumulated 
savings, a tight labour market, recent 
increases in house prices, and robust 
demand for our goods exports. However, 
these will be tempered by volatility in 
economic activity in the near term as a result 
of COVID-19 restrictions. We assume that 
GDP declined 7.0 percent in the September 
2021 quarter due to the recent lockdowns, 
and will rebound in the December quarter as 
restrictions are eased.
However, the recovery in activity is not 
expected to be as rapid as that following the 
nationwide lockdown in 2020 (figure 2.6). In 
our recent conversations with businesses, 
several noted the negative and compounding 
effects of multiple lockdowns over the past 
18 months. Businesses said they did not think 
there would be such a big bounce-back in 
activity in Auckland. Firms in the construction 
sector were the exception, given their 
significant backlog of residential work.  
Capacity pressures continue
to build, particularly in the
labour market
Capacity pressures have continued to 
tighten in recent months (figure 2.7), and 
are expected to build further despite the 
near-term volatility in economic activity. 
Reported capacity utilisation for builders and 
manufacturers is at its highest-ever level. 
These pressures are the result of continued 
strong demand in an environment where 
parts of the economy are constrained, 
either by public health restrictions, border 
restrictions, or supply-chain disruptions. 
Tighter capacity pressures are expected 
to support business investment over 
the projection. However, investment is 
assumed to be held back in the near term 
while businesses gauge the likely impacts 
of COVID-19 becoming widespread in 
New Zealand.  
Figure 2.7
Output gap and output gap indicators
(share of potential output)
Source: NZIER, MBIE, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The output gap indicators based on information about the labour market are shown 
separately from the other indicators. For each group of indicators, the shaded area shows 
the range of values and the line shows the mean value. 
Figure 2.6
Quarterly production GDP
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and risks
12
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
Survey measures and discussions with 
businesses indicate that there is an acute 
shortage of workers in many sectors. The 
unemployment rate declined to 3.4 percent 
in the September 2021 quarter, equalling the 
previous low in 2007 (figure 2.8). A broader 
measure of slack in the job market, the 
underutilisation rate, shows a sharp fall in the 
number of part-time employees that would 
like more hours and those available but not 
actively seeking work. 
Broad-based demand for labour has 
meant that employment has continued to 
rise despite lingering skills and regional 
mismatches from jobs displaced as a result 
of COVID-19. Groups that had previously 
been lagging in the recovery, or who were 
particularly badly affected during 2020, are 
now seeing strong growth in employment. 
This includes younger people, women, 
Māori, and Pasifika (figures 2.8, 2.9 and 2.10). 
Strong demand for labour has drawn people 
back into work, with the participation rate 
increasing to 71.2 percent.  
Businesses are increasingly looking to boost 
staff numbers, and working harder to retain 
existing workers. Businesses are reporting 
that they are holding onto staff even during 
periods of reduced trading. This reflects 
difficulties in obtaining and retaining staff in a 
highly competitive labour market. The Wage 
Subsidy scheme has also helped firms to hang 
on to workers, even if they have been hit hard 
by COVID-19 public health restrictions. 
Figure 2.9
Unemployment rates by age
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.8
Unemployment rates by sex
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 2.10
Unemployment rates by ethnicity
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and risks
13
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
Labour market tightness is being reflected in 
wages. Same-job wage growth (as measured 
by the Labour Cost Index) increased to 
2.5 percent in the year to the September 
2021 quarter, approaching rates of growth 
last seen in the mid-2000s (figure 2.11). 
Broader wage growth is also being boosted 
by increased movement between jobs. 
However, real wage growth has declined 
as consumer price inflation has increased. 
Nominal wage growth is expected to 
increase further over the next year, reflecting 
ongoing labour market tightness and 
employees seeking some compensation for 
the higher cost of living.
Employment is above its maximum 
sustainable level
We assess employment as being above 
its maximum sustainable level, with many 
of our labour market indicators near or at 
record levels (figure 2.12). We assume that 
the unemployment rate will decline further 
in the final quarter of this year as businesses 
continue to focus on retaining and boosting 
staff numbers to meet strong underlying 
demand. We assume access to workers 
from abroad will remain limited by border 
restrictions during at least the first half of 
2022. We expect the unemployment rate to 
slowly rise towards a more sustainable level 
as capacity pressures ease.
Inflation has continued to 
increase, reflecting global and 
domestic factors
Stronger wage inflation, greater pressure 
on available domestic resources, global and 
local supply-chain disruptions and increases 
in global prices for our imports have all seen 
consumer price inflation increase more than 
anticipated in the August Statement. Annual 
inflation in the consumers price index (CPI) 
increased to 4.9 percent in the September 
2021 quarter (figure 2.13).
Figure 2.13
Contributions to annual CPI inflation
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.11
Private sector wage inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 2.12
MSE indicator suite
Source: NZIER, Stats NZ, MBIE, ANZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The Reserve Bank uses a range of indicators when assessing MSE and regards 
the December 2019 quarter as a period when this selection of indicators pointed to 
employment being at MSE. However, current outturns should not be directly compared to 
2019Q4 as the level of MSE is likely lower. The vertical lines on the left-hand and right-hand 
sides represent the lowest and highest data outcomes since 2000, respectively. A pink 
dot to the right of a black dot means that the latest data outcome was stronger than in the 
December 2019 quarter. It should be noted that ‘average hours worked gap’ data were 
heavily affected by the restrictions on activity during periods at higher alert levels.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and risks
14
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
While the sources of higher inflation were 
largely as expected, the size of price 
movements were greater than anticipated. 
Prices for goods and services in sectors 
most exposed to international developments 
and competition (tradables) increased by 
5.7 percent in the year to September 2021. 
Food and petrol prices contributed to much 
of the recent increase. Crude oil prices have 
increased rapidly due to the recovery in 
global demand and less supply following 
disagreements among some of the largest oil 
producers. Higher global oil prices have been 
partly offset by a higher New Zealand dollar, 
but prices at the pump have still increased. 
The New Zealand dollar trade-weighted 
index (TWI) is currently above the level 
assumed in the August Statement (figure 
2.14). The recent appreciation reflects both 
expectations for higher interest rates in 
New Zealand relative to other countries, and 
a recovery in risk sentiment in global markets 
(discussed further in chapter 3). A higher 
exchange rate is expected to moderate 
tradables inflation over the projection. 
Supply-chain disruptions
to persist into 2022
Strong global demand for goods and 
disruptions in global supply chains continue 
to push up prices for our imported goods. 
While estimated shipping costs have eased 
in the past month, they remain significantly 
higher than their pre-pandemic levels 
(figure 2.15). Our recent conversations with 
businesses suggest that they expect global 
supply-chain bottlenecks to carry on well into 
2022. More shipping containers are available 
and vaccination rates have been rising, 
which means it is less likely that COVID-19 will 
create further disruptions at ports. However, 
import supply chains remain vulnerable to 
COVID-19 resurgences in key manufacturing 
regions, notably in South East Asia. Given all 
of these factors, we continue to assume that 
supply-demand imbalances will start to ease 
from around mid-2022. 
Figure 2.14
New Zealand dollar TWI
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.15
Shipping costs for consumer goods
(share of import cost)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: These series are estimated by taking the value of consumer merchandise imports 
including freight and insurance costs (CIF) and subtracting the reported value for duty 
(VFD), which excludes these costs. It is expressed as a percentage of the VFD figure.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and risks
15
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
Domestic inflationary pressures 
are also strong
While global factors have boosted inflation, 
domestic pressures are also making a
strong contribution. Annual non-tradables 
inflation increased to 4.5 percent in the 
September 2021 quarter, which was higher 
than widely expected. 
Strong demand is putting pressure on 
available resources in the economy. 
Businesses are reporting pressures on a 
range of costs including electricity, fuel, 
imported materials and other goods, 
shipping, compliance and labour. To date, 
non-tradables inflation has been most 
evident in housing-related components, 
where high demand has made it easier for 
firms to pass on cost increases (figure 2.16). 
Significant annual increases in council rates 
are also adding to inflationary pressures. We 
expect domestic inflationary pressures to 
broaden in coming quarters as recent high 
inflation starts to be reflected in wage- and 
price-setting decisions.
Measures of core inflation and 
expectations have risen
Measures of core inflation, which attempt 
to look through any short-term volatility, 
have also increased (figure 2.17). All of these 
measures now sit above 2 percent. The rise 
in consumer price inflation has also resulted 
in increases in survey measures of inflation 
expectations, particularly over the next one 
to two years. Expectations at longer horizons 
remain near the target midpoint of 2 percent 
(figure 2.18). 
Figure 2.16
Contributions to annual non-tradables inflation
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 
Figure 2.17
Core inflation measures
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 
Figure 2.18
Inflation expectations curve
(annual)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: See ‘Inflation expectations and the conduct of monetary policy in New Zealand’ 
(Lewis, McDermott and Richardson, 2016) for a description of the inflation 
expectations curve.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and risks
16
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
Annual CPI inflation is expected
to ease towards 2 percent
CPI inflation is expected to remain elevated 
over coming quarters, due to ongoing 
capacity pressures and high import prices. 
Any further increases in global oil prices 
would likely result in higher inflation. Annual 
inflation is expected to moderate towards 2 
percent over the latter half of the projection, 
as recent spikes in petrol prices drop out 
of the annual calculation, supply-chain 
disruptions ease, and higher interest rates 
lead to declining pressure on available 
resources (figure 2.19). However, there are 
risks to the outlook for inflation, as discussed 
in the following section.
Figure 2.19
CPI inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and risks
17
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
Key risks to the economic outlook
The appropriate monetary policy stance 
depends not only on our central outlook for 
the economy, but also on our assessment 
of the balance of risks to this outlook. The 
risks discussed below are not intended to be 
exhaustive, but instead illustrate some factors 
that could substantially alter the economic 
and monetary policy outlook.
The response to COVID-19 
becoming widespread in 
New Zealand
It is likely that COVID-19 will spread 
throughout New Zealand in the near term. 
Unlike most other countries, New Zealand 
has not seen widespread community 
transmission.  
While this is a complex issue, there are two 
factors that we expect will most influence 
New Zealand’s economic outcomes (in the 
absence of unexpected developments or 
manifestation of other risks). These factors are:
1.	 The extent and frequency of more 
stringent public health restrictions, which 
will also influence the extent to which 
activity is constrained. This will depend on 
the ability of our health system to respond 
to high case numbers.
2.	 How households and businesses respond 
to widespread community transmission, 
such as whether people become reluctant 
to go out and do things like eating at 
restaurants or attending sporting events. 
These factors are closely linked. Our central 
projection assumes that high levels of 
vaccination enable the health system to 
meet higher case numbers. While there are 
likely to be some periods of tight restrictions 
in some areas, we assume that restrictions 
are fairly moderate at a national level. We 
expect some hesitation by households to 
go out and travel within New Zealand and 
overseas and that some businesses will 
hold back on investment while uncertainty 
about our transition to endemic COVID-19 
is high. However, this hesitancy is assumed 
to be relatively short-lived, as uncertainty 
wanes and people adapt to COVID-19 being 
widespread in the community. 
Different combinations of the factors 
described above could lead to very different 
economic outcomes. These are summarised 
in table 2.1.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and risks
18
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
Table 2.1
Illustrative outcomes in response to COVID-19 becoming 
widespread throughout New Zealand 
Extensive public health 
restrictions are sporadic and 
short-lived; health system 
can meet demand from 
higher case numbers
Extensive public health 
restrictions are frequent and 
widespread; health system 
is under significant pressure 
from higher case numbers
Household and business 
demand remains strong, 
despite widespread 
community transmission
(A)
Demand is strong and 
occasional restrictions do 
not constrain activity. Faster 
removal of monetary stimulus 
might be required.
(C)
Demand remains resilient, 
but frequent and widespread 
restrictions constrain activity, 
leading to greater capacity 
pressures. Faster removal 
of monetary stimulus might 
be required, depending on 
the outlook for continued 
demand.
Household and business 
demand weakens due to 
reluctance to leave home
and heightened uncertainty
(B)
Occasional restrictions do not 
constrain activity, but demand 
is somewhat weakened. 
Pressure on available 
resources is therefore lower, 
and a slower removal of 
monetary stimulus may be 
required.
(D)
Demand is weak and frequent 
and widespread restrictions 
constrain activity. Weaker 
demand quickly leads to 
lower business revenue and 
businesses may be forced 
to lay off staff and reduce 
investment.
This leads to further slowing 
in demand and negative 
second-round impacts. A 
slower removal of, or an 
increase in, monetary stimulus 
may be required.    



Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and risks
19
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
All of these stylised outcomes would also be 
influenced by factors such as:
•	 The response of fiscal policy. Significant 
government spending during the current 
and previous lockdowns has supported 
business and household incomes, 
offsetting some of the impacts of tight 
mobility restrictions.
•	 The magnitude of net migration once 
border restrictions start to ease. 
Increased migration of foreign workers 
would add to demand for goods, services, 
housing and infrastructure, but would 
also be expected to alleviate some of 
the current pressures on the labour 
market. There is also a risk that more 
New Zealanders look to migrate overseas 
as they become vaccinated and global 
restrictions are increasingly eased.  
•	 The demand for international travel 
and tourism by New Zealanders and 
foreigners once border restrictions are 
eased. Our central projection assumes 
that the demand for international tourism, 
especially to long-haul destinations, 
does not recover to pre-pandemic levels. 
However, if this recovery is weaker than 
currently assumed, this would have a 
significant impact on New Zealand’s 
tourism industry and the economy as a 
whole. This is especially the case given 
that the industry was provided a degree 
of respite by higher domestic tourism 
spending over the 2020/21 summer. 
Once border restrictions are eased, 
New Zealanders are likely to begin 
travelling overseas once more. 
There is additional uncertainty surrounding 
the longer-term economic implications of 
COVID-19, here and abroad, particularly for 
neutral interest rates (as discussed in the 
August 2021 Statement) and potential output 
(discussed in chapter 4.2).
Higher inflation becomes 
embedded
There is a risk that high inflation outcomes 
will lead to an increase in expected inflation 
that becomes embedded in wage- and 
price-setting behaviour to a greater extent 
than anticipated. This would result in greater 
underlying inflationary pressures. 
We currently assume that these impacts will 
be limited, as we expect observed annual 
inflation to decline from the middle of next 
year. However, there is a risk that inflation 
remains higher on balance than in the 
central projection, and leads to high inflation 
becoming more embedded. Factors that 
contribute to this risk include:
•	 a possibility that supply-chain disruptions 
exert pressure on prices for longer;
•	 house price inflation remaining higher 
than assumed, placing further pressure on 
housing-related components of consumer 
prices, such as rents and construction 
costs; and 
•	 the possibility that the direct effects of 
climate-change-related disruptions and 
government climate transition policies 
add to inflationary pressures (discussed in 
chapter 4.3).
We will continue to monitor inflation 
outcomes and expectations for any signs 
that inflationary pressures are building to an 
extent that is inconsistent with our medium-
term objectives.  


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and risks
20
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
Monetary policy outlook
The OCR remains low by historical standards, 
and below the Reserve Bank’s estimate of 
a nominal neutral interest rate of about 2 
percent. Given the current and expected 
strength in the labour market and increase in 
inflationary pressures, our central projection 
implies that official interest rates should be 
increased further in order for the MPC to 
meet its economic objectives 
(figure 2.20).
The speed at which interest rates should 
be increased is greater than assumed in 
the August Statement, due to a stronger 
starting point, reflected in higher capacity, 
labour market and inflationary pressures. 
These additional pressures more than offset 
the short-term volatility in activity resulting 
from recent lockdowns. They also offset 
our assumption that widespread COVID-19 
weighs on household and business spending 
in the near term. As is always the case, 
this projection for the OCR is conditional 
upon the economy evolving in line with the 
assumptions summarised in this chapter, 
and also in chapter 5.
The reduction in monetary stimulus in 
New Zealand has happened sooner 
than in many of our advanced trading 
partner economies. This reflects different 
combinations of current employment and 
inflationary pressures in each country, and 
differences in central banks’ monetary 
policy objectives that influence how they are 
expected to respond to these pressures. 
These factors are summarised in table 2.2. 
Figure 2.20
Official Cash Rate
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and risks
21
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
Table 2.2
Central bank comparison
Monetary 
policy
objectives
Annual headline 
consumer price 
inflation
(%)
Unemployment 
rate
(%)
Average 
projected output 
gap in 2022
(%)
New Zealand
1–3% inflation 
target; 
employment 
objective
4.9
3.4
2.1
Australia
2–3% inflation 
target; 
employment 
objective
3.0
5.2
0.0
USA
Inflation averages 
2% over time; 
employment 
objective
4.4*
4.6
3.3
UK
2% inflation target
4.2
4.3
-0.4
Euro area
2% inflation target
4.1
7.4
-0.6
Source: Respective central banks and official statistical agencies, International Monetary Fund (IMF), Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Output gap projections are based on IMF estimates, except for New Zealand’s, which is based on our current projection. All other data 
reflect the respective latest outturns. 
*The consumer price inflation measure for the US is the annual inflation rate for the personal consumption expenditures price index. 


Chapter 3 Financial conditions
22
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
CHAPTER 
03
Financial
conditions
Farmland. Coromandel, New Zealand


Chapter 3 Financial conditions
23
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
CHAPTER 3
Financial conditions
The Reserve Bank’s monetary policy tools affect economic 
activity by influencing conditions in financial markets, including 
the interest rates at which households and businesses save and 
borrow, and the exchange rate. Financial conditions have been 
accommodative but have tightened since the August Statement. 
Wholesale interest rates have risen
Financial conditions have been tightening
for several months due to expectations of 
higher central bank policy rates here and 
overseas. Stronger global and domestic
data have helped to increase confidence 
amongst market participants that economic 
conditions will warrant higher interest rates 
over coming years. 
Market participants now expect a faster 
and larger tightening of monetary policy in 
New Zealand than at the time of the August 
Statement. In the lead up to the November 
Statement, financial market expectations for 
the OCR, as measured by overnight indexed 
swap (OIS) pricing, were for around one 
25 basis point increase in the OCR at each 
scheduled review until November 2022 
(figure 3.1). The market is expecting the OCR to 
reach at least 2 percent by August next year, 
100 basis points higher than was expected at 
the time of the August Statement. 
Figure 3.1
Market expectations for the OCR
Source: Bloomberg.
Note: Each line represents the expectations of the level of the OCR at a given point in time 
in the future, as measured by overnight indexed swap pricing. For example, the Feb-2022 
line shows expectations over time for what the OCR will be in February 2022.


Chapter 3 Financial conditions
24
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
Interest rate swap rates in New Zealand 
have also increased, primarily due to higher 
expectations for short-term interest rates. 
Swap rates are now at their highest levels 
since 2018 (figure 3.2). The 2-year swap rate 
is more than 200 basis points higher than 
its low earlier this year. In recent months, 
increases in shorter-term swap rates have 
been larger than increases in longer-term 
swap rates, leading to a flattening of the yield 
curve in the swaps market.  
Reduced market liquidity has contributed to 
recent moves in swap markets. A historically 
large value of mortgage debt is reaching the 
end of its fixed-rate period during the current 
quarter, and borrowers have recently been 
fixing their mortgages at longer terms. This 
has been putting additional upward pressure 
on swap rates, as banks use interest rate 
swaps to insure against the interest rate 
risk of their fixed-rate mortgage lending. 
These market dynamics appear to have 
contributed to recent increases in swap 
rates, but increases in short-term interest rate 
expectations have been the main driver. 
The recent tightening in domestic financial 
conditions has led to a widening gap 
between interest rates in New Zealand 
and those in the US. This year, the 
spread between the yield on the 2-year 
New Zealand government bond and the 
2-year US government bond reached its 
widest level since 2016 (figure 3.3). 
Increases in New Zealand interest rates 
relative to the US would typically be 
associated with an appreciation in the 
New Zealand dollar. This is because 
New Zealand dollar-denominated 
investments become relatively more 
attractive. Despite this, the New Zealand 
dollar to US dollar exchange rate has traded 
within a narrow range this year (figure 
3.4). This is alongside other supporting 
factors, such as sustained strength in 
New Zealand’s export commodity prices and 
an improvement in global appetite for risk. In 
the second half of this year, the US dollar has 
appreciated against other major currencies, 
following improving economic activity within 
the US as COVID-19 restrictions were lifted. 
This US dollar strength may help to explain 
why the New Zealand dollar exchange rate 
has not always moved in line with interest 
rate differentials this year.  
Figure 3.2
Interest rate swap rates
Source: Bloomberg.
Figure 3.3
NZ-US interest rate differentials
Source: Bloomberg.


Chapter 3 Financial conditions
25
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
Increasing inflation expectations 
have supported domestic
interest rates
Increases in inflation expectations have 
played a role in pushing up interest rates 
globally and in New Zealand. Medium-term 
measures of inflation expectations, such as 
those derived from financial markets, have 
risen since the August Statement (figure 3.5). 
Over this period, the US 10-year breakeven 
inflation rate, which offers an insight into 
financial market participants’ inflation 
expectations, has increased around 35 basis 
points to 2.7 percent. The latest value implies 
what market participants expect inflation to be 
in the next 10 years, on average. As discussed 
in chapter 2, survey measures of inflation 
expectations in New Zealand have increased 
for the one- and two-year horizons, but remain 
well-anchored over the medium term. 
The New Zealand 10-year breakeven inflation 
rate has risen in recent months and is now 
slightly above 2.0 percent. Breakeven 
inflation rates are also influenced by other 
factors, such as changes in appetite for 
liquidity and insurance against the risk of 
higher or lower inflation in the future, so 
they do not give a pure read on market 
participants’ expectations. This is particularly 
the case for New Zealand, where the small 
size of the inflation-indexed bond market has 
typically led to a higher liquidity premium 
than in larger inflation-linked bond markets. 
This helps explain why breakeven inflation
in New Zealand has traded below the 
Reserve Bank’s inflation target historically. 
Figure 3.5
10-year breakeven inflation rates
Source: Bloomberg, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Breakeven inflation rates are the differences between the yields on regular bonds 
and those on inflation-indexed bonds. 
Figure 3.4
New Zealand dollar exchange rates
Source: Reuters.


Chapter 3 Financial conditions
26
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
Bank funding costs remain low 
Both short- and medium-term measures of 
bank funding costs relative to benchmark 
rates have remained near historic lows, 
despite increased volatility in domestic 
financial markets since the August Statement. 
This can be seen in the spread between 
the 3-month bank bill (BKBM) and the 
3-month OIS rate. A lower BKBM-OIS spread 
implies investors are willing to accept less 
compensation for the risk of lending money 
to a bank. 
Following the implementation of the Reserve 
Bank’s additional monetary policy tools, 
including the Large Scale Asset Purchase 
(LSAP) programme and the Funding for 
Lending Programme (FLP), the BKBM-OIS 
spread declined to near historic lows last 
year and currently remains close to these 
levels (figure 3.6). Credit spreads provide 
an indication of medium-term funding costs 
relative to benchmark interest rates. A lower 
spread represents a lower implied borrowing 
cost. The 5-year bank credit spread also 
spiked in March 2020 and has remained 
near historic lows ever since. 
Markets continue to function well 
in the face of tightening financial 
conditions 
In line with recent increases in swap rates, 
yields on New Zealand government bonds 
(NZGB) have also increased significantly 
since the August Statement. In recent weeks, 
we have observed some of the largest daily 
changes in these yields since March 2020. 
However, indicators suggest the NZGB 
market is functioning well. One indicator to 
determine this is the bid-ask spread. This 
measures how far apart buyers and sellers 
are from reaching an agreed price to trade. 
In times of market stress, bid-ask spreads 
can widen significantly. Bid-ask spreads on 
nominal NZGBs did widen during March 
2020 and returned to pre-COVID-19 levels 
by May 2020. Bid-ask spreads have not 
widened since the August Statement, despite 
increased volatility in the NZGB market. This 
indicates that markets continue to function 
well in the face of tightening financial 
conditions. 
The NZGB market has also responded in an 
orderly way to the halt in LSAP purchases. 
The New Zealand Debt Management’s 
(NZDM) tenders provide a useful indication of 
demand in the NZGB market. These tenders 
typically occur three times a week and involve 
NZDM issuing debt at a pre-announced time 
and volume. Demand at these tenders, as 
measured by the amount that the volume of 
bids for these bonds exceeds the volume of 
bonds being offered, has remained in line with 
pre-pandemic averages following the halt in 
LSAP purchases. 
In addition, the Reserve Bank’s Bond Lending 
Facility (BLF) provides market participants 
access to NZGBs as a lender of last resort. Use 
of this facility provides an indication of NZGB 
availability in the secondary market. Towards 
the end of the LSAP programme, use of the 
BLF increased. Following the halt in LSAP 
purchases, this has subsequently declined in 
line with the increasing supply of NZGBs.
Figure 3.6
Bank funding costs
Source: Bloomberg, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Credit spreads are the differences between secondary market bond yields and the 
swap curve. The bond yields used for the 5-year measure were the averages of 5-year 
bonds issued in New Zealand dollars from ANZ, ASB, BNZ and Westpac. A lower spread 
represents a lower implied borrowing cost.


Chapter 3 Financial conditions
27
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
Higher wholesale rates are
being passed through to higher 
retail rates
Interest rates paid by businesses and 
mortgage borrowers, as well as those paid 
to depositors, are increasing in response 
to rising wholesale rates. Fixed mortgage 
rates at all terms are now above their pre-
pandemic levels (figure 3.7). The 1-year 
mortgage rate has increased to around 
130 basis points above its low this year. For 
longer-term fixed mortgages, increases 
have been larger. For example, the 5-year 
mortgage rate has risen 185 basis points 
from its lowest point this year. However, the 
increase in mortgage rates has not been as 
large as the increase in swap rates over the 
past year, in part because the increase in 
banks’ funding costs has been subdued.
OCR increases are passed through to 
mortgaged households’ interest payments 
more quickly when borrowers are on shorter 
fixed terms. Similar to the two most recent 
periods when the OCR was increasing, a 
significant share of mortgages is due to 
reprice over the coming year, constituting 
67 percent of fixed-rate mortgage debt (see 
the August Statement). At the same time, as 
a consequence of higher debt levels overall, 
a historically large value of mortgages are 
due to reprice over the next 12 months. In 
recent months, many borrowers have fixed at 
longer terms in anticipation of rising interest 
rates. These dynamics, coupled with rising 
mortgage rates, imply that the majority 
of borrowers who reprice in the current 
quarter will be moving onto rates at least 1 
percentage point higher. 
Despite these recent increases, interest 
rates on outstanding business loans 
and mortgages remain low by historical 
standards. The average interest rates on 
outstanding business loans and mortgages 
were 3.2 percent and 2.8 percent in 
September, respectively. This is more than 
80 and 120 basis points lower than at the 
start of 2020. Business loans tend to be 
floating or fixed at shorter terms, meaning the 
interest rates on these loans tend to move 
more closely with the OCR.
Term deposit rates have also increased. 
This year, term deposit rates have increased 
at a slower pace than mortgage rates, 
but have risen quickly since the August 
Statement. The 6-month term deposit rate 
is 60 basis points higher than at the start 
of this year. In comparison, the 1-year term 
deposit rate has increased by 100 basis 
points this year, to 1.8 percent. These smaller 
increases relative to mortgage rates are 
partly a consequence of the shorter term of 
these rates. Term deposit rates have been 
suppressed by the large growth in deposits 
over the past 18 months, caused in part by 
the LSAP programme and the Wage Subsidy. 
Continued availability of the FLP, which 
provides an alternative source of funding, 
has also suppressed term deposit rates.
Figure 3.7
Mortgage rates
Source: Interest.co.nz.
Note: The rate shown for each term is the average of the latest ‘special’ rates on offer from 
ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac.


Chapter 4 Special topics
28
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
CHAPTER 
04
Special topics
Wairau River. Marlborough, New Zealand.


Chapter 4 Special topics
29
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
CHAPTER 4 
Special topics 
Before each Statement, the MPC is provided with analysis 
of some topical issues.
Topics for the November Statement included:
1.	 Transmission of global developments to New Zealand’s economy.
2.	 Outlook for New Zealand’s productive capacity.
3.	 Climate change and inflation.
Transmission of global developments
to New Zealand’s economy 
As New Zealand is a small open economy, 
global economic and financial market 
conditions have a significant influence on 
domestic activity and inflation. This section 
describes how international developments 
are currently affecting the New Zealand 
economy, through trade, uncertainty and 
financial market channels.
Trade channel
The global economy continues to recover 
from the pandemic. This recovery is 
supporting demand for New Zealand’s 
commodity exports. However, actual and 
forecast trading-partner growth has slowed 
since the August Statement (figure 4.1). The 
loss of momentum is due to the spread of the 
COVID-19 Delta variant, ongoing supply-chain 
disruptions and targeted regulatory tightening 
in China. While demand for New Zealand’s 
exports has remained strong, a further easing 
in global growth momentum could pose a 
downside risk to New Zealand’s exports.
Global inflationary pressures have increased, 
largely reflecting a combination of supply-
demand mismatches brought about by the 
COVID-19 pandemic. These inflationary 
pressures have transmitted to New Zealand 
primarily via higher import prices.
1
Figure 4.1
Quarterly trading-partner GDP
(2015Q1=100)
Source: Consensus Economics.


Chapter 4 Special topics
30
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
New Zealand’s exports of travel services 
have remained muted due to the decline in 
international visitors since the introduction 
of border restrictions in early 2020. There is 
significant uncertainty about how international 
tourism will recover as border restrictions ease.
Financial channel
Currently, global financial conditions in 
major economies remain accommodative, 
characterised by low government bond yields, 
tight corporate credit spreads, and high 
equity prices. Accommodative global financial 
conditions have allowed New Zealand banks 
to access low-cost funding from offshore 
wholesale markets.
Since the August Statement, a number of 
central banks have begun to signal or move 
towards reducing monetary stimulus, citing 
the ongoing recovery from the pandemic and 
rising inflationary pressures. If inflationary 
pressures prove more persistent than currently 
expected, and inflation expectations increase, 
this could lead to a faster increase in global 
interest rates. Such a situation would tighten 
global financial conditions, and might also 
put upward pressure on domestic long-term 
interest rates, given the high correlation in 
long-term interest rates across countries.
1	
See Rice, Vehbi and Wong (2018), ‘Measuring uncertainty and its impact on the New Zealand economy’, Analytical Note, 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand. 
Changes in global wholesale interest rates can 
flow through to the costs of borrowing for New 
Zealand firms and households. They have 
also contributed to recent moves in the New 
Zealand dollar exchange rate (see chapter 3).
Uncertainty channel
Uncertainty around the global economic 
outlook is likely to remain elevated for some 
time, primarily due to uneven vaccine rollouts 
across countries and the continued presence 
of COVID-19 across the globe. The outlook 
for global inflationary pressures remains 
highly uncertain, in part due to unpredictability 
around how long it may take for global supply-
chain disruptions to ease, and to what extent 
they will ease.
Uncertainty stemming from offshore 
developments can influence consumption 
and investment in New Zealand, particularly 
via business and consumer confidence.1 
Domestic uncertainty is playing a greater role 
at present as firms face near-term uncertainty 
about health policy, border settings, and 
consumption patterns when COVID-19 
becomes widespread in New Zealand
(as discussed in chapter 2).
 


Chapter 4 Special topics
31
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
Outlook for New Zealand’s productive capacity
Gross domestic product (GDP) is an important 
economic indicator, as it measures the 
amount of goods and services produced 
in an economy over a period. Another 
key concept is productive capacity, also 
known as potential GDP or potential output. 
Potential output is the amount of goods 
and services an economy could produce 
without generating excess inflationary 
pressure. This is the amount of output that 
would be produced if all labour and capital 
in the economy were used to their maximum 
sustainable levels. 
COVID-19 has significantly affected the way 
goods and services are produced and has 
limited New Zealand’s productive capacity. 
Health restrictions have temporarily closed 
parts of the economy and, at times, reduced 
the amount of staff that are allowed to work 
onsite. New Zealand’s international tourism 
industry has been severely hampered by 
border restrictions. International restrictions to 
control outbreaks are straining global supply 
chains. However, there may also be positive 
changes. Digital innovation has increased 
as businesses have moved online and many 
employees can now work from home. 
Our projection reflects that potential output 
is likely to be lower than it would have been 
without the COVID-19 pandemic. The level of 
potential GDP is assumed to be lower, mainly 
due to four supply-side channels (discussed 
below). We have also made specific 
adjustments to our estimates of potential 
output to reflect New Zealand’s much lower 
ability to produce goods and services at 
Alert Levels 3 and 4 (figure 4.2). There is a 
large degree of uncertainty about the overall 
impact on potential output over the next 
few years, depending on how New Zealand 
adapts to living with COVID-19. 
Productive capacity is 
an important concept for 
understanding the economy
Productive capacity is a theoretical concept 
that cannot be measured directly. But it can 
be estimated using models to improve our 
understanding of the economy:
•	 Potential GDP gives an indication of 
the level of actual GDP that may be 
sustainable over longer periods. This 
helps to guide medium-term forecasts of 
GDP since the economy tends to move 
back to its sustainable level if it is above 
or below this level.
•	 Potential GDP is also a predictor of 
inflationary pressure in an economy. 
When labour or capital are employed in an 
unsustainable way, actual output deviates 
from potential output and this typically 
generates excess inflation.
For example, to increase production, a 
manufacturer could employ more people. 
However, if the economy were operating 
above its potential output, the workers 
that the manufacturer needs would be 
more likely to already be employed. The 
employer may need to offer higher wages 
to entice workers from other firms, pushing 
up production costs and generating 
inflationary pressures. If this happens 
across the economy it causes inflation.  
2
Figure 4.2
GDP and potential GDP
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 4 Special topics
32
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
COVID-19 will affect New 
Zealand’s productive capacity 
over the medium term
New Zealand is transitioning towards 
COVID-19 being widespread in the 
community. We expect this transition to affect 
potential GDP through four key supply-side 
channels (figure 4.3).
Protection measures
Restrictions to slow the spread of the virus 
have held back the full use of labour and 
capital. While ongoing strict nationwide 
lockdowns are less likely with high vaccination 
rates, regional lockdowns to prevent the 
healthcare system from being overwhelmed 
would still slow down production. Increased 
sick days and periods of self-isolation for staff 
may also reduce labour productivity.
2	
See ‘How coronavirus transformed our use of technology and what it means for the future’, MYOB (2020).
Adaptation of business models
Endemic COVID-19 could reinforce 
the adoption of digital technologies by 
New Zealand businesses. Surveys show 
businesses are more likely to look at 
new technology opportunities after their 
experience during lockdown.2 For example, 
temporary closures of physical stores 
have triggered substantial growth in online 
shopping (figure 4.4) and a change in the 
demographics using it.
Figure 4.4
Total online spend by sector
Source: NZ Post, Datamine.
• Health restrictions limit 
business productivity, 
particularly in 
high-contact sectors
• Periodic restrictions to 
manage stress on the 
healthcare system
Protection 
measures
• Increased digital 
adoption/e-commerce
• Changes to supply 
chains to increase 
resilience
Business 
models
• Smaller tourism and 
services sectors, relative 
to the pool of workers
• Jobs/capital mismatch
for a period
• Resources may be 
allocated to higher 
productivity ﬁrms
Sectoral 
reallocation
• Reluctance of some
people to work in 
high-contact sectors
• Risk of reduced labour 
force participation
• Ongoing diﬃculties 
accessing the global 
labour market
Labour 
supply
Figure 4.3
Summary of medium-term impacts of COVID-19 on productive capacity


Chapter 4 Special topics
33
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
While the effects of these changes on 
business models are uncertain, there is 
evidence to suggest a switch to digital ways 
of doing business could boost productivity. 
For example, an increased ability to work 
remotely could increase labour productivity. 
On the other hand, COVID-19 has strained 
global supply chains. Domestic firms are 
currently having to agree to more expensive 
contracts to ship their goods. Businesses 
have also noted longer production times, 
and that shipping disruptions are 
encouraging them to maintain higher levels 
of inventories as insurance against delays. 
While increasing the resilience of domestic 
supply, maintaining higher inventory levels 
‘just in case’ can come at the cost of lower 
productivity, as firms dedicate more time and 
resources to managing larger stock levels.
Sectoral reallocation
The spread of COVID-19 in the community 
is also likely to disproportionately affect 
businesses in high-contact sectors, such as 
retail and hospitality. These sectors have 
already been heavily impacted since the 
outset of the pandemic and their productivity 
may continue to be affected by public health 
restrictions such as social distancing. A 
transition away from these industries may 
reduce short-to-medium-term productive 
capacity if specialist workers and capital 
in these industries can no longer be used 
to their full potential. However, productive 
capacity could be boosted after the transition 
period if workers and other resources shift 
into higher-productivity firms. 
3	
For example, the Bank of England has estimated that the required amount of task reallocation for workers to shift is smaller than in the early 
1990s recession, when workers with more specialised skills were affected.
4	
See ‘COVID-19, productivity and reallocation: Timely evidence from three OECD countries’, Andrews et al (2021).
Such reallocation of resources was a 
common feature of historical recessions 
(figure 4.5). This adjustment process may 
be smoother compared to past experiences 
because the sectors that are likely to be the 
worst hit tend to have higher job turnover, 
have less job-specific capital, and are less 
capital intensive in some cases.3  
Some early studies suggest that COVID-19 
has prompted a shift of resources towards 
high-productivity firms that are more digitally 
innovative,4 however the evidence for this 
in New Zealand has been weaker to-date. 
The effects of reallocation may become 
increasingly evident as government support 
measures are withdrawn and the economy 
transitions to COVID-19 being widespread.
Figure 4.5
Change in the share of employment by industry
(% of total employment)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: The recessions in the comparison are the 1991 recession (Q4 1990 to Q2 1991), 
1997 recession (Q2 1997 to Q1 1998), and 2008 recession (Q4 2007 to Q2 2009). For the 
COVID-19 comparison, the period is Q1 2020 to Q3 2021.


Chapter 4 Special topics
34
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
Labour shortages
The labour market is currently tight and 
many firms are reporting difficulty in finding 
workers. Widespread COVID-19 could further 
impact the availability of workers. Workers 
may be more cautious about being employed 
in sectors where they have a lot of direct 
contact with customers or other employees. 
It is also possible that participation rates 
decline as a result of factors like vaccine 
mandates, or parents staying home to care 
for their children while schools and childcare 
facilities are closed. 
Despite the challenges to labour supply, 
employment growth bounced back strongly 
in recent quarters. And, in contrast to many 
countries, labour force participation has 
not yet been dampened substantially by 
COVID-19 in New Zealand. 
The pace of the easing of border restrictions, 
and the ability to attract overseas workers 
to fill jobs, presents risks to the outlook for 
potential output. Looser border restrictions 
might encourage higher immigration. This 
would increase potential output by increasing 
the size of New Zealand’s labour force and 
helping with skill shortages. However, it is 
also likely that some people now living in 
New Zealand would move overseas for work.
The outlook for productive 
capacity is uncertain
The impact on potential output in 
New Zealand could be more severe than 
we have assumed if widespread COVID-19 
causes consumers and workers to be much 
more cautious. This could lead to more 
disruptive impacts on high-contact sectors. 
On the other hand, potential output may 
quickly return to and then exceed pre-
COVID-19 levels. For example, this could 
occur if productivity gains from digital 
adoption emerge, spare resources are 
effectively deployed by high-productivity 
firms, and the opening of borders resolves 
labour shortages. In the long run, the impact 
of COVID-19 is likely to be overshadowed 
by factors such as technology, infrastructure, 
education and population.


Chapter 4 Special topics
35
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
Climate change and inflation
5	
 See Climate Changed 2021 and Beyond, Reserve Bank of New Zealand (2021).
6	
 See for example ‘State of Climate in 2021: Extreme events and major impacts’, World Meteorological Organisation (2021).
Climate change has important implications 
for the economy and financial system.5 For 
monetary policy, climate change is likely to 
impact both inflation and employment. This 
special topic discusses the potential effects 
on consumer prices, which stem from both 
the physical impacts of climate change and 
the policies aimed at minimising climate 
change and its effects. 
Climate change will impact the 
supply of goods and services
Climate change is likely to impact the supply 
of goods and services in the economy. These 
effects could become large and persist for 
several decades. They fall into two main 
categories:
•	 Physical impacts: These are the direct 
impacts of climate change, such as 
variations in growing conditions for 
crops, and more frequent and severe 
weather events. Physical climate-change-
related events are likely to become more 
significant over time.6
•	 Transition impacts: These are the 
outcomes of actions to limit climate 
change and its effects. They may be the 
result of government policy changes, 
consumer preferences for ‘green’ 
products, or pressure from investors and 
the public more generally. Government 
intervention is accelerating globally, 
with New Zealand recently making a 
commitment to reduce net greenhouse 
gas emissions by 50 percent by 2030.
The impacts on consumer prices will vary 
in both magnitude and direction over time. 
They will come through both the prices 
of goods and services produced and 
consumed locally, as well as those that are 
imported. The clearest potential impacts 
are on consumer prices for housing and 
household utilities, food and transport. These 
components account for a significant share 
of consumer spending in New Zealand 
(figure 4.6). They are particularly vulnerable 
to physical impacts and are exposed to 
transition impacts due to their greenhouse 
gas emissions (figure 4.7).
3
Figure 4.6
Composition of consumer spending 
Source: Stats NZ.
Note: Spending shares are based on the base expenditure weights used in the consumers 
price index.
Figure 4.7
Industrial greenhouse gas emissions
Source: Stats NZ.  


Chapter 4 Special topics
36
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
The physical impacts of climate change 
will be passed through to consumer prices 
by increasing the scarcity and/or reducing 
the productivity of certain resources in the 
near term. These impacts could result from 
reductions in global food production due to 
more frequent extreme weather events such 
as droughts or floods, and from disruptions to 
renewable energy generation. 
The outcomes of government policies 
to limit the extent and impacts of climate 
change will – by design in many cases – 
change consumer prices. For example, the 
New Zealand Emissions Trading Scheme 
(ETS) is designed to progressively increase 
the cost of high-emissions production, which 
will affect production costs in high-emissions 
industries. This would be particularly 
pronounced in the transport sector. The 
relative cost of emissions from fossil-fuel-
based transport is likely to steadily rise, 
as governments encourage a shift to low-
emissions transport methods. Concurrently, 
this should help low-emissions production 
become cheaper, and encourage investment 
in new technology that could further reduce 
costs in low-emissions industries. 
Climate change will impact 
consumer prices over the next 
decade
Climate change is expected to impact the 
level and volatility of consumer prices in the 
short and medium term. Its effects further out 
are more uncertain.
Short-term impacts
In the near term, climate-change-related price 
movements could be large and generally 
positive. Climate change impacts are likely to 
be contributing to price pressures globally for 
energy, food and transportation. Volatility in 
global food and energy prices typically flows 
through to the prices paid by New Zealand 
consumers (figures 4.8 and 4.9).  
Markets for some goods have been 
affected by physical disruptions to global 
production and distribution. For example, 
severe droughts in Brazil over the past two 
years have been boosting grain prices. 
Some markets have also been affected 
by transition impacts, as the MPC noted 
in the Summary Record of Meeting for the 
October 2021 Review. For example, the shift 
to renewable energy has created some 
challenges, such as energy shortages when 
demand is high. China temporarily introduced 
electricity rationing due to high coal prices 
and difficulties meeting emissions goals, as 
manufacturing-related electricity demand 
increased and extreme weather boosted 
demand for heating and cooling. 
Figure 4.8
Global and domestic food price inflation
(annual)
Source: FAO, Reuters, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 4.9
Global and domestic energy price inflation
(annual)
Source: Reuters, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 4 Special topics
37
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
It is important to note that it is very difficult 
to separate these impacts from those of 
other developments in these markets. These 
include factors such as strong global demand 
and non-climate-related supply-chain 
disruptions.
Medium-term impacts
Over the next five to ten years, the impacts 
of climate change on consumer prices may 
become broader. Tightening domestic 
carbon policy will continue to generate 
price pressures for fuel and high-emissions 
industries, such as transport. Home 
ownership costs, such as insurance and 
council rates, are already rising in response 
to the actual and expected physical risks 
presented by rising sea levels and more 
extreme weather events. Housing costs are 
also likely to increase if building standards 
increasingly encourage energy-efficient 
buildings, which are more expensive. Over 
time, higher home ownership costs may also 
be reflected in rent prices.
The magnitudes of these impacts are 
uncertain, and there are likely to be some 
offsetting effects. For example, demand for 
houses that are exposed to physical risks is 
likely to be lower, and higher housing costs 
may encourage people to live in smaller 
houses. In addition, policy-driven reductions 
in demand for high-emissions products, such 
as fossil fuels, could reduce the underlying 
prices of those products. 
In general, the overall impact on consumer 
prices is expected to be mitigated by 
changes in spending patterns as consumers 
substitute away from high-emissions 
products. The impacts are likely to be larger 
where spending behaviour is entrenched, 
such as in the case of widespread use of 
petrol and diesel vehicles, or in cases where 
substitutes are more limited. It is important 
that the measurement of the consumers 
price index adapts as consumers’ spending 
patterns and product types evolve.
Long-term impacts
In the longer term, the direction and strength 
of climate-change-related inflation impacts 
are less clear. This is because there is 
greater scope for upside and downside price 
influences in the long run. For example, the 
physical impacts of climate change could be 
more or less severe, consumption patterns 
might change, and new technologies might 
be developed. In addition, some areas will 
experience changes in climate that are 
beneficial to food production. 
Implications for monetary policy
The potential implications of climate change 
for inflation make it relevant for monetary 
policy. However, isolating, quantifying and 
tracking the specific impacts of climate 
change on consumer prices is extremely 
challenging. In addition, increases in the 
prices of certain goods and services due 
to climate change will not always result in a 
sustained increase in the overall consumer 
price level as the prices of other products 
adjust. Regardless, it is likely that climate-
change-related price volatility will result in 
more volatility in consumer price inflation 
over time. 
The Reserve Bank is working to better 
understand the macroeconomic impacts of 
climate change. This work will build on the 
modelling work by the Network of Central 
Banks and Supervisors for Greening the 
Financial System (NGFS) and the Climate 
Change Commission.


Chapter 5 Economic projection
38
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
CHAPTER 
05
Economic 
projection
Putangirua Pinnacles. Wairarapa, New Zealand.


Chapter 5 Economic projection
39
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
CHAPTER 5
Economic projection
This chapter summarises the baseline economic projection
that the MPC considered when making its policy assessment. 
The projection was finalised on 18 November 2021.
This projection relies on a set of key 
assumptions about the global and domestic 
responses to the ongoing COVID-19 
pandemic. These relate to:
•	 the timing and pricing impacts of supply-
chain disruptions and how and when they 
dissipate;
•	 the economic impacts of, and recovery 
following, restrictions on activity; 
•	 how the behaviour of businesses, 
consumers, and workers might adapt to 
living with COVID-19 in the community;
•	 vaccination rates and vaccine 
effectiveness; and
•	 how well the New Zealand health system 
will cope with widespread COVID-19 in 
the community, and to what extent the 
Government will respond.
There is significant uncertainty about these 
assumptions, and outcomes could be 
substantially different if they do not hold. 
Chapter 2 discusses some of the key risks to 
the economic outlook. 
The projection takes into account recent 
data, which show strong economic activity 
before recent lockdowns and a more resilient 
labour market than previously expected. The 
factors underpinning this starting point are 
discussed in chapter 2.
The projection also accounts for the 
assumed impacts of developments since 
the August Statement, including the 
announced COVID-19 Protection Framework, 
the tightening of loan-to-value ratio (LVR) 
restrictions, and announced policy changes 
aimed at increasing housing supply through 
new housing intensification rules. The 
projection assumes New Zealand moves to 
the COVID-19 Protection Framework before 
the end of 2021, and that New Zealand is 
predominantly at Orange or Green Level 
restrictions over the projection horizon. 
The projection also assumes that border 
restrictions ease gradually from the March 
2022 quarter in line with recent Government 
announcements. 
Employment is expected to remain above its 
maximum sustainable level (MSE) over the 
projection horizon, but to return towards MSE 
over the projection as capacity pressures 
ease. Similarly, annual CPI inflation returns 
to the 2 percent target midpoint towards 
the end of the projection. Annual inflation 
remains elevated due to ongoing supply-
chain disruptions and heightened capacity 
pressures in the near term.
The economic outlook is consistent with 
higher interest rates. This helps to ensure 
the MPC meets its medium-term inflation and 
employment objectives.


Chapter 5 Economic projection
40
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
Table 5.1
Key projection assumptions
Key factors
Global growth
•	 Annual average trading-partner GDP growth is expected to recover to 5.7% in 2021 and 
moderate thereafter. While this recovery is supported by the ongoing COVID-19 vaccine rollout, 
expected near-term growth has slowed since the August Statement. This slowdown is in part 
due to the spread of the Delta variant in Australia and across Asia.  
•	 The New Zealand dollar trade-weighted index (TWI) is assumed to stay around 75.1.
•	 The Dubai oil price is assumed to return gradually towards USD 73 per barrel over the medium 
term, in line with futures market pricing.
Health 
restrictions
•	 New Zealand is assumed to transition to the announced COVID-19 Protection Framework before 
the end of 2021.
•	 New Zealand is assumed to be predominantly at Orange or Green Level restrictions over the 
projection, with restrictions becoming less stringent towards the latter half of the projection. 
COVID-19 is assumed to become more widespread in the community. The projection allows for 
some periods of increasing, but not unmanageable, strain on the health system.
•	 Border restrictions are expected to begin to ease gradually in 2022, in line with recent 
Government announcements.
House prices
•	 Annual house price growth is expected to slow down from 30% at the end of 2021 to 6% by 
the end of 2022. House prices are then assumed to fall modestly from late 2022 until the 
end of the projection horizon. This reflects a variety of factors, including increases in interest 
rates, increased housing supply, low net migration, announced changes to tax policy, and the 
reintroduction and tightening of LVR restrictions.


Chapter 5 Economic projection
41
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
Economic growth
Production
•	 Near-term economic activity has been negatively impacted by the recent lockdowns, although 
not as severely as the nationwide lockdown in 2020. Activity is expected to recover, with annual 
average GDP growth peaking at 4.7% in 2022. 
•	 New Zealand’s productive capacity (potential output) continues to be constrained by the 
domestic and international measures put in place to contain COVID-19 (see chapter 4.2).
These disruptions are expected to dissipate as domestic border restrictions and supply-chain 
pressures ease.
•	 The output gap is starting from a much higher position than assumed in the August Statement. 
This reflects stronger-than-expected economic growth and a tighter labour market.
Consumption
•	 Consumption is expected to rebound from the recent lockdowns but remain fairly muted over 
the near term. This reflects some hesitancy as COVID-19 becomes widespread. Consumption is 
then projected to accelerate, supported by a resilient labour market and accumulated savings. 
•	 Rising interest rates and easing house price inflation are expected to moderate consumption 
growth over the medium term.
Investment
•	 Business investment rebounds from the recent lockdowns, but is expected to be dampened by 
an initial period of heightened uncertainty in the near term as COVID-19 spreads more widely in 
New Zealand. However, it then recovers in response to ongoing capacity pressures. 
•	 Residential investment rebounds strongly from the recent lockdowns, reflecting record levels of 
residential building consents. Policies that permit more intensive residential builds are expected 
to provide further medium-term support. Despite the slowdown in house price inflation and 
increases in interest rates, residential investment is expected to remain elevated over the 
projection horizon. However, the construction sector will continue to face capacity constraints, 
particularly in the near term.
Exports and 
imports
•	 Import prices are significantly higher than previously expected, driven largely by higher oil prices 
and the impact of supply-chain disruptions on the cost of producing goods and transporting 
them to New Zealand.
•	 Recovering global growth is expected to underpin demand for New Zealand’s exports. This 
supports strong, albeit moderating, export prices over the projection.
•	 It is assumed that, as border restrictions ease, factors like New Zealand’s remoteness will somewhat 
discourage international travellers from visiting. In contrast, New Zealanders are expected 
to become more comfortable with international travel as they adapt to COVID-19 being more 
widespread in the community. This asymmetry weighs on net exports over the projection horizon.


Chapter 5 Economic projection
42
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
Labour market
Employment
and wages
•	 New Zealand’s labour market is exceptionally tight. The unemployment rate fell to 3.4% in the 
September 2021 quarter, despite a marked increase in the participation rate. This reflects both 
heightened demand and constrained labour supply. 
•	 We assume that the level of MSE is lower relative to pre-COVID-19 levels, largely reflecting a 
mismatch of skills in New Zealand’s labour market. This is particularly the case while border 
restrictions remain stringent, preventing migrant workers from filling labour shortages. 
•	 Consequently, employment is expected to be above, but to return towards, its maximum 
sustainable level over the projection horizon.
•	 Annual labour cost index (LCI) private sector wage inflation is projected to accelerate further 
from 2.5% in the September 2021 quarter, peaking at 3.6% at the end of 2022. This reflects the 
tight labour market, heightened capacity pressures, and rising living costs. 
•	 Net working-age migration is projected to be mildly negative over 2021, as asymmetric border 
restrictions impede arrivals but not departures. Net migration is assumed to increase gradually 
as border restrictions ease, to about 24,000 people per year.
Consumer price inflation
Tradables
•	 Annual tradables inflation is expected to peak at 6.7% in late 2021, reflecting increases in oil 
prices and the ongoing impacts of supply-chain disruptions. 
•	 Supply-chain disruptions are currently assumed to ease from mid-2022, with ex-oil import prices 
stabilising towards the end of 2022. Together with moderating oil prices, and a relatively strong 
TWI, annual tradables inflation declines to -0.4% by the end of the projection horizon.
Non-tradables
•	 Annual non-tradables inflation remains at or above 3.5% over the projection.
•	 High starting-point momentum in housing demand and construction costs supports housing-
related components of non-tradables inflation. Capacity pressures and a tight labour market 
provide additional support, but are assumed to ease over the latter part of the projection.
Headline
•	 Annual CPI inflation is projected to peak at 5.7% in the March 2022 quarter, reflecting strength in 
both tradables and non-tradables inflation. 
•	 Annual CPI inflation is expected to decelerate to the 2% midpoint of the target band towards the 
end of the projection, reflecting the tradables and non-tradables factors listed above.


Chapter 5 Economic projection
43
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
Figure 5.3 
Unemployment rate 
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Charts
Figure 5.1
CPI inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Dotted lines show the projection from the August Statement. 
Figure 5.2 
Private sector LCI wage inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 5.4 
Annual house price inflation
Source: CoreLogic, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 5.5
Quarterly production GDP
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 5.6
Official Cash Rate
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ.


Chapter 6 The MPC’s risk appetite statement
44
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
CHAPTER 
06
The MPC’s 
risk appetite 
statement
Te Hoho Rock. Coromandel, New Zealand.


Chapter 6 The MPC’s risk appetite statement
45
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
CHAPTER 6
The MPC’s risk appetite 
statement
The statement of the MPC’s monetary policy strategy at the 
beginning of this document outlines how the MPC approaches 
economic risks when making policy decisions. The MPC also 
faces other risks when it acts. This chapter outlines the MPC’s 
risk appetite statement for operational, legal, reputational, and 
financial risks. 
The Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 
(1989) underpins the Monetary Policy 
Committee’s (MPC) purpose, which is to 
promote the prosperity and well-being 
of New Zealanders, and contribute to a 
sustainable and productive economy. The 
MPC is mandated to do this by formulating 
monetary policy to achieve and maintain 
stability in the general level of prices over 
the medium term and support maximum 
sustainable employment, subject to 
secondary considerations. In doing so, the 
MPC is guided by the operational objectives 
set out in the MPC Remit. The MPC’s Charter 
further outlines the duties and responsibilities 
for the MPC in an operational sense.
The MPC faces a range of risks when 
formulating policy – some of which are 
unavoidable. The MPC has recently defined 
the specific risks it faces and has detailed a 
Risk Appetite Statement (RAS) for the first time 
to outline its appetite for each type of risk.
Defining the risks
The MPC aims to maximise the operational 
objectives in the Remit while not taking 
undue risk. Undue risk can be defined as 
risks over and above those outlined in its RAS 
below. The purpose of the MPC’s RAS is to 
distinguish between necessary and undue risk. 
It summarises the MPC’s willingness to take on 
different types of risks to best fulfil its mandate.
The MPC’s willingness to take on some types 
of risk must be guided by its legal mandate. 
Some, such as the financial risk borne by 
the Reserve Bank as a consequence of the 
MPC’s monetary policy decisions, will also be 
heavily influenced by the risk preferences of 
the Reserve Bank.  
The MPC’s risk appetite is categorised as 
high, medium or low in the RAS. Definitions 
for each level of risk can be found in table 
6.1. The types of risk the MPC is exposed to 
(operational, legal, reputational and financial) 
are defined with examples in table 6.2.


Chapter 6 The MPC’s risk appetite statement
46
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
Table 6.1
Defining the risk appetite levels
Risk appetite
Description 
High appetite
The MPC readily accepts exposure to these risks, as they are central to 
the pursuit of its mandate. Managing them on an appropriate risk-reward 
basis is one of its core competencies.
Medium appetite
The MPC accepts exposure to these risks, but on a controlled basis. 
These risks contribute to the achievement of its mandate but may come at 
a material cost, and are taken on a modest basis.
Low appetite
The MPC generally avoids these risks, as they have the potential to 
undermine its ability to achieve its mandate. When these risks arise, extra 
measures are taken to mitigate them.
Table 6.2
Defining the risks faced by the MPC
Risk
Definition and examples
Operational
The risk that disruptions to people, systems, and processes impact the 
MPC meeting and the effective formulation of monetary policy.
•	 One or more MPC members can’t meet due to illness, technical 
difficulties or similar issues.
•	 MPC members can meet, but they don’t have the best information or 
resources available to make a decision.
•	 MPC must make decisions under less than ideal conditions – e.g. 
without sufficient time for deliberation.
•	 MPC can make a decision, but doesn’t have the resources to 
communicate it well.
Legal
The risk that the MPC does not fulfil its lawful mandate and is subject to 
legal challenge. Lawful mandate covers the Act, Remit, Charter, and Code 
of Conduct.
•	 The legality of MPC monetary policy decisions is legitimately questioned.
•	 An MPC member is found to have acted illegally.
Reputational
The risk that damage to credibility results in a loss of stakeholder trust or 
confidence in monetary policy and/or the MPC.
•	 MPC policies produce poor outcomes.
•	 MPC policies produce good outcomes, but are received poorly by the 
public or other key stakeholders.
•	 Monetary policy credibility is lost.
•	 The reputation of the MPC or MPC members is compromised by factors 
other than policy choices.
Financial
The MPC bears no financial risk as a committee, but has the responsibility 
to set policies which may cause significant financial risk to be borne by 
the Reserve Bank and the Crown.


Chapter 6 The MPC’s risk appetite statement
47
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
Table 6.3
The MPC’s risk appetite statement
Risk type
Risk appetite statement
Success indicators
Operational
The MPC has low appetite for directing the 
Reserve Bank to undertake policies that would 
exceed its operational capacity, or lead to 
a policy being launched without sufficient 
preparation.
The MPC has low appetite for making 
decisions without thorough deliberation and 
a sound understanding of the information 
available at the time. However, it operates in 
an inherently uncertain environment, therefore 
the MPC necessarily has a high tolerance for 
setting policy under uncertainty.
The MPC has low appetite for making a 
decision without all members contributing, but 
is flexible with respect to how members come 
together to deliberate.
The MPC has medium appetite to test new 
internal systems and processes, seeking 
continuous improvement in the way it operates.
Monetary policy is formulated in line with the 
capacity of the Reserve Bank.
The MPC is forward-looking regarding potential 
policy tools and directs the Reserve Bank 
to prepare its operational needs in line with 
expected future policy needs.
The MPC can meet and formulate policy as 
scheduled.
Legal
The MPC has very low appetite for legal 
challenge, and no appetite for acting illegally.
Monetary policy decisions are explained and 
justified in the Monetary Policy Statement.
Record of meeting reflects consideration of a 
broad range of information, robust discussion, 
and acknowledgement of secondary 
considerations.
Members continuously seek to reach 
consensus.
Reputational
The MPC recognises the importance of 
credibility for effective monetary policy. It has 
low appetite for policies or decisions that 
could cause inflation expectations to become 
unanchored.
The MPC has moderate appetite for external 
criticism and challenge, and will respond 
as necessary to maintain its legal licence to 
operate.
The MPC has high appetite to learn from its 
international peers and to design and test 
new or novel policies to respond to uncharted 
economic conditions.
Medium-to-long-term inflation expectations are 
anchored near the target midpoint.
Market rates (e.g. OIS) move as intended when 
implementing monetary policy.
Inflation and employment are near, or forecast 
to converge towards, their respective targets.
Financial
The MPC bears no financial risk as a 
committee, but has the responsibility to set 
policies which may cause significant financial 
risk to be borne by the Reserve Bank. For this 
reason, the MPC is guided by the Reserve 
Bank’s internal risk appetite and institutional 
arrangements in these areas.


Chapter 6 The MPC’s risk appetite statement
48
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
Table 6.3
Summary of the MPC’s risk appetite
Risk type
Low
Medium
High
Operational
✓
New systems and 
processes
Legal
✓
Reputational
✓
External challenge
Learning from 
international peers 
and innovative or 
novel policy
Financial
Note: A tick denotes the default risk tolerance level, with exceptions listed in italics. The MPC has not established an appetite for financial risk, 
as it does not bear any financial risk as a committee.


Chapter 7 Appendices
49
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
CHAPTER 
07
Appendices


Chapter 7 Appendices
50
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
CHAPTER 7
Appendices
Appendix 1: 
Statistical tables
Table 7.1
Key forecast variables
GDP growth 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Annual
TWI
OCR
2019
Mar
0.3
0.1
1.5
74.0
1.8
 
Jun
0.4
0.6
1.7
72.6
1.6
 
Sep
0.9
0.7
1.5
72.0
1.2
 
Dec
0.2
0.5
1.9
71.3
1.0
2020
Mar
-1.4
0.8
2.5
70.9
0.9
 
Jun
-9.9
-0.5
1.5
69.7
0.3
 
Sep
13.9
0.7
1.4
72.0
0.3
 
Dec
-1.0
0.5
1.4
72.9
0.3
2021
Mar
1.4
0.8
1.5
74.9
0.3
 
Jun
2.8
1.3
3.3
74.7
0.3
 
Sep
-7.0
2.2
4.9
74.4
0.3
 
Dec
5.8
1.2
5.7
75.1
0.6
2022
Mar
2.6
0.9
5.7
75.1
0.9
 
Jun
0.8
0.8
5.2
75.1
1.5
 
Sep
0.3
1.1
4.0
75.1
1.9
 
Dec
0.4
0.5
3.3
75.1
2.1
2023
Mar
0.2
0.5
2.9
75.1
2.3
Jun
0.4
0.4
2.5
75.1
2.4
Sep
0.3
0.8
2.3
75.1
2.5
Dec
0.3
0.3
2.1
75.1
2.6
2024
Mar
0.4
0.5
2.1
75.1
2.6
Jun
0.4
0.4
2.1
75.1
2.6
Sep
0.3
0.8
2.0
75.1
2.6
Dec
0.3
0.3
2.0
75.1
2.6


Chapter 7 Appendices
51
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
Table 7.2
Measures of inflation, inflation expectations, and asset prices
2020
2021
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Inflation (annual rates)
CPI
2.5
1.5
1.4
1.4
1.5
3.3
4.9
CPI non-tradables
3.4
3.1
2.6
2.8
2.1
3.3
4.5
CPI tradables
1.5
-0.6
-0.1
-0.3
0.5
3.4
5.7
Sectoral factor model estimate of 
core inflation
1.8
1.8
1.9
2.0
2.2
2.4
2.7
CPI trimmed mean (30 percent 
measure)
2.7
2.1
1.7
2.2
1.7
3.0
4.0
CPI weighted median
2.8
2.4
2.2
2.7
2.3
3.0
3.3
GDP deflator (expenditure)
3.7
2.4
1.6
0.6
0.2
2.2
Inflation expectations
ANZ Business Outlook – inflation one 
year ahead (quarterly average to date)
1.7
1.4
1.4
1.5
1.9
2.2
2.9
3.9
RBNZ Survey of Expectations – 
inflation 2 years ahead
1.9
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.9
2.0
2.3
3.0
RBNZ Survey of Expectations – 
inflation 5 years ahead
2.0
1.8
1.9
1.9
2.0
2.1
2.0
2.2
RBNZ Survey of Expectations – 
inflation 10 years ahead
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.1
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
Long-run inflation expectations*
1.8
1.8
2.0
2.0
2.1
2.1
2.1
2.1
Asset prices (annual percent 
changes)
Quarterly house price index 
(CoreLogic NZ)
7.6
7.2
10.7
16.9
24.1
REINZ Farm Price Index (quarterly 
average)
-12.5
-8.0
-3.7
-0.5
6.9
6.3
15.1
NZX 50 (quarterly average)
21.1
6.4
8.6
13.2
14.4
17.1
10.3
Source: ANZ Bank, Aon-Hewitt Consulting, Consensus Economics, RBNZ estimates.
*Long-run expectations are extracted from a range of surveys using a Nelson-Siegel model.


Chapter 7 Appendices
52
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
Table 7.3
Measures of labour market conditions	
(seasonally adjusted, changes expressed in annual percent terms, unless specified otherwise)	
2020
2021
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Household Labour Force Survey
Unemployment rate
4.2
4.1
5.3
4.8
4.6
4.0
3.4
Underutilisation rate
10.4
12.1
13.2
11.8
12.1
10.5
9.2
Labour force participation rate
70.7
69.9
70.1
70.2
70.4
70.5
71.2
Employment rate (percentage of 
working-age population)
67.7
67.1
66.4
66.8
67.1
67.6
68.8
Employment growth
2.5
1.6
0.4
0.6
0.2
1.6
4.3
Average weekly hours worked
34.1
30.7
33.7
34.9
33.9
34.1
31.2
Number unemployed (thousand 
people)
120
116
151
139
133
116
98
Number employed (million people)
2.74
2.73
2.71
2.73
2.75
2.78
2.83
Labour force (million people)
2.86
2.85
2.87
2.87
2.88
2.89
2.93
Extended labour force (million 
people)
2.96
2.96
2.97
2.97
2.99
2.98
3.01
Working-age population (million 
people)
4.05
4.07
4.09
4.09
4.09
4.10
4.11
Quarterly Employment Survey – 
QES
Filled jobs growth
2.1
0.3
-0.6
0.3
0.5
2.4
4.0
Average hourly earnings growth 
(private sector, ordinary time)
3.3
2.4
3.7
4.6
4.1
4.4
3.6
Other data sources
Labour cost index growth, private 
sector
2.4
1.7
1.6
1.5
1.6
2.2
2.5
Labour cost index growth, private 
sector, unadjusted
3.6
2.8
2.6
2.4
2.8
3.7
4.1
Estimated net migration (published, 
thousands, quarterly)
26.9
0.4
0.5
-1.1
Change in All Vacancies Index
-14.5
-50.1
-19.1
-1.1
26.1
164.1
56.6
Note: The All Vacancies Index is produced by MBIE as part of the monthly Jobs Online report, which shows changes in job vacancies advertised by businesses
on internet job boards. It is converted to quarterly and seasonally adjusted by the RBNZ. The unadjusted labour cost index (LCI) is an analytical index that reflects 
quality change in addition to price change (whereas the official LCI measures price changes only). For definitions of underutilisation, the extended labour force, 
and related concepts, see Statistics New Zealand (2016), Introducing underutilisation in the labour market. Estimated net migration (published) is the Stats NZ 
outcomes-based measure.


Chapter 7 Appendices
53
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
Table 7.4
Composition of real GDP growth
(annual average percent change, seasonally adjusted, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
Final consumption expenditure
Private
3.9
3.3
4.2
6.5
4.9
4.4
2.6
0.4
4.7
3.5
1.2
Public authority
2.1
3.4
2.3
2.2
3.4
3.7
6.1
6.5
8.4
1.2
-0.2
Total
3.5
3.3
3.7
5.5
4.6
4.2
3.4
1.9
5.6
2.9
0.8
Gross fixed capital formation
Residential
15.2
8.3
7.1
8.8
-1.8
3.0
1.4
1.2
7.7
8.6
0.7
Other
7.6
7.9
2.5
-0.3
10.4
6.4
1.2
-6.1
8.0
9.2
2.3
Total
9.4
8.0
3.7
2.1
7.0
5.5
1.2
-4.2
7.9
9.0
1.9
Final domestic 
expenditure
4.8
4.4
3.7
4.7
5.2
4.5
2.9
0.4
6.1
4.3
1.1
Stockbuilding*
-0.2
0.5
-0.3
0.1
0.2
-0.1
-0.5
-0.1
0.7
-0.2
0.0
Gross national 
expenditure
4.5
4.6
3.2
4.9
5.6
4.4
2.3
-0.6
7.0
4.5
1.2
Exports of goods and 
services
0.1
4.7
6.8
2.1
3.8
3.4
0.3
-17.6
5.1
5.8
7.5
Imports of goods and 
services
8.1
7.7
2.6
5.6
7.8
4.3
1.1
-15.9
14.7
7.0
5.8
Expenditure on GDP
2.1
3.7
4.4
3.8
4.4
4.2
2.1
-0.3
4.4
4.0
1.3
GDP (production)
2.7
3.8
3.7
3.7
3.6
3.3
1.7
-1.4
4.5
4.2
1.3
GDP (production, 
March qtr to March qtr)
3.5
3.8
4.1
3.2
3.6
2.9
0.1
2.9
3.7
1.7
1.4
*Percentage point contribution to the growth rate of GDP.


Chapter 7 Appendices
54
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
Table 7.5
Summary of economic projection
(annual percent change for March years unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2014
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
Price measures
CPI 
1.5
0.3
0.4
2.2
1.1
1.5
2.5
1.5
5.7
2.9
2.1
Labour costs
1.7
1.8
1.8
1.5
1.9
2.0
2.4
1.6
3.2
3.6
3.5
Export prices (in 
New Zealand dollars) 
11.5
-9.2
-0.2
3.9
3.3
1.5
7.2
-2.7
7.2
-2.8
-2.1
Import prices (in 
New Zealand dollars) 
-3.0
-3.4
1.2
0.6
1.7
4.1
2.4
-2.7
6.4
-1.7
-0.2
Monetary conditions
OCR (year average)
2.5
3.4
2.9
2.0
1.8
1.8
1.2
0.3
0.5
2.0
2.5
TWI (year average)
77.6
79.3
72.6
76.5
75.6
73.4
71.7
72.4
74.8
75.1
75.1
Output
GDP (production, annual 
average % change)
2.7
3.8
3.7
3.7
3.6
3.3
1.7
-1.4
4.5
4.2
1.3
Potential output (annual 
average % change)
2.6
3.1
3.2
3.2
3.1
3.0
2.5
-1.2
2.7
3.8
2.0
Output gap (% of potential 
GDP, year average)
-1.5
-0.8
-0.3
0.2
0.7
1.0
0.2
-0.1
1.7
2.0
1.3
Labour market
Total employment 
(seasonally adjusted)
4.0
3.6
2.3
5.9
2.9
1.5
2.5
0.2
3.5
0.7
0.9
Unemployment rate 
(March qtr, seasonally 
adjusted)
5.6
5.5
5.3
4.9
4.4
4.2
4.2
4.6
3.3
3.6
3.9
Trend labour productivity 
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.5
Key balances
Government operating 
balance (% of GDP, year 
to June)
-1.2
0.2
0.7
1.5
1.9
2.4
-7.3
-4.1
-4.6
-2.1
-1.8
Current account balance 
(% of GDP)
-2.5
-3.5
-2.4
-2.6
-3.0
-3.7
-2.3
-2.5
-4.4
-5.1
-5.8
Terms of trade (SNA 
measure, annual average 
% change)
11.7
-0.3
-3.0
2.6
4.5
-2.4
2.0
-0.7
1.7
0.6
-2.2
Household saving rate 
(% of disposable income)
1.2
-0.3
0.0
0.3
-0.1
0.5
1.9
5.2
1.6
0.2
-0.8
World economy
Trading-partner GDP 
(annual average % change)
3.5
3.7
3.5
3.5
3.9
3.5
1.7
-0.8
5.3
4.6
3.3
Trading-partner CPI 
(TWI weighted)
2.2
1.0
1.2
1.9
1.8
1.4
2.4
0.8
2.6
2.1
2.1


Chapter 7 Appendices
55
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
Appendix 2: Chart pack
Figure 7.1
Composition of CPI inflation
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 7.2
Output gap
(share of potential)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 7.3
Unemployment and underutilisation rates
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 7.4
OCR and neutral OCR indicator suite
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: Shaded area indicates the range between the maximum and minimum 
values from a suite of neutral OCR indicators.
Figure 7.5
GDP and potential GDP
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 7.6
Measures of core inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Core inflation measures exclude the GST increase in 2010.


Chapter 7 Appendices
56
Monetary Policy Statement November 2021
Figure 7.7
Inflation expectations
(annual) 
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: Inflation expectations are estimates from the RBNZ inflation expectations 
curve, based on surveys of businesses and professional forecasters.
Figure 7.9
House price inflation
(annual) 
Source: REINZ.
Source: Stats NZ, Global Dairy Trade, Reuters, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 7.12
Terms of trade, dairy and oil price indices
Figure 7.10
Mortgage rates
Source: interest.co.nz, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The rates shown for each term are the average of the latest rates on 
offer from ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac.
Figure 7.8
Private sector wage growth
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Private sector wage growth is measured by the labour cost index, all 
salary and wage rates, private sector. Real labour cost index is deflated with 
headline CPI inflation.
Figure 7.11
New Zealand dollar exchange rates
(quarterly average) 
Source: Reuters, RBNZ, RBNZ estimates.
