BANK: RBNZ
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: Monetary Policy Statement November 2022
DATE: 22/11/2022
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/monetary-policy-statements/2022/mps-nov-22/mpsnov22.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

11/2022
Monetary Policy
STATEMENT


ii
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
STATEMENT
of the MPC’s monetary policy strategy
The Monetary Policy Committee’s (MPC’s) monetary policy strategy is its 
overarching plan for how it will formulate monetary policy under different 
circumstances to achieve its objectives.1 It outlines a consistent approach 
to how the MPC intends to achieve its objectives across time, accounting 
for trade-offs and uncertainty. Agreeing on and publishing a strategy 
promotes transparency, public understanding, and accountability.
1	
For a more in-depth discussion of monetary policy strategy in New Zealand, see J. Ratcliffe and R. Kendall (2019), ‘Monetary policy strategy in New Zealand’, 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Bulletin, Vol. 82, No. 3, April.
2	
These economic objectives contribute to the overall purpose of the Act, which is to promote the prosperity and well-being of New Zealanders, and contribute to 
a sustainable and productive economy. See monetary policy framework for more information on New Zealand’s monetary policy framework, including the full 
text of the Remit.
Monetary policy 
framework and objectives
Under the Reserve Bank of 
New Zealand Act 1989 (the 
Act), the MPC is responsible for 
formulating monetary policy to 
maintain a stable general level of 
prices over the medium term and 
to support maximum sustainable 
employment.2 Operational 
objectives for monetary policy are 
set out in the Remit. The current 
Remit sets out a flexible inflation 
targeting regime, under which the 
MPC must set policy to: 
•	 keep future annual inflation 
between 1 and 3 percent over 
the medium term, with a focus 
on keeping future inflation 
near the 2 percent mid-point; 
and
•	 support maximum sustainable 
employment, considering 
a broad range of labour 
market indicators and taking 
into account that maximum 
sustainable employment is 
largely determined by non-
monetary factors.
In pursuing these objectives, 
the Remit requires the MPC to 
have regard to the efficiency 
and soundness of the 
financial system, seek to avoid 
unnecessary instability in the 
economy and financial markets, 
and discount events that have 
only transitory effects on inflation. 
The MPC must also assess the 
effects of its monetary policy 
decisions on the Government’s 
policy to support more 
sustainable house prices.
The Reserve Bank’s flexible 
inflation targeting framework 
and the MPC’s monetary policy 
strategy reflect the fact that: 
•	 low and stable inflation is 
monetary policy’s best long-
run contribution to the well-
being of New Zealanders;
•	 in the short to medium term, 
monetary policy can influence 
real variables such as 
employment, and hence policy 
trade-offs can arise; and
•	 monetary policy is more 
effective if the Bank’s policy 
targets are credible, so policy 
should be formulated in a 
way that ensures credibility is 
maintained.
Key aspects of monetary 
policy strategy
The MPC practises forecast 
targeting, which means that it 
sets monetary policy such that 
it expects to achieve its inflation 
and employment goals in the 
medium term. In most instances 
the MPC aims to return inflation 
to the target mid-point within a 
one- to three-year horizon. The 
appropriate horizon at each 
policy decision will vary based 
on how different policy paths 
will contribute to maximum 
sustainable employment, whether 
price-setters’ expectations are 
consistent with the inflation 
target, and other considerations 
such as the balance of risks to the 
MPC’s central economic outlook.


iii
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
The MPC does not attempt to 
return inflation and employment 
to target immediately, because 
monetary policy actions take time 
to transmit through the economy. 
Attempting to return inflation to 
target too quickly would result 
in unnecessary instability in the 
economy and financial markets. 
The 1 to 3 percent target range for 
inflation provides the MPC with 
flexibility to ensure that managing 
inflation variability does not come 
at the cost of excessive variability 
in the real economy. For similar 
reasons, the MPC does not 
attempt to offset events that are 
expected to have only transitory 
effects on inflation. 
The MPC takes into account both 
its inflation and employment 
objectives when setting policy. In 
the long run, no trade-off exists 
between the MPC’s objectives. 
In the short to medium term, 
there may be situations where 
monetary policy can move one 
objective closer to target only 
at the cost of the other, resulting 
in a trade-off. When a trade-off 
does arise, the MPC will consider 
outcomes for both objectives 
in setting policy. In general, if 
employment is projected to be 
below its long-run sustainable 
level, the MPC would let inflation 
overshoot the target mid-point 
for a time, and vice versa (while 
staying within the 1 to 3 percent 
target range). 
The MPC responds to both 
deviations above target and 
deviations below target. The 
MPC sets policy to stabilise 
employment near its maximum 
sustainable level, and to return 
inflation near to the target mid-
point, regardless of whether 
inflation is currently below or 
above 2 percent. This approach 
helps to anchor inflation 
expectations at the target mid-
point and promotes sustainable 
growth and employment by 
dampening fluctuations in the 
business cycle.
The MPC considers the balance 
of risks to its objectives that 
arise from uncertainty about 
the economic outlook and 
the transmission of its policy 
decisions. In general, the MPC 
will incorporate likely future 
developments into its central 
economic projections and set 
monetary policy in response. 
However, the MPC will also take 
into account risks to its central 
projections when setting policy. 
Under extreme uncertainty, the 
MPC may choose to publish 
scenarios instead of central 
projections to illustrate the 
range of possible situations and 
economic outcomes that could 
occur when circumstances are 
highly unpredictable.
The MPC has regard to the 
efficiency and soundness of 
the financial system, while 
recognising that in most 
instances prudential policy is 
better suited to leaning against 
risks to financial stability. The 
Reserve Bank takes prudential 
policy settings into account when 
setting monetary policy, and 
vice versa.
Implementation of strategy
The MPC applies the following 
process when formulating a 
policy decision:
1.	 Firstly, it assesses the outlook 
for the economy and the 
implications for its policy 
objectives. It then discusses 
risks to achieving its policy 
objectives.
2.	 Next, it considers which stance 
of monetary policy is most 
consistent with its monetary 
policy strategy given the 
current economic outlook, 
risks, and trade-offs.
3.	 Finally, the MPC decides how 
it will achieve the desired 
stance of monetary policy, 
including whether or not 
to adjust its policy settings 
at the current meeting and 
how it will communicate the 
policy outlook. The MPC has 
a suite of monetary tools to 
achieve its goals, and uses its 
Principles for Monetary Tools 
to make decisions on which 
tools to deploy.


REPORT AND SUPPORTING NOTES PUBLISHED AT:
www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/monetary-policy-statement
Subscribe online: www.rbnz.govt.nz/email-updates
Copyright © 2022 Reserve Bank of New Zealand
This report is published pursuant to section 
15C of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 1989. 
ISSN 1770-4829
rbnz.govt.nz
Cover image: Roy’s Peak. Photo: Paul Conway
Thank you to RBNZ staff for photography in this report.


The projection was finalised on 17 November 2022. The Official Cash Rate (OCR) 
projection incorporates an outlook for monetary policy that is consistent with the 
MPC’s monetary policy assessment, which was finalised on 23 November 2022. 
11/2022
Monetary Policy
STATEMENT
Contents
Statement of the MPC’s monetary policy strategy	
ii
1.	 Policy assessment	
2
	
Summary Record of meeting	
4
2.	 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook	
8
	
Box A – Economic contraction in New Zealand	
19
3.	 Global developments and outlook	
22
4.	 Special topics	
28
	
4.1	 The neutral interest rate	
30
	
4.2	 Developments in real wages	
33
5.	 Financial conditions	
37
6.	 Economic projections	
43
7.	 Appendices	
50
	
Appendix 1: Statistical tables	
51
	
Appendix 2: Chart pack	
56


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
2
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
CHAPTER 
01
Policy 
assessment
Castle Hill. Photo: Rebecca Williams


Chapter 1 Policy assessment
3
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
CHAPTER 1
Policy assessment
Tēnā koutou katoa, welcome all.
The Monetary Policy Committee today increased
the Official Cash Rate (OCR) from 3.5 percent to
4.25 percent. 
The Committee agreed that the OCR needs to 
reach a higher level, and sooner than previously 
indicated, to ensure inflation returns to within its 
target range over the medium term. Core consumer 
price inflation is too high, employment is beyond its 
maximum sustainable level, and near-term inflation 
expectations have risen. 
Global consumer price inflation is broad based and 
remains heightened. Food and energy prices, and 
persistent core inflation, have combined to create 
very high headline inflation in many countries. 
Central banks are tightening monetary conditions 
in an effort to slow spending and reduce inflation 
pressure. The ongoing slowdown in global growth 
will affect New Zealand through both financial and 
trade channels, and impact on people’s confidence 
due to uncertainty.  
In New Zealand, household spending remains 
resilient, especially considering the rise in debt 
servicing costs, the fall in house prices, and low 
levels of consumer confidence. Employment levels 
are high, and income growth and household savings 
are supporting spending. The rebound in tourism is 
also supporting domestic demand.  
The productive capacity of the economy is being 
constrained by broad-based labour shortages,
and wage pressures are evident. Aggregate 
demand continues to outstrip New Zealand’s 
capacity to supply goods and services, with a range 
of indicators continuing to signify broad-based 
inflation pressure. 
Committee members agreed that monetary 
conditions needed to continue to tighten further, 
so as to be confident there is sufficient restraint on 
spending to bring inflation back within its 1-3 percent 
per annum target range. The Committee remains 
resolute in achieving the Monetary Policy Remit.
Meitaki, thanks.
Adrian Orr
Governor 


4
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
SUMMARY 
Record of meeting 
The Monetary Policy 
Committee discussed 
developments 
affecting the outlook 
for inflation and 
employment in 
New Zealand. Inflation 
is currently too high 
and employment is 
beyond its maximum 
sustainable level. The 
Committee agreed it 
must continue to act 
decisively to return 
inflation to target and 
to fulfil its Remit.  
The Committee discussed 
recent international economic 
developments. In many countries, 
elevated food and energy prices 
are contributing to high headline 
inflation, with high core inflation 
reflecting more broad based 
inflationary pressures. Most 
central banks have continued 
to tighten monetary conditions 
and to signal further interest rate 
increases in coming months. 
Financial market volatility remains 
high as central banks act to 
stem the rise in inflation in an 
environment of slowing and 
uncertain economic growth. 
Expectations for global economic 
growth have declined further. 
For example, China’s economy 
is facing headwinds emanating 
from the property sector, while 
measures to contain the spread 
of COVID-19 continue to cause 
production bottlenecks. The 
United States and Europe are, to 
varying degrees, experiencing 
the effects of high inflation, 
tighter financial conditions 
and associated economic 
uncertainty. The Committee 
agreed that the anticipated global 
growth slowdown will affect 
New Zealand through trade and 
financial channels, and increased 
economic uncertainty impacting 
on people’s confidence. 
The Committee observed that 
consumer price inflation in 
New Zealand in the September 
quarter was significantly stronger 
than expected. Measures of 
core inflation continued to rise 
and price pressures broadened. 
Survey measures and other high 
frequency data suggest that 
pricing pressure will be sustained 
over coming months. In addition, 
shorter-term inflation expectations 
have increased as high inflation 
persists. 
The Committee agreed that to 
achieve its Remit objectives, 
actual and expected inflation 
need to decline substantially. 
Members highlighted that the 
longer actual inflation remains 
above the target band, the more 
likely it is that higher inflation 
expectations become embedded.
The Committee discussed the 
labour market at length, given 
its importance in the current 
economic environment. Labour 
shortages remain a significant 
constraint on economic activity. 
Recent data highlight a material 
increase in employment, 
enabled by a strong lift in labour 
force participation to a record 
level. Measures of labour force 
utilisation are near record levels 
and firms continue to report 
severe difficulties finding labour. 


5
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
High consumer price index 
(CPI) inflation and competition 
for workers are putting upward 
pressure on wages. The 
Committee observed that overall 
wage growth is not exceeding 
CPI inflation after accounting for 
productivity growth. While wage 
growth for people in the same 
job is generally not keeping pace 
with inflation, many people are 
changing jobs or increasing their 
hours worked to achieve real 
income growth. The Committee 
noted that public sector wage 
growth has lagged that in the 
private sector and agreed this lag 
represents an upside risk to wage 
pressure going forward. 
The Committee observed the 
stronger than expected rebound 
in tourism since New Zealand’s 
border reopened. Short-term 
visitor arrivals, international card 
spending data, and information 
gathered from recent business 
visits indicate that tourism 
spending will make a strong 
contribution to economic activity 
in coming months. However, 
some members noted that 
ongoing capacity constraints 
could, at some point, inhibit the 
tourism recovery and add to 
overall inflation pressures. In 
relation to New Zealand’s goods 
exports, members observed that 
a lower New Zealand dollar is 
currently mitigating the impact of 
recent declines in international 
commodity prices. 
The Committee discussed the 
recent Financial Stability Report 
and noted that the financial 
system remains resilient. In 
particular, members highlighted 
that recent stress tests 
demonstrate banks’ resilience. 
The Committee was especially 
interested in the resilience of 
household balance sheets to 
scenarios of higher interest 
rates, reduced labour demand, 
and declining house prices. The 
Committee noted that while 
national house price indices 
have declined to mid-2021 levels, 
they are still above estimates of 
sustainable house prices and 
above levels that prevailed pre-
COVID-19. 
Household spending remains 
robust, especially considering the 
rise in debt servicing costs, the fall 
in house prices, and low levels of 
consumer confidence. Members 
observed that the large stock of 
household savings, in addition 
to income growth, may provide 
a buffer to support consumption 
now and in the future. However, 
members also noted that the 
ownership of savings is likely 
concentrated, leaving the majority 
of households exposed to high 
inflation and interest rates. 
The Committee agreed that 
as debt servicing costs rise, 
spending decisions for many 
households will be increasingly 
constrained. These constraints 
would be most felt by recent 
home buyers with a high debt 
servicing commitment relative 
to their income. The Committee 
agreed that the impact of rising 
interest rates on households’ 
spending and saving decisions 
is an important channel for 
monetary policy. In addition to 
constraining spending, higher 
interest rates also encourage 
saving and paying down of debt. 
The Committee discussed 
domestic financial conditions, 
noting that wholesale interest 
rates have risen significantly since 
the August Statement, primarily 
due to higher-than-expected 
inflation in New Zealand and 
globally. Retail lending rates have 
also increased but remain lower 
than the levels wholesale rates 
might imply. Members observed 
that this reflects a combination 
of both the higher volume and 
the mix of current bank funding. 
Members noted that a gradual 
normalisation in bank funding 
conditions over the forecast 
period could result in sustained 
upward pressure on retail
lending rates.


6
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
The Committee considered the 
economic projections. Members 
noted that a reduction in 
aggregate demand is projected 
to cause GDP in the New Zealand 
economy to temporarily contract 
by around 1% from 2023. Members 
noted that this reduction in 
aggregate demand was necessary 
to return inflation to target over the 
forecast period. Members agreed 
that the exact timing and extent of 
negative GDP growth was difficult 
to predict, but historical evidence 
suggests risks are skewed toward 
a likely short period of contraction. 
Members also agreed that the 
sooner supply and demand were 
better matched in the economy, 
the lower the overall cost of 
reducing inflation. 
Members agreed that monetary 
policy primarily impacts on 
demand in the economy. 
However, any increase in the 
supply potential of the economy, 
such as through productivity 
improvements, would also assist 
in reducing inflation. However, 
members agreed that a significant 
increase in the economy’s 
capacity to supply goods and 
services could not be relied on to 
reduce inflation pressures over 
the forecast horizon. 
The Committee agreed that 
fiscal policy can also act to 
reduce demand in the economy. 
Members observed that in a 
higher inflation environment, 
a given level of government 
services would cost more to 
deliver. However, members noted 
that inflation would also lead to 
increased government revenues 
in nominal terms, potentially 
offsetting the rising cost of service 
delivery. On balance, members 
viewed the risks to inflation 
pressure from fiscal policies as 
skewed to the upside given the 
ongoing real demand for services. 
The Committee received an 
update on the status of the Large 
Scale Asset Purchase (LSAP) 
portfolio and noted that sales of 
bonds in the LSAP portfolio to 
New Zealand Debt Management 
began in July. Members 
observed that the New Zealand 
government bond market 
continues to function normally 
under the current pace of LSAP 
sales and agreed to continue to 
evaluate this on an ongoing basis. 
The Committee agreed that the 
level of settlement cash balances 
is not a source of unexpected 
inflationary pressure and noted 
that overnight wholesale interest 
rates remain aligned to the OCR. 
The Committee discussed the 
extent of additional monetary 
tightening required to achieve 
its Remit. Members agreed that 
the OCR needed to reach a level 
where the Committee could be 
confident it would reduce actual 
inflation to within the target 
range over the forecast horizon. 
Members agreed that this level 
had increased since the time 
of the August Statement due to 
the persistence of inflationary 
pressures resulting in a higher 
short-term nominal neutral 
interest rate. 


7
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
The Committee discussed the 
size of the OCR increase to 
be delivered at this meeting. 
Increases of 50, 75 and 100 
basis points were considered. 
The Committee discussed the 
relative merits of maintaining 
consistent increments in the OCR 
versus moving more quickly to 
reach the higher level of the OCR 
required. Members agreed that 
a larger increase in the OCR was 
appropriate, given the resilience 
of domestic spending, and the 
higher and more persistent actual 
and expected inflation outcomes. 
The Committee gave 
consideration to an increase in 
the OCR of 75 or 100 basis points. 
On the balance of risks, the 
Committee agreed that a 75 basis 
point increase was appropriate 
at this meeting. Members 
highlighted that the cumulative 
tightening of monetary conditions 
delivered to date continues to 
pass through to the economy 
via the lagged transmission to 
effective retail interest rates. 
On Wednesday 23 November,
the Committee reached a 
consensus to increase the OCR 
from 3.5% to 4.25%.
Attendees:
Reserve Bank members 
of MPC: 
Adrian Orr, Karen Silk,
Christian Hawkesby,
Paul Conway
External MPC members: 
Bob Buckle, Peter Harris,
Caroline Saunders
Treasury Observer: 
Dominick Stephens
MPC Secretary: 
David Craigie


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
8
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
Emerald Lakes, Tongariro National Park. Photo: Nele McHattie
CHAPTER 
02
Current
economic 
assessment
and monetary 
policy outlook


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
9
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
CHAPTER 2
Current economic assessment 
and monetary policy outlook
Key points
•	 The economic costs of high inflation 
mean that the best contribution monetary 
policy can make to promote the prosperity 
and wellbeing of New Zealanders is 
to ensure that inflation returns to being 
low and stable. Higher interest rates 
will slow demand in order to relieve 
pressure on available resources and 
enable the Monetary Policy Committee 
(MPC) to sustainably meet its inflation 
and employment objectives over the 
medium term. 
•	 Demand in the New Zealand economy 
has remained resilient to global and 
domestic challenges to date. Household 
spending has stayed elevated despite 
falling house prices, high consumer 
price inflation and increasing interest 
rates. Spending has been supported 
by high employment, increasing wages, 
and savings built up in recent years. 
Global prices for some of our key export 
commodities remain at high levels, 
although some have eased in recent 
months. The tourism sector has seen a 
strong recovery in international visitors, 
and will contribute significantly to 
economic growth over coming quarters.
•	 However, demand in the New Zealand 
economy is not being matched with 
enough supply. Business activity is being 
held back by severe labour shortages 
that are unlikely to ease in the near term. 
The unemployment rate remained very 
low at 3.3 percent in the September 
2022 quarter, despite a record share of 
the population participating in the labour 
force. Although there are signs that 
supply-chain bottlenecks are starting to 
loosen globally, they continue to delay the 
production and delivery of some goods 
in New Zealand and are adding to 
overall costs.
•	 The very tight labour market is 
contributing to high consumers price 
index (CPI) inflation. Wage growth is 
increasing, adding to business costs while 
also supporting household incomes and 
spending. Housing construction costs 
remain high and continue to increase. 
Annual non-tradables inflation was 6.6 
percent in the September 2022 quarter.
•	 Global developments have also been a 
large contributor to high headline inflation 
in New Zealand, with annual tradables 
inflation at 8.1 percent in the September 
2022 quarter. Increases in commodity 
and energy prices as a result of the 
Ukraine war have compounded existing 
inflationary pressures that emerged 
during the COVID-19 pandemic. Inflation is 
now at or near multi-decade highs in many 
parts of the world.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
10
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
•	 Central banks have responded to high 
inflation by raising interest rates. Higher 
interest rates globally have contributed 
to a weaker New Zealand dollar trade-
weighted index (TWI) exchange rate. 
All else equal, a lower exchange rate 
supports exporters’ incomes and makes 
the cost of imported goods and services 
more expensive, adding to inflation in 
New Zealand.
•	 CPI inflation remains too high. Due to 
the domestic and global factors outlined 
above, annual CPI inflation was 7.2 
percent in the September 2022 quarter – 
well above the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target 
band over the medium term. Measures 
of persistent or ‘core’ inflation have also 
increased further. Inflation expectations, 
as measured by the Reserve Bank’s 
Survey of Expectations, for one, two, 
five and ten years ahead all increased 
following the latest CPI data, after showing 
tentative signs of turning in the previous 
quarter. Increases have been larger at the 
one- and two-year horizons.
•	 The MPC has been tightening monetary 
policy since mid-2021. By increasing the 
official cash rate (OCR), the MPC is aiming 
to reduce demand in the economy so that 
it better aligns with the economy’s ability 
to sustainably supply goods and services. 
Higher interest rates are intended to 
reduce household and business spending 
with the usual lag of several quarters. 
•	 Higher interest rates globally are also 
intended to ease demand offshore as 
central banks try to lower inflation in their 
own economies. This will eventually lead 
to lower imported inflation. Lower global 
growth is expected to contribute to lower 
business investment and lower demand 
for our export goods over coming years. 
•	 Conditional on our central economic 
outlook, it is expected that the OCR will 
need to increase more than assumed in 
the August Statement. The higher outlook 
for interest rates reflects stronger overall 
inflationary pressures, including those 
resulting from the recent increases in 
inflation expectations. This more than 
offsets the medium-term effects of 
weaker global growth on the 
New Zealand economy.  
•	 Because the New Zealand economy 
is starting from a position of very high 
inflation and acute labour shortages, a 
period of economic contraction is likely as 
economic activity declines from elevated 
levels. The peak to trough decline in 
the level of gross domestic product 
(GDP) is expected to be about 1 percent. 
Employment may fall below its maximum 
sustainable level for a time.
•	 Trying to avoid an economic contraction 
by limiting any interest rate increases in 
the near term would likely lead to a longer 
period of high inflation. In turn, this would 
likely result in higher interest rates and 
a larger contraction eventually being 
required to bring inflation and employment 
back to a more sustainable path. 


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
11
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
Current economic assessment
Demand remains resilient
Demand in the New Zealand economy has 
shown continued resilience to global and 
domestic headwinds. GDP increased 1.7 
percent in the June 2022 quarter, and recent 
data suggest that growth has remained firm 
over the second half of this year (figure 2.1).
Household spending has remained elevated, 
despite high inflation, rising interest rates, 
falling house and other asset prices, and 
increased global uncertainty. Although private 
consumption declined 3.1 percent in real 
terms in the June 2022 quarter, this in large 
part reflected changing seasonal patterns 
since the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Real consumption per person remains above 
pre-pandemic levels (figure 2.2), and higher-
frequency spending data indicate that this 
strength has continued during the second half 
of this year. 
Recent household spending has been 
supported by rising incomes, due to the 
combination of high employment, increasing 
wages, and the Government’s Cost of 
Living Payment. Savings built up by the 
household sector over recent years – most 
notably during lockdowns when spending 
opportunities were limited – have also 
strengthened household balance sheets in 
aggregate (figure 2.3). 
Figure 2.2
Quarterly private consumption 
expenditure per working-age person
(real, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.3
Saving rate as a share of net disposable 
income and accumulated savings 
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.1
Quarterly production GDP
(real, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
12
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
Although New Zealand house prices have 
now declined by about 11 percent since 
the November 2021 peak, household 
wealth in the June 2022 quarter was still 
15 percent higher than at the end of 2020. 
The effect of the most recent reduction in 
household wealth on spending has also 
been outweighed by higher incomes so 
far. Although the outlook for residential 
construction has deteriorated due to falling 
house prices and higher interest rates, the 
number of new residential consents has yet 
to decline significantly, and forward order 
books for many construction firms remain full.
The recovery in international visitors 
has been faster than anticipated since 
New Zealand’s borders were reopened 
(figure 2.4). The increase in visitors from 
Australia has been particularly large. 
Businesses that Reserve Bank staff have 
spoken to during the past six weeks have 
said that forward bookings are also strong, 
with increasing bookings being made by 
traditionally higher-spending travellers from 
the US, Canada and the UK. The recovery 
in the tourism sector is expected to make a 
large contribution to economic growth over 
New Zealand’s upcoming summer.
World prices for our commodity exports 
remain at elevated levels, despite a 
weakening global outlook. High prices 
are supporting exporters’ incomes and 
businesses that serve farmers in particular. 
Labour shortages are 
constraining output
Although demand has been resilient to 
date, it is not being matched with sufficient 
supply. Acute labour shortages are limiting 
business services and output across many 
industries, regions and skill types (figure 2.5). 
The unemployment rate remained low at 
3.3 percent in the September 2022 quarter 
(figure 2.6), despite a record number 
of New Zealanders opting to participate in 
the labour force.
Figure 2.6
Unemployment rate
(seasonally adjusted, unemployed as share of the labour force)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.4
Air passenger arrivals and departures
(7-day moving average)
Source: New Zealand Customs Service.
Figure 2.5
QSBO factor most limiting production
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: NZIER, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
13
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
Figure 2.7
Maximum sustainable employment 
(MSE) indicator suite
Source: NZIER, Stats NZ, MBIE, ANZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The Reserve Bank uses a range of indicators when assessing MSE. It regarded 
the December 2019 quarter as a period when this selection of indicators pointed to 
employment being at MSE. However, current outturns should not be directly compared to 
the December 2019 quarter as the level of MSE changes over time. The vertical lines on 
the left-hand and right-hand sides represent the lowest and highest data outcomes since 
2000, respectively. An orange dot to the right of a black dot means that the latest data 
outcome was stronger than in the December 2019 quarter.
Figure 2.8
Wage and labour income compared to CPI
(index=100 in 2019Q4)
Source: Stats NZ.
Note: The adjusted LCI (all sectors, salary and ordinary wage rates) estimates wage 
growth for the same job, being done to the same quality and quantity. The unadjusted 
LCI is the same as the adjusted LCI but includes wage growth due to changes in what 
quality a job is done to. QES average hourly earnings (all industries, ordinary and 
overtime, seasonally adjusted) is an hourly labour income measure that reflects same-job 
wage growth but also income changes due to productivity changes, job promotions and 
job switching. QES gross earnings (all industries, seasonally adjusted) per QES filled job 
(all industries, seasonally adjusted) includes all these factors as well as changes in the 
number of hours worked. For more information, see table 4.1.
The low unemployment rate is one of many 
indicators that suggest employment is 
currently above its maximum sustainable 
level (figure 2.7). The unemployment rate 
is assumed to stay low in the near term, as 
employers are likely to hold on to existing 
workers and instead reduce vacancies in 
response to the weakening outlook for 
economic growth. 
Labour shortages are providing employees 
with a greater ability to demand higher 
wages in response to increased living costs. 
As discussed further in section 4.2, although 
same-job wage inflation has not kept pace 
with higher CPI inflation, broader measures 
of average hourly earnings and overall 
incomes have increased at a greater pace 
(figure 2.8). The tight labour market has seen 
workers being promoted, switching jobs or 
increasing their hours to boost household 
incomes, helping sustain continued growth in 
household spending.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
14
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
While labour is widely reported as the 
biggest factor holding businesses back from 
expanding production, materials shortages 
and supply-chain bottlenecks also continue 
to constrain production and increase overall 
costs. There have been some signs of 
supply-chain bottlenecks loosening in parts 
of the world, but this has yet to translate 
meaningfully into improved supply conditions 
or easing cost pressure for New Zealand 
firms (figure 2.9).
The tight labour market is 
contributing to inflation
Pressure on available resources and 
increasing wages are contributing to high 
domestic inflation. Annual non-tradables 
inflation – which captures price changes for 
goods and services that are relatively less 
exposed to international competition – was 
6.6 percent in the September 2022 quarter, 
up from 6.3 percent in the June quarter. 
High non-tradables inflation continues to be 
accounted for in large part by construction, 
rent and other housing-related price growth 
(figure 2.10). However, inflation has become 
even more broad-based as businesses have 
passed on higher wage and general costs 
into consumer prices.
Global developments are also 
adding to inflation in New Zealand
Global developments have also been a 
large contributor to high headline inflation in 
New Zealand. Annual tradables inflation was 
8.1 percent in the September 2022 quarter. 
While this was lower than the 8.7 percent 
inflation in the year to the June 2022 quarter, 
it is in stark contrast to the decade of low or 
falling tradables prices before the COVID-19 
pandemic and was higher than expected at 
the time of the August Statement. Increases 
in food, other commodity and energy prices 
as a result of the Ukraine war compounded 
existing inflationary pressure that had 
emerged during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Inflation is now at or near multi-decade highs 
in many parts of the world. 
Figure 2.11
Petrol and Dubai oil prices
Source: Datamine – Gaspy data, Stats NZ, Reuters, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Gaspy fuel prices are indexed to the petrol CPI level in the December 2019 
quarter.
Figure 2.9
Shipping costs for consumer goods
(share of import value for duty)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: These series are estimated by taking the value of consumer merchandise 
imports including freight and insurance costs (CIF) and subtracting the reported 
value for duty (VFD), which excludes these costs. They are expressed as a 
percentage of the VFD figure.
Figure 2.10
Contributions to non-tradables inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
15
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
Although global oil prices have eased from 
their March 2022 peak, they remain 14 
percent higher than they were at the start 
of 2022, contributing to high petrol prices 
(figure 2.11). Food and fertiliser prices remain 
high globally. In conjunction with domestic 
weather events and increasing wage costs, 
these global factors have contributed to 
high food price inflation in New Zealand 
(figure 2.12). More generally, high inflation 
globally has also led to sharp increases in 
world prices for the goods that New Zealand 
imports. 
Central banks around the world are 
responding to high inflationary pressures by 
increasing interest rates – rapidly in some 
cases. High interest rates and elevated 
geopolitical uncertainty, such as that related 
to the war in Ukraine, have seen the outlook 
for global growth continually revised lower 
over the past year. Interest rate increases 
in many of our trading partner economies, 
especially the US, have put downward 
pressure on the New Zealand dollar TWI 
exchange rate. Global political and economic 
events have also reduced financial market 
participants’ tolerance for risk since the 
August Statement, strengthening demand 
for US dollar denominated assets and 
contributing to a lower New Zealand 
dollar. A lower TWI supports exporters’ 
returns and makes New Zealand’s imports 
more expensive, adding to inflation in 
New Zealand.
Core and expected inflation have 
increased
Due to these global and domestic factors, 
annual CPI inflation was 7.2 percent in 
the September 2022 quarter (figure 2.13). 
This was a very slight decline from the 7.3 
percent annual inflation in the previous 
quarter, but remains well above the MPC’s 
1 to 3 percent target band over the medium 
term. Consistent with inflation becoming 
more broad-based (figure 2.14), measures 
of persistent or ‘core’ inflation have also 
increased further (figure 2.15). 
Figure 2.14
Distribution of price movements in CPI classes
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ.
Note: There are more than 100 CPI classes – capturing prices for specific types of 
goods and services – for which the bands show the distribution of annual percent 
changes. Shaded areas represent: grey – middle 50 percent of CPI classes; 
purple – middle 75 percent of CPI classes; light brown – middle 90 percent of CPI 
classes.
Figure 2.13
Contributions to CPI inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 2.12
Contributions to tradables inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
16
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
Expectations for inflation one, two, five 
and ten years ahead have also increased 
following the release of the latest CPI data 
(figure 2.16). Expectations for inflation one 
and two years ahead have increased by 0.2 
and 0.5 percentage points respectively. Five 
and ten year expectations have increased by 
0.1 percentage points. Increases in inflation 
expectations imply that the short-term 
nominal neutral interest rate has increased, 
meaning monetary policy has not been as 
contractionary as previously assumed (see 
section 4.1).
Higher core and expected inflation suggests 
that inflation will remain elevated in the near 
term and will only start to decline significantly 
in the second half of 2023. The announced 
reintroduction of fuel-related taxes in January 
2023 and the expiry of transport subsidies 
will result in a one-off boost to inflation in the 
March 2023 quarter.
Higher domestic interest rates will 
slow the pace of economic growth 
and reduce inflation
The MPC began tightening monetary policy 
in mid-2021 in response to increasing 
inflationary pressures and a tight labour 
market. Actual and expected OCR increases 
have seen the interest rates faced by 
households and businesses increase quickly 
over the past 12 months. Higher interest rates 
– in conjunction with low population growth, 
strong building activity and regulatory 
changes – have already contributed to a 
decline in house prices from their November 
2021 peak. Although the speed and extent of 
the decline is highly uncertain, house prices 
are assumed to continue to fall towards more 
sustainable levels over the coming year 
(figure 2.17). The central projection assumes 
that house prices will decline by 20 percent 
in total from the November 2021 peak.
Figure 2.15
Headline and core inflation measures
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.16
Inflation expectations
(annual, years ahead)
Source: RBNZ Survey of Expectations (Business).
Figure 2.17
House prices
(nominal)
Source: CoreLogic, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
17
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
Higher interest rates, elevated construction 
costs and lower house prices are also 
expected to result in a decline in residential 
building from next year. Residential 
investment is assumed to remain elevated in 
the near term as builders work through the 
large pipeline of consented projects, before 
declining significantly as a share of the 
economy over the medium term (figure 2.18).
Lower house prices and higher interest rates 
are assumed to result in a sustained slowing 
in household spending, as households feel 
less wealthy and a greater portion of their 
income is directed towards servicing debt. 
Although household spending is currently 
supported by robust income growth, 
employment growth is expected to wane 
as higher interest rates contribute to lower 
overall spending and reduce businesses’ 
demand for workers. Consumption per capita 
is assumed to decline over coming years 
(figure 2.2).
The weaker global outlook will 
lower economic growth and 
inflation in New Zealand over 
coming years
Higher interest rates globally are intended to 
ease demand as central banks try to lower 
inflation in their own economies. While higher 
interest rates abroad are currently placing 
downward pressure on the New Zealand 
dollar exchange rate and boosting prices for 
our imports, slowing global growth should 
eventually lead to lower imported inflation 
over the medium term. Lower global demand 
and elevated uncertainty are expected to 
contribute to both lower business investment 
and demand for our export goods over 
coming years (figures 2.19 and 2.20).
Figure 2.18
Residential investment
(real, share of potential GDP, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.20
Exports of goods
(real, share of potential GDP, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.19
Business investment
(real, share of potential GDP, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
18
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
Annual inflation will return to
2 percent over the medium term
Non-tradables and tradables inflation are 
expected to ease over the medium term, 
following some near-term strength. Lower 
demand will result in less pressure on 
the available supply of labour and goods, 
which means less pressure on prices and 
lower domestic inflation. Higher interest 
rates globally are assumed to lead to a 
simultaneous slowing of growth in our trading 
partner economies, which will result in easing 
imported inflationary pressures and demand 
for New Zealand’s goods exports. Annual CPI 
inflation is assumed to return to within the 1 
to 3 percent target band in the second half 
of 2024, and to 2 percent by the end of the 
projection (figure 2.21). 
Because New Zealand is starting from a 
position of very high inflation and acute 
labour shortages, an economic contraction
is likely. This is discussed further in Box A.
Figure 2.21
CPI inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


19
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
Box A
Economic contraction
in New Zealand
The New Zealand economy – 
like many economies around 
the world – is expected to enter 
recession in 2023. This economic 
contraction will, in part, be a 
result of higher interest rates, as 
the Reserve Bank acts to reduce 
inflation and return employment 
to a more sustainable level. It will 
therefore differ from contractions 
experienced in New Zealand 
in recent decades when poor 
economic outlooks, often related 
to international conditions such as 
those during the global financial 
crisis, were cushioned by lower 
interest rates. 
Government spending and 
monetary policy measures around 
the world supported households 
and businesses from the onset of 
the COVID-19 pandemic. When 
COVID-19 restrictions were first 
eased globally, the combination 
of strong pent-up demand, labour 
shortages and bottlenecks in 
production and trade led to 
higher inflation. Just as it was 
becoming increasingly clear that 
inflation was going to remain 
higher for longer than expected, 
the Russian invasion of Ukraine 
in February 2022 led to higher 
energy and food prices. Annual 
inflation has now reached 30-year 
highs in many economies around 
the world.
In New Zealand, annual inflation 
was 7.2 percent in the September 
2022 quarter. High and variable 
inflation makes it harder for 
households and businesses to 
plan and to know where to best 
direct any investment. Unexpected 
changes in inflation also arbitrarily 
affect relative outcomes for savers 
and borrowers. The higher cost 
of living is particularly challenging 
for people earning low or fixed 
incomes, as it erodes purchasing 
power and is effectively a pay cut. 
Given the economic costs of high 
inflation, the best contribution 
that monetary policy can make 
to promote the wellbeing of 
New Zealanders and support 
maximum sustainable employment 
(MSE) is to ensure inflation returns 
to being low and stable. 
MSE is unobservable and 
cannot be represented by a 
single measure, such as the 
unemployment rate, but it 
captures an environment where 
the balance of supply and demand 
in the labour market is not causing 
consumer prices and wages to 
move in an unsustainable way. 
If wages are increasing faster 
than productivity growth, this 
can lead to higher and more 
persistent inflation as businesses 
pass on these costs. This can 
then lead to even higher wages 
as workers seek compensation 
for an even higher cost of living. 
When labour demand far outstrips 
labour supply, as is the case 
in New Zealand currently, the 
economy bears higher costs. 
These include rising inflation
and ongoing disruptions.
To return inflation to the target 
range and employment to a 
more sustainable level, the MPC 
needs to increase interest rates 
so overall spending declines 
from recent high levels. This will 
slow demand for output and for 
workers. In turn, this will reduce 
pressure on the supply capacity 
of the economy, leading to less 
pressure on costs, prices and 
inflation. The easing in global 
growth from higher interest rates 
overseas will also contribute 
to lower domestic activity and 
inflation, by slowing demand 
for our exports and reducing 
the global prices of our imports 
respectively.
Because the New Zealand 
economy is starting from a 
position of very high inflation 
and acute labour shortages, an 
economic contraction is likely. 
Any fiscal or monetary policy 
actions that try to offset this with 
further stimulus will ultimately 
lead to a longer period of high 
inflation, with higher interest 
rates subsequently needed to 
control inflation and return the 
economy to a more sustainable 
path. The peak to trough decline 
in the level of GDP is expected 
to be about 1 percent. In the 
central projection, this recession 
is assumed to be spread over 
several quarters, although there 
is uncertainty about the timing.  


20
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
A consequence of slowing 
economic growth is that the 
unemployment rate is likely to 
increase. It is possible that labour 
market conditions fall below their 
maximum sustainable level for 
a time. Keeping unemployment 
near current levels without 
causing unsustainable wage 
pressures would require 
structural changes in the labour 
market that are beyond the 
control of the Reserve Bank.
Higher interest rates will 
reduce aggregate demand and 
consequently pressure on labour 
and other production resources, 
such as materials and machinery. 
Another way to relieve this 
pressure would be for the supply 
capacity of the economy to grow 
– for example, through increased 
productivity here or abroad. 
If this were to occur, it would 
mean that a smaller economic 
contraction would be consistent 
with lower inflation and maximum 
sustainable employment. 
However, it is highly unlikely that 
such an adjustment will occur 
soon enough to address current 
inflationary pressures. 


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
21
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
Monetary policy outlook
Inflation is starting from a higher level than 
assumed in the August Statement, and 
inflationary pressures are also assumed to 
be higher over the medium term. Continued 
labour shortages, recent increases in inflation 
expectations and a stronger recovery 
in international tourism are expected to 
underpin momentum in domestic inflation. 
Inflationary pressures are also stronger 
globally. Higher global interest rates in 
response to these inflationary pressures 
are placing downward pressure on 
New Zealand’s exchange rate, which – all 
else equal – results in a higher near-term 
outlook for imported inflation.
The magnitude, speed, and widespread 
nature of interest rate increases globally 
have seen the outlook for global growth 
deteriorate, and increased the risk that 
this slowdown will be more severe than 
intended. However, the assumed impacts 
of weaker global activity are more than 
offset by the stronger inflation outlook within 
New Zealand. Conditional upon our central 
economic outlook, the OCR is projected 
to increase by more than assumed at the 
time of the August Statement (figure 2.22). 
As outlined in Box A, higher interest rates 
will ensure that demand slows in order to 
relieve pressure on available resources 
and enable the MPC to meet its inflation 
and employment objectives. Ensuring that 
inflation returns to being low and stable is 
the best contribution monetary policy can 
make to long-term economic wellbeing and 
maximum sustainable employment. 
Figure 2.22
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 3 Global developments and outlook
22
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
Waiheke Island. Photo: Julia Ratcliffe
CHAPTER 
03
Global 
developments 
and outlook


Chapter 3 Global developments and outlook
23
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
CHAPTER 3
Global developments
and outlook
Weakening economic activity 
indicators foreshadow a decline
in global growth 
The outlook for global growth has continued 
to weaken since the August Statement. This 
weaker outlook reflects spillovers from the 
Ukraine war, tighter financial conditions, 
low real income growth, and a slowdown in 
housing activity across the globe. 
GDP growth has slowed in most of 
New Zealand’s major trading partners over 
2022. Economic activity in the US and 
Europe has expanded only slightly since 
the end of 2021, while stringent COVID-19 
controls have dampened growth significantly 
in China. In contrast, GDP growth in Australia 
has remained relatively firm at 3.6 percent on 
an annual basis. 
Timely indicators of economic growth – such 
as Purchasing Managers Indices (PMI), a 
measure of manufacturing activity – have 
declined through 2022. Aggregate advanced 
economy manufacturing PMIs are just within 
expansionary levels, while services PMIs 
have been contractionary for several months 
(figure 3.1). Global consumer confidence 
measures have remained at low levels since 
early 2022. 
Global household spending growth has 
moderated, but has nonetheless remained at 
a relatively high level. Savings built up during 
the COVID-19 pandemic have supported 
household spending. Labour markets in 
advanced economies remain very strong, 
with unemployment rates in most of our 
key trading partners close to record low 
levels (figure 3.2). This has helped underpin 
significant growth in nominal wages in many 
key trading partner economies.
Figure 3.1
Advanced economy PMI
Source: Haver Analytics.
Note: Index values above 50 are expansionary while below 50 are contractionary.
Figure 3.2
Key trading partner unemployment rate forecasts
Source: Bloomberg, Consensus Economics.
Note: New Zealand forecasts are from Consensus Economics for comparability.


Chapter 3 Global developments and outlook
24
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
The global growth slowdown
is expected to be broad based
and persistent 
Global growth forecasts have continued 
to be revised lower. Annual growth in 
New Zealand’s trading partners as a whole is 
forecast to slow to 2.4 percent in 2022 and 
2.0 percent in 2023, well below the average 
growth rate of 3.1 percent since 2000 (figure 
3.3). Uncertainty around these estimates is 
high, with risks skewed to the downside. 
China’s economy is facing significant 
headwinds, with continued stringent 
COVID-19 restrictions and weakness in 
the property sector dampening economic 
confidence and activity. Annual GDP growth 
in China declined to 3.9 percent in the 
September quarter of 2022, and growth is 
expected to remain historically low through 
to at least the end of 2023. 
Growth in the euro area and the US is 
expected to fall to around zero percent in 
2023. Within this average outlook, some 
forecasters are expecting recessions in 
these economies. High energy prices in 
Europe, due to a severe reduction in natural 
gas supplies from Russia, are dampening 
economic activity significantly. Higher interest 
rates are expected to reduce spending in 
both the euro area and the US. The extent to 
which economic activity declines will depend 
partly on household spending, which has 
been relatively resilient, as savings built up 
during COVID-19 lockdowns are run down. 
Growth expectations are higher in Australia, 
where strong household consumption and 
continued export growth have supported 
economic activity. 
Inflationary pressures have 
continued to increase since 
August
Global inflationary pressures remain broad 
based and are higher than expected at the 
time of the August Statement. While headline 
inflation measures have declined slightly in 
the US and Canada due to lower energy and 
transport inflation, they remain well above 
central bank targets (table 3.1). Core inflation 
measures are proving particularly resilient. 
Core and headline inflation measures remain 
elevated in most countries as a result of 
common international factors and similar 
patterns in inflation subcomponents like food, 
transport, and housing. However, there are 
substantial differences in inflation between 
economies, reflecting both local economic 
conditions and regional factors such as 
exposure to the war in Ukraine (table 3.2).
Figure 3.3
Annual key trading partner GDP 
growth rate forecasts
Source: Haver Analytics, Consensus Economics, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Growth rate forecasts are based on Consensus Economics estimates, except for 
New Zealand’s, which is based on our current projection.


Chapter 3 Global developments and outlook
25
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
Table 3.1
Central bank comparison
Monetary policy 
objectives
Annual headline 
consumer price 
inflation (%)
Unemployment 
rate (%)
Average 
projected output 
gap in 2023 (%)
New Zealand 
1–3% inflation target; 
employment objective
7.2
3.3
1.0
Australia 
2–3% inflation target; 
employment objective
7.3
3.4
0.6
United States 
Inflation averages 2% over 
time; employment objective
7.7
3.7
-0.8
United Kingdom 
2% inflation target
11.1
3.6
-1.0
Euro area
2% inflation target
10.6
6.6
-0.8
Source: Respective central banks and official statistical agencies, International Monetary Fund (IMF), Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: Output gap projections are based on IMF estimates, except for New Zealand’s, which is based on our current projection. 
All other data reflect the respective latest outturns.
Table 3.2
Annual headline CPI inflation and subcomponents in 2022
Australia 
September 
(%) 
Euro area 
October
(%) 
NZ 
September 
(%) 
UK
October
(%) 
US 
October
(%) 
Headline CPI
7.3 
10.6 
7.2 
11.1 
7.7 
Inflation ex. food & energy
6.3 
5.0 
6.2 
5.8 
6.3
Food
9.0 
13.1 
8.0 
16.2 
10.9 
Services
4.1 
4.3 
5.1 
6.3 
6.7
Sources: Stats NZ, Australian Bureau of Statistics, Bureau of Labor Statistics, European Statistical Office, Haver Analytics, UK Office for National Statistics.
Note: All data is monthly except for the New Zealand CPI where only quarterly data is available.


Chapter 3 Global developments and outlook
26
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
Annual headline inflation in the US remained 
elevated at 7.7 percent in October 2022 
(figure 3.4). This reflected global inflationary 
pressures from food, energy and transport, as 
well as broader price pressures from supply-
chain disruptions and stronger consumer 
demand. Core inflation pressures from more 
persistent inflation subcomponents such as 
shelter and services have surprised to the 
upside for many months (figure 3.5).
The latest US data showed some signs 
of price pressures moderating, with core 
inflation decreasing from 6.6 percent in 
September to 6.3 percent in October. 
Despite this monthly decline, there are still 
upside risks from factors such as stronger 
wage growth, supply-chain disruptions, or 
continued strength in shelter inflation. 
Large increases in food and consumer 
energy prices have contributed to relatively 
higher inflation in Europe, reflecting the 
area’s proximity to the war in Ukraine. Annual 
inflation rose in October 2022, to 10.6 
percent in the Euro area, and 11.1 percent 
in the United Kingdom.  Both headline and 
core inflation measures have continued to 
increase in Australia. 
 
Figure 3.4
Annual headline inflation in key trading partners
Source: Haver Analytics.
Figure 3.5
Annual inflation excluding food and energy 
in key trading partners
Source: Haver Analytics, Organization for Economic Cooperation & Development (OECD).


Chapter 3 Global developments and outlook
27
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
Central banks have increased 
interest rates significantly 
Most central banks have increased policy 
rates substantially in recent months, and 
indicated a firm commitment to maintaining 
tight conditions until inflationary pressures 
have eased. With the exception of Japan, 
major advanced economy central banks 
have each increased policy rates by a 
cumulative amount of between 200 and 
375 basis points through 2022. Financial 
markets are also pricing in further policy rate 
increases over coming months (figure 3.6). 
Market pricing for the peak in central bank 
policy rates during this tightening cycle has 
increased throughout 2022 in response to 
persistent inflationary pressure. However, 
this pricing has moderated in recent weeks, 
as some central banks have communicated 
an intent to slow the pace of monetary 
tightening. Reasons for a potentially slower 
pace of tightening include risks from the 
lagged impact, and the recent synchronised 
nature, of global monetary policy tightening. 
However, current market pricing for short-
term interest rate increases still represents
a historically fast pace. 
Financial market volatility
has increased 
Financial markets have experienced 
increases in volatility over recent months as a 
result of greater macroeconomic uncertainty, 
risk aversion, and lower market liquidity. 
Measures of financial market volatility for 
bond and foreign exchange markets are 
above the monthly peak levels reached in 
March 2020 (figure 3.7). 
Foreign exchange markets have been 
particularly volatile, as investors have sought 
‘safe haven’ currencies such as the US dollar 
in response to rises in macroeconomic 
uncertainty. A faster pace of US monetary 
policy tightening has also contributed to 
recent US dollar strength. This is because 
higher US interest rates make US dollar 
investments relatively more attractive. 
Global sovereign bond markets have also 
been affected by shifting monetary policy 
expectations. US longer-term bond yields 
have moved significantly higher since 
August, as inflation data has persistently 
printed above expectations. However, 
US yields have declined slightly through 
November, following signs of weaker 
inflationary pressures in the latest US
CPI data. 
Figure 3.7
Volatility indices
(monthly averages)
Source: Bloomberg.
Figure 3.6
Central bank policy interest rates and 
market pricing for future policy rate levels
(as at 17 Nov 2022)
Source: Bloomberg.


Chapter 4 Special topics
28
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
Aoraki. Photo: Roanna McLeod
CHAPTER 
04
Special topics


Chapter 4 Special topics
29
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
CHAPTER 4 
Special topics 
Before each Statement, the MPC is provided with analysis 
of some topical issues.
Topics for the November Statement included:
1.	 The neutral interest rate
2.	 Developments in real wages
Special topics in the past 12 months
Topic
Date/publication
Global inflation developments 
MPS August 2022 (Chapter 3)
Assessing recent inflation surprises
MPS August 2022 (Chapter 3)
Business conditions
MPS August 2022 (Chapter 3)
Global inflation developments
MPS May 2022 (Chapter 4)
The outlook for household spending, house prices, 
and construction
MPS May 2022 (Chapter 4)
International developments and risks
MPS February 2022 (Chapter 4)
Inflation expectations
MPS February 2022 (Chapter 4)
Transmission of global developments to 
New Zealand’s economy
MPS November 2021 (Chapter 4)
Outlook for New Zealand’s productive capacity
MPS November 2021 (Chapter 4)
Climate change and inflation
MPS November 2021 (Chapter 4)


Chapter 4 Special topics
30
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
The neutral interest rate
1	
 Productivity Commission | Productivity by the numbers (Productivity Commission, 2021).
The neutral interest rate is the level at which 
a country’s policy rate is neither expansionary 
nor contractionary. It is conceptually the rate 
that, over time, would be consistent with no 
over- or under-utilisation of resources and 
stable inflation. The neutral interest rate is 
unobservable, but estimates of the neutral 
rate are useful for determining the stance of 
monetary policy.
The global economy heavily 
influences the neutral interest
rate in New Zealand
In a small open economy like New Zealand’s, 
both domestic and international 
developments influence the neutral interest 
rate. Estimates of global neutral interest 
rates have been declining since the 1980s. 
They have been driven by a variety of 
factors including demographic change, 
lower productivity growth, and changes in 
consumers’, businesses’, and governments’ 
attitudes towards savings and investment.
New Zealand-specific factors can cause 
the neutral OCR to deviate from global 
neutral interest rates. For example, 
New Zealand’s productivity growth has 
tended to be lower than those of many other 
advanced economies. This in part reflects 
an increasing proportion of low-productivity 
industries, and a relatively slow adoption 
of global technological developments into 
domestic production.1 The neutral OCR can 
also deviate from global rates due to risk 
premiums placed on New Zealand assets or 
because of New Zealand-specific savings 
and investment preferences.
The Reserve Bank uses a suite of indicators 
that combines several models and 
approaches to assess the neutral interest 
rate. Some of the indicators are based on 
expectations of interest rates over the long 
run, or other long-run economic factors 
that can influence the neutral interest rate. 
These indicators use expectations from 
professional forecasters, as well as financial 
market participants as implied by the prices 
of financial instruments. Other indicators 
use information about recent economic 
outcomes and consider what they imply 
about the level of monetary stimulus and the 
neutral interest rate. 
The neutral OCR can be expressed in either 
real – inflation-adjusted – or nominal terms. 
In the past, we have focused on providing 
estimates of the long-run nominal neutral 
OCR. This method was appropriate when 
inflation expectations were low and stable, 
and the economy was close to equilibrium. 
In the current economic environment, where 
inflation expectations vary considerably 
across different time horizons, we find it more 
helpful to consider real and nominal neutral 
interest rates separately.
1


Chapter 4 Special topics
31
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
Figure 4.1
Real neutral interest rate indicator 
suite average and range
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: Our estimates for the neutral OCR in figures 4.1 to 4.4 end in 2022Q3 due to data 
availability.
Our average estimate of the
real neutral OCR remains 
around 0 percent
In New Zealand, as in most economies, 
estimates of the real neutral interest rate 
have been trending downwards over several 
decades. In recent years, our indicator suite 
suggests that the real neutral interest rate 
has stabilised at low levels. Our current 
average estimate for the real neutral OCR 
is around 0 percent (figure 4.1). However, 
the wide range between the maximum 
and minimum values of our estimates 
demonstrates that there is significant 
uncertainty about the level of neutral interest 
rates, particularly since the beginning of the 
COVID-19 pandemic.
The nominal neutral OCR takes 
different values over different 
time horizons
The nominal neutral OCR consists of the 
real neutral OCR adjusted to account for 
domestic inflation expectations. Because 
inflation expectations differ across time 
horizons, the nominal neutral rate will take 
on different values depending on the time 
horizon to which it is applied.
The long-run nominal neutral interest rate 
consists of the real neutral interest rate 
adjusted by our 2 percent inflation target 
midpoint. It is the interest rate that would 
be neither expansionary nor contractionary 
when the economy is at equilibrium, with a 
zero output gap, employment at its maximum 
sustainable level, and inflation expectations 
anchored at our target midpoint. Our 
indicators suggest that the long-run nominal 
neutral rate has remained stable at around
2 percent (figure 4.2). However, our estimates 
suggest that this rate may be starting to 
increase slowly.
The short-run nominal neutral interest rate 
is the level of the OCR that would be neither 
contractionary nor stimulatory if set today. 
It consists of the real neutral interest rate, 
inflated by measures of inflation expectations 
that are most relevant to decision-making 
today. As an approximation, we use an 
average of several measures of inflation 
expectations over one- and two-year 
horizons. Our short-run estimates have 
increased relatively sharply compared to our 
long-run estimates, reflecting relatively rapid 
increases in short-run inflation expectations. 
The short-run nominal neutral interest rate is 
currently considerably higher than 2 percent 
(figure 4.3).


Chapter 4 Special topics
32
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
Between these two concepts is the forecast 
horizon nominal neutral OCR, which 
considers inflation expectations across the 
two- to five-year year horizon. This is the 
level the OCR should tend towards in order 
to stabilise inflation as the output gap closes. 
It is not always equal to the end-point of 
the OCR in our published projections. This 
is because large shocks may take more 
than three years to fully work through the 
economy, and we do not always forecast a 
zero output gap at the end of the projection. 
The forecast horizon neutral OCR sits 
somewhere between the short-run and long-
run nominal neutral interest rate estimates 
(figure 4.4).
Estimates of the neutral OCR 
are very uncertain
There is always considerable uncertainty 
about the level of the neutral interest rate. 
This is because it is a concept that cannot 
be directly measured and is only imperfectly 
estimated. COVID-19 and the war in Ukraine 
have caused large structural shifts in both 
the global and the New Zealand economy, 
which further increase uncertainty. Over time 
we will continue to incrementally improve 
our estimates of the neutral interest rate 
and develop our understanding of recent 
structural shifts in the economy.
Figure 4.2
Long-run nominal neutral interest rate 
indicator suite average and range
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Figure 4.3
Short-run nominal neutral interest rate 
indicator suite average and range
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Figure 4.4
Forecast horizon nominal neutral interest 
rate indicator suite average and range
Source: RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 4 Special topics
33
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
Developments in real wages
A tight labour market and increasing costs 
of living have contributed to rising nominal 
wages and incomes. There are a range of 
measures for nominal wage and income 
growth. Different measures are useful for 
informing us about changing conditions in 
different aspects of the labour market. These 
measures suggest that some workers may 
have been able to take advantage of the tight 
labour market and earn more by obtaining 
promotions, changing jobs or working more 
hours. As a result, broader wage measures 
generally show that earnings have roughly 
kept pace with CPI inflation recently.
What can different wage and 
income measures tell us? 
Four key measures of wages and income 
are the Quarterly Employment Survey (QES) 
gross earnings per filled job, QES average 
hourly earnings, and the unadjusted and 
adjusted Labour Cost Index (LCI). These 
measures are described in a simple example 
in table 4.1.
2
Table 4.1
Wage and income measures example
Example
Measure
Edmund is a barista. He gets a pay rise of
6 percent.
This 6 percent is captured in the unadjusted LCI. 
This is a useful measure of wage changes for a 
fixed labour market composition.
Edmund’s boss is asked by Stats NZ to divide
this 6 percent pay rise on the basis of better 
quality of work (2 percent) and adjustment due
to higher costs of living or meeting market rates
(4 percent).
The 4 percent is captured in the adjusted LCI, 
deliberately excluding changes due to the quality 
of work. This is the narrowest wage inflation 
indicator and is a useful measure of the cost of a 
‘unit’ of labour to a business.
Edmund’s friend Kate tells him about the good 
wages she is earning in the construction industry 
and that she can get him a job earning 10 percent 
more than he does now. Edmund changes jobs. 
This does not directly affect the above LCI 
measures, but affects the QES average hourly 
earnings measure. This captures changes in 
labour market composition (e.g. people moving 
to higher-paid industries) and people being 
promoted. It is a useful measure of labour market 
tightness and consumer spending potential.
In his new job, Edmund gets asked to work on 
weekends occasionally. So on top of earning 
10 percent more per hour, he also increases his 
income by working longer hours.  
This affects the QES gross earnings per filled 
job measure. In addition to the average hourly 
earnings discussed above, this captures changes 
in the number of hours people work. When the 
labour market is very tight, employers might 
encourage existing staff to work longer hours 
to cover labour shortages. Alternatively, it can 
be seen during periods of cost-of-living shocks 
where longer hours are worked by employees to 
maintain a given level of consumption. Being the 
broadest labour income measure, this is useful as 
an indicator of household spending potential.
 Note: See Stats NZ for technical definitions of QES and LCI measures. The unadjusted LCI measure is an experimental series. 


Chapter 4 Special topics
34
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
How have these different 
measures developed over 
the past few years?
Different wage measures help to inform us 
about different pressure points in the labour 
market. In the past two years, all four wage 
measures have increased significantly in 
nominal terms (figure 4.5). However, the 
two QES measures have increased much 
more than the LCI measures. This suggests 
that employees have increasingly used 
their strong positions in a very competitive 
labour market to increase their pay. They 
have gained promotions or switched jobs 
to better-paid positions and industries to 
receive higher starting wages. 
From an inflation perspective, the increase in 
firms’ unit labour cost – as measured by the 
adjusted LCI – has been relatively moderate 
compared to the overall income growth of 
some workers as measured by earnings 
per filled job. Some of this overall income 
growth likely represents people’s increasing 
productivity from taking on higher-skilled jobs 
via promotion or job switching, and is not 
necessarily inflationary.  
Real wages assess the quantity of goods 
and services that individuals’ average wage 
incomes can purchase. Real wages rise or fall 
depending on whether the prices of goods 
and services are growing more quickly than 
the nominal wages used to pay for them. This 
determines whether an individual can afford to 
purchase the same amounts of these goods 
and services with their wages over time. 
Across the four wage measures, adjusted 
and unadjusted LCI wages have been 
declining in real terms since mid-2021. 
However, the broader QES measures of 
wage and income growth have recently 
kept pace with CPI inflation (figure 4.6). This 
implies that a large part of the high wage 
growth some employees have experienced 
over this period has been needed to maintain 
a similar level of consumption. Some workers 
have been working longer hours to maintain 
their real incomes and standard of living.
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 4.5
Nominal wage and income growth
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Deflated by headline CPI.
Figure 4.6
Real wage and income growth
(annual)


Chapter 4 Special topics
35
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
What factors drive wage growth?
Nominal wage pressures can build up 
when demand for labour is high and during 
periods of sustained high inflation. Strong 
labour demand encourages wage growth 
as employers compete for a limited pool of 
available workers, especially when recruiting 
offshore labour is difficult or expensive, 
such as when New Zealand’s borders were 
closed during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
When unemployment is low and demand 
for workers is high it is easier for workers to 
switch jobs. This in turn incentivises firms 
to raise wages to retain existing staff. High 
CPI inflation puts pressure on employers to 
compensate employees for the rising cost 
of living, especially when there is strong 
competition for workers that makes it easier 
to move jobs.
A tight labour market often coincides with 
higher CPI inflation because employers pass 
higher wage costs into prices. We have used 
a simple wage Phillips curve model (figure 
4.7) to help separate wage growth into the 
contributions from:  
•	 labour market tightness;
•	 past, current and expected CPI inflation; 
and
•	 past wage inflation.
These factors can either work together or 
be offsetting forces on wage growth. A tight 
labour market and high CPI inflation have 
outweighed the economic uncertainties 
from COVID-19 and wage inflation has 
increased. In addition, wage growth tends to 
be persistent, meaning that recent high wage 
inflation is contributing more to current wage 
inflation.
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Bars show the estimated contribution of each factor to wage inflation relative to its 
historical average. Labour market tightness is measured by the unemployment rate gap 
and is lagged one quarter. Expected CPI inflation is based on businesses’ expectations of 
CPI inflation two years ahead, as measured in the Reserve Bank’s Survey of Expectations.
Figure 4.7
Modelled contributions to nominal 
adjusted LCI wage inflation
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)


Chapter 4 Special topics
36
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
How do we expect wages to 
develop over the medium term?
A rise in nominal wage growth typically 
lags behind an increase in inflation. In most 
industries, wages are reviewed less often 
than prices and people have to become 
aware of rising inflation before negotiating 
higher pay to compensate for it. This lag 
means that real wages tend to first fall when 
inflation increases sharply, then catch up 
later as employees regain spending power 
through nominal wage increases.
Slower-moving measures of nominal 
wages like the LCI normally take longer to 
reflect such a catch-up. This is because 
workers tend to achieve higher pay through 
promotions or changing jobs first. For this 
reason broader measures like the QES hourly 
earnings have returned to positive real wage 
growth much more quickly in the current 
period of higher CPI inflation.
We assume that it will take until late 2023 for 
annual nominal adjusted LCI wage inflation 
to peak at around 5.7 percent. In real terms, 
we expect positive annual wage growth as 
measured by the adjusted LCI by the end of 
2023 (figure 4.8).  
As inflation and economic growth slow in 
line with rising interest rates, demand for 
labour will ease in the coming years. Higher 
net migration will also provide some relief to 
the current labour shortages. On this basis, 
we expect that nominal wage growth will 
eventually return to long-run average levels 
towards the end of the projection horizon.
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 4.8
Nominal and real adjusted LCI wage inflation
(annual)


Chapter 4 Special topics
37
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
CHAPTER 
05
Financial 
conditions
Godley Head. Photo: Katie Davis


Chapter 5 Financial conditions
38
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
CHAPTER 5
Financial conditions
A key way in which monetary policy affects economic activity 
is by influencing financial conditions in New Zealand. These 
conditions include the interest rates at which households and 
businesses save and borrow, the exchange rate, and other 
factors such as credit availability. 
Financial conditions have continued to tighten since the August Statement, 
although retail rates have increased at a slower pace than wholesale rates. 
Domestic wholesale interest rates have risen 
significantly since the August Statement. 
Stronger global and domestic inflation data 
have driven market participants’ expectations 
for the OCR over the next 12 months higher 
(figure 5.1). The two-year swap rate has 
increased by around 100 basis points since 
August (figure 5.2). While medium- and 
long-term interest rates have also risen, this 
increase has been smaller than for short-
term interest rates. The 10-year swap rate is 
now 50 basis points lower than the two-year 
swap rate. This implies that although market 
participants expect higher interest rates in 
the near term, they expect interest rates to 
fall over the medium to long term. 
Domestic financial market volatility remains 
elevated, with larger-than-normal daily 
interest rate changes over recent months 
(figure 5.3). Offshore markets have also been 
volatile, and developments in these markets 
continue to play a key role in driving changes 
in New Zealand interest rates. However, a 
number of domestic developments have also 
contributed to the recent pick-up in domestic 
interest rate volatility (table 5.1)
The New Zealand dollar has depreciated 
slightly on a trade-weighted basis since
the August Statement (figure 5.4). 
Market risk sentiment remains weak and 
continues to support investor demand for the 
US dollar, given its status as a ‘safe haven’ 
currency. Lower prices for New Zealand’s 
export commodities have contributed to 
lower demand for the New Zealand dollar. 
Interest rates in major economies such as the 
US and the euro area have increased at a 
faster pace than those in New Zealand, also 
contributing towards the recent weakness in 
the New Zealand dollar. 
Retail interest rates continue to increase in 
response to increases in wholesale rates. 
Mortgage rates have risen across a variety of 
terms, with larger increases in the popular one- 
and two-year fixed rates, leading to a flattening 
of the mortgage curve (figure 5.5). Term 
deposit rates have also continued to increase, 
but remain low relative to comparable 
wholesale rates. This is playing a role in 
limiting the extent to which higher wholesale 
rates feed through to higher mortgage rates. 
We expect that higher deposit rates over the 
medium term will provide upward pressure to 
mortgage rates, independent of any changes 
to the OCR outlook. 
Despite a recent increase in financial market 
volatility, domestic bank credit spreads have 
remained stable since the August Statement. 
Credit spreads tend to widen during periods 
of higher risk aversion, but they currently 
remain broadly in line with pre-pandemic 
levels (figure 5.6). 


Chapter 5 Financial conditions
39
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
Table 5.1
Developments in domestic financial conditions as at 17 November
Wholesale interest rates 
Market pricing 
for the OCR
•	 Market participants now expect a faster and larger increase in the OCR than at the time of the 
August Statement. Financial market expectations for the peak OCR in this tightening cycle, as 
measured by overnight indexed swap pricing, have risen by around 120 basis points over this 
period to 5.1 percent. 
•	 These moves have largely been influenced by a combination of domestic and offshore 
economic data releases that suggest inflationary pressure is stronger than previously expected.
New Zealand 
Government 
Bonds
•	 New Zealand Government Bond (NZGB) yields have risen significantly since the August Statement. 
On average, yields have increased by around 80 basis points across the curve, with the 10-year 
trading at 4.2 percent. 
•	 NZGBs were added to the FTSE Russell World Government Bond Index (WGBI) on 1 November 
2022. This led to significant purchases of NZGBs by offshore investors who use the WGBI as 
a benchmark. This increased demand led to NZGB yields falling relative to other benchmark 
domestic interest rates around the date that NZGBs were included in the index. 
•	 The NZGB market continues to function well despite a recent pick-up of volatility related to 
domestic and offshore factors. The intraday range for the 10 year NZGB (the difference between 
the lowest and highest price on a given trading day) has steadily risen since the August 
Statement. However, bid-ask spreads (how far apart buyers and sellers are from reaching an 
agreed price to trade) have not widened over this period. 
•	 New Zealand Debt Management issued its inaugural green sovereign bond on 15 November 
2022. The bond has a maturity date of 15 May 2034 and received strong demand during the 
issuance process. Green bonds are structured in the same way as other nominal NZGBs; 
however, the funds raised are required to be put towards specific government projects with 
environmental benefits. 
Interest rate 
swaps
•	 New Zealand dollar interest rate swaps have also increased significantly since the August 
Statement. These increases have been slightly larger at shorter terms, with the two-year swap 
rate increasing around 90 basis points to 4.9 percent. As a consequence, there is now a steeper 
inversion across the swap curve. The difference between the two- and 10-year swap rates has 
widened by a further 20 basis points to 50 basis points. 
•	 Global interest rate swaps have also risen sharply. These rates continue to be a key influence on 
domestic interest rate movements. The US two-year swap rate has risen 120 basis points since 
the August Statement to 4.7 percent. This increase largely reflects upward revisions to market 
expectations for the degree of further US monetary policy tightening over coming quarters. 


Chapter 5 Financial conditions
40
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
New Zealand dollar
Interest rate 
differentials
•	 New Zealand interest rates have increased at a slower rate than interest rates in major 
economies such as the US and euro area since the August Statement. For example, over this 
period the NZGB two-year interest rate has increased by around 25 basis points less than the 
two-year US Treasury yield. Decreases in New Zealand interest rates relative to key trading 
partners have contributed to the depreciation in the New Zealand dollar. 
•	 However, New Zealand interest rates have risen at a faster pace than some other trading 
partners. This includes Australia, as the Reserve Bank of Australia has slowed down the pace of 
its monetary policy tightening. As a result, the New Zealand dollar has appreciated against the 
Australian dollar. 
Risk sentiment
•	 During periods of elevated uncertainty or volatility, financial market participants’ willingness to 
take on additional risk decreases and demand for ‘safe haven’ currencies, such as the US dollar, 
increases. Higher risk aversion has contributed to the depreciation of the New Zealand dollar. 
•	 Demand for riskier assets has worsened this year in response to expectations of higher interest 
rates, a weakening global economic outlook, and elevated uncertainty related to the economic 
impacts of the war in Ukraine. 
•	 These trends have continued since the August Statement, in particular in government bond 
markets. Levels of volatility have at times been similar to those observed in the initial phase of 
the COVID-19 pandemic in 2020.
Commodity 
prices
•	 Decreases in New Zealand’s key export commodity prices have also contributed to the 
depreciation of the New Zealand dollar. 
•	 Prices of key export commodities in New Zealand peaked in the first quarter of this year and have 
gradually fallen since then. In particular, dairy prices are now near a two-year low. Despite declining 
over this year, commodity export prices have remained elevated relative to historical levels. 
Retail interest rates
Mortgage rates
•	 Mortgage rates have risen since the August Statement in response to rising wholesale rates. 
The one- and two-year fixed-rate terms have increased by 100 and 70 basis points respectively. 
Increases have been smaller in the three- to five-year terms, leading to a flattening of the 
mortgage curve. 
•	 Increases in mortgage rates continue to be smaller than increases in wholesale interest rates at 
comparable terms, as bank funding costs remain historically low relative to wholesale rates. 
Deposit rates
•	 Term deposit rates have also increased since the August Statement. They have increased by 85 
basis points and 50 basis points in the popular terms of six months and one year respectively. 
These increases mean that both terms are currently at their highest levels since 2015. 
•	 The deposit curve is now relatively flat, with the five-year term deposit rate currently only around 
20 basis points higher than the one-year rate. 


Chapter 5 Financial conditions
41
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
Bank funding conditions
Funding 
composition
•	 Term deposit volumes continue to increase as depositors switch from on-call accounts. This is 
increasing banks’ average funding costs as the interest rates paid on term deposits are higher 
than they are for on-call accounts. 
•	 Funding for Lending Programme (FLP) drawdowns have increased by $3.7 billion since the 
August Statement, taking total drawdowns to $16.4 billion. The additional allocation drawdown 
window closes on 6 December 2022.
•	 Banks remain well funded and have strong liquidity buffers. The core funding ratio rose by 0.5 
percentage points in September, to 90.6 percent. This is the highest ratio since data collection 
began in April 2010. 
Credit spreads
•	 The cost of raising long-term wholesale bank funding relative to benchmark wholesale rates has 
been relatively stable in the second half of this year. It sits at levels higher than that in the 2020/21 
period and is broadly in line with pre-pandemic levels. Short-term credit spreads have not risen 
and remain around the levels prevailing since the monetary response to the COVID-19 pandemic.
•	 Domestic credit spreads have increased at a slower pace than comparable measures for 
offshore issuers.


Chapter 5 Financial conditions
42
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
Charts
All charts are as at 17 November 2022.
Figure 5.1
Market expectations for the OCR
Source: Bloomberg.
Figure 5.4
New Zealand dollar TWI and selected 
bilateral exchange rates
(index=100 at August Statement)
Source: RBNZ, NZFMA.
Figure 5.5
Mortgage interest rate curve
Source: interest.co.nz.
Note: The mortgage rates shown for each term are the average of the latest 
‘special’ fixed-term rates on offer from ANZ, ASB, BNZ and Westpac. 
Figure 5.6
5-year bank credit spread
Source: Bloomberg, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: This is the difference between banks’ secondary market bond yields and 
the interest rate swap curve. This uses the averages of bonds with a remaining 
maturity of five years issued in New Zealand dollars by ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and 
Westpac. A lower spread represents a lower implied borrowing cost.
Figure 5.2
Global 2-year interest rate swaps
Source: Bloomberg.
Figure 5.3
Intraday range 10-year New Zealand 
Government Bond yield
Source: Bloomberg.


Chapter 5 Financial conditions
43
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
Ruakākā. Photo: Liza Reiderman
CHAPTER 
06
Economic 
projections


Chapter 6 Economic projections
44
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
CHAPTER 6
Economic projections
This chapter summarises the baseline economic projections 
that the MPC members considered when making their policy 
assessment. The projections were finalised on 17 November 2022.
These projections rely on a set of key 
assumptions about the global and domestic 
drivers of the economy. These include:
•	 the faster recovery of international tourism 
in New Zealand, which is likely to make 
labour shortages and inflation worse in 
the near term;
•	 a weaker exchange rate, which has 
supported export revenues and caused 
higher imported inflation;
•	 continued weakness in house prices and 
sales, which is likely to lead to an eventual 
slowdown in residential construction 
activity and household consumption;
•	 sustained levels of government spending 
in coming quarters in line with Budget 
2022 and ongoing moderate public 
sector pay growth; 
•	 higher inflation expectations, leading to 
more persistent inflation; 
•	 stronger global inflation in the near term, 
causing central banks around the world to 
raise interest rates further and therefore 
lead to a weaker outlook for global 
growth; and
•	 slowing business investment and 
household consumption in response to 
rising costs, higher interest rates and 
weaker global demand.
There is significant uncertainty about these 
assumptions, and the actual outcomes could 
be different if they do not hold.
The projections take into account recent 
data, that  show inflation remaining higher 
than expected, and a very tight labour 
market with low unemployment. The factors 
underpinning this starting point are discussed 
in chapter 2.
Inflation is expected to remain elevated in 
the near term. The expected strong recovery 
of international tourism over the 2022/23 
summer will put further strain on an already 
stretched services sector, including hotels 
and restaurants. Global inflationary pressures 
stemming from strong global demand over 
the past year, and the war in Ukraine, have 
continued to feed through to inflation in 
New Zealand. Additionally, domestic demand 
has so far remained robust through 2022, 
contributing to labour shortages and putting 
upward pressure on prices. 
Over the medium term we assume that 
higher interest rates in New Zealand will 
reduce domestic demand. This will provide 
space for labour shortages to ease, along 
with gradual population growth through 
natural increase and net immigration. Prices 
of oil and other products that New Zealand 
imports are expected to fall. 
Consumer price inflation is expected to return 
to its 2 percent target midpoint towards the 
end of the projection horizon in 2025. Given 
the expected slowing in domestic demand, a 
rising unemployment rate from exceptionally 
low levels is likely. In the second half of the 
projection horizon, employment is expected 
to fall below its maximum sustainable level.


Chapter 6 Economic projections
45
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
Table 6.1
Key projection assumptions
Key factors
The international 
tourism restart
•	 The return of overseas tourists to New Zealand has exceeded expectations since the border 
re-opened. Forward bookings indicate demand will continue to strengthen towards a more 
typical pre-pandemic summer seasonal peak. We have assumed that tourism and travel services 
recover to 75 percent of their pre-pandemic level this summer and to 95 percent of their pre-
pandemic level by the end of 2025.
•	 It is likely that the transport, hospitality and accommodation sectors will struggle to keep up with 
demand over this year’s peak summer period. Capacity in these sectors was reduced while 
the border was closed, and labour shortages remain acute. This may lead to significant price 
increases in those industries that operate with flexible pricing models, such as accommodation 
and transport.
House prices 
and residential 
construction
•	 House prices have fallen by 11.5 percent since their peak in November 2021. House prices are 
projected to keep falling into 2024, consistent with lower sales volumes in recent months. In 
quarterly terms, house prices are expected to fall by 19 percent by early 2024. Annual house 
price inflation is assumed to turn positive towards the end of the forecast horizon as net 
immigration increases and interest rates decline.
•	 Higher interest rates and lower house prices are expected to reduce incentives for new home 
building over the projection horizon. However, home building activity has so far held up, and 
firms indicated in our business visits that the pipeline of residential building projects is full for 
about another six months. In particular, near-record house building consents, more permissive 
planning regulations, and delays due to supply constraints continue to support construction in 
the near term. Over the medium term, we project residential construction’s share of potential 
economic output to fall back to pre-pandemic levels.
•	 Continued house price falls are expected to slow household spending growth over the 
projection as aggregate household wealth falls.
Global factors
•	 The global economic environment is highly inflationary, particularly in the near term. Central 
banks have responded to high global inflation by raising interest rates. Consequently, the 
New Zealand dollar exchange rate has weakened, which has led to high import and export price 
increases for New Zealanders. 
•	 Several large economies have seen significantly higher than expected inflation readings overall 
since the August Statement. Economic growth in China is projected to remain modest as the 
property market downturn and COVID-19 restrictions continue to weigh on activity. Longer-term 
Consensus forecasts for the growth of developed nations have been revised lower, as these 
countries are particularly exposed to more expensive food imports and higher US interest rates.
•	 Prices for New Zealand’s commodity exports have declined in recent months. Quarterly goods 
export prices are assumed to decline by 10 percent over the projection, in line with softening 
global demand. Likewise, export goods volumes are expected to grow below their long-term trend.
•	 Softening global demand is also assumed to decrease business investment in addition to 
the effects of higher interest rates. This is because the global slowdown is assumed to cause 
New Zealand firms to delay investment, because of either uncertainty about demand or cash-
flow constraints. 
•	 The New Zealand dollar trade weighted index (TWI) is assumed to remain at 70.


Chapter 6 Economic projections
46
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
Economic growth
Production
•	 We expect the economy is currently still growing, supported by recent high export prices, 
household savings built up during the COVID-19 pandemic, and government spending. The 
return of international visitors is expected to keep the economy growing through the March 
2023 quarter.
•	 Economic activity has been expanding faster than capacity over the past two years, leading 
to a large output gap and high inflation. The average annual output gap in 2022 is estimated 
to be 2.4 percent of potential GDP, compared to 2.0 percent in 2021. This reflects a tighter 
labour market, elevated capacity pressure in the goods market and more recently a recovery in 
services consumption.
•	 However, these projections contain a sustained, albeit shallow, period of economic contraction. 
GDP is assumed to decline by 1 percent in total from its peak; however, the timing of this 
contraction is highly uncertain.
•	 We expect the output gap to start closing quickly in mid-2023, as households and businesses 
respond to higher interest rates in the economy, dampening demand. The annual average 
output gap is assumed to be -2.0 percent of potential GDP at the end of the projection.
•	 Over the medium term, the supply of goods and services is also expected to increase.
We assume that supply-chain bottlenecks will continue to loosen and that labour supply will 
be bolstered by a return of low but positive net immigration. Overall, the combination of slower 
demand and rising supply is expected to result in a negative output gap for a time.
Consumption
•	 Consumption growth appears to have been robust during 2022 to date. We assume that 
consumption continues to be supported in the near term by the Government’s Cost of Living 
Payment and savings built up during the COVID-19 pandemic. Incomes have also been buoyed by 
high export prices, high labour force participation, increasing wages and longer working hours.
•	 High interest rates and lower house prices are expected to slow consumption growth over 
coming quarters. Consumption is expected to decline on a per capita basis to pre-pandemic 
levels by mid-2024.
Investment
•	 We assume that the outlook for business investment remains weak, relative to its trend. Factors 
weighing on business investment over the projection include the weakening global outlook and 
elevated uncertainty, higher interest rates, declining export prices and easing capacity pressures.
•	 We have revised our outlook for residential construction from mid-2023 significantly lower than 
that in the August Statement. This reflects an assumption that the effects of higher interest rates, 
tighter credit conditions, and lower house prices become more evident. Despite the softening 
housing market, building consent issuance has remained high so far. Due to capacity, cost, and 
financial pressures facing the construction sector, we expect some consented projects to be 
postponed or cancelled.
Government
•	 We assume that government activity evolves consistent with the fiscal forecasts in Budget 2022 
in May. As in the August Statement, we continue to assume a smoother profile for government 
consumption as measured in the System of National Accounts relative to the May Statement. 
Elevated inflation since Budget 2022 is assumed to reduce government consumption in real terms.
Exports and 
imports
•	 International tourist arrivals and departures have increased considerably since border 
restrictions began easing earlier in the year. Exports of travel services (international visitors to 
New Zealand) are expected to increase considerably over the upcoming summer period. This is 
expected to strain capacity in the transport, hospitality and accommodation sectors.
•	 The outlook for goods exports and imports is subdued given the expected global slowdown in 
demand and the expected fall in consumption in New Zealand respectively. 
•	 Quarterly goods export prices are assumed to decline by 8 percent over the projection in line 
with softening global demand. Likewise, export goods volumes are expected to remain below 
levels implied by their long-term trend.
•	 Global central bank tightening and soft commodity prices are expected to cause non-oil import 
prices to decline from early 2023. By the end of 2025, non-oil import prices in real world terms 
are assumed to decline to their pre-pandemic level.


Chapter 6 Economic projections
47
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
Labour market
Employment
and wages 
•	 The New Zealand labour market has remained exceptionally tight. The unemployment rate 
remained at 3.3 percent in the September 2022 quarter, despite an increase in participation to a 
record level. Our suite of labour market indicators continue to suggest that the economy is well 
above maximum sustainable employment (MSE). 
•	 Employment is starting from a very strong level, reflecting acute labour market tightness and a 
record-high labour force participation rate. The number of online job vacancies is near record 
levels. Over the medium term, employment is projected to decline in line with the expected 
economic contraction and fall below MSE for a time. The slowing in domestic activity over 
several quarters, together with gradual growth in the labour force, is expected to relieve labour 
shortages.
•	 Annual private sector LCI wage inflation is expected to continue to increase, peaking at 5.7 
percent in 2023. This reflects ongoing labour shortages, expected further rises in the minimum 
wage and rising cost-of-living adjustments by employers. 
Inflation (annual)
Headline
•	 Headline inflation is expected to rise to 7.5 percent for the next two quarters.
•	 Over 2023 and 2024, headline inflation is projected to decline, returning to the top of the 1 to 3 
percent target band by late 2024.
•	 Headline inflation is expected to continue to trend down in the latter half of the projection 
horizon, reaching the 2 percent midpoint of the target band at the end of the projection in 2025. 
Tradables
•	 Tradables inflation is assumed to start declining only gradually in the next two quarters. Near-
term tradables inflation is assumed to be held up by a weaker exchange rate in the current 
quarter and the re-imposition of the fuel excise tax in the next quarter. In the near term, higher 
food price inflation is caused by labour shortages, domestic shipping challenges and higher 
global food prices. These are expected to ease during 2023.
•	 Over the medium term, weaker global demand and a gradual easing of international supply 
constraints are expected to see tradables inflation decline.
Non-tradables
•	 Non-tradables inflation is also expected to remain high over the next two quarters. This is being 
driven by ongoing labour shortages, including those likely to be exacerbated by the return of 
international tourism.
•	 Shortages of materials and labour in the construction industry have continued to underpin 
housing-related cost increases. These capacity pressures are expected to ease as interest rates 
rise, house prices fall and home building activity slows. Slower domestic activity and lower house 
prices are expected to cause non-tradables inflation to ease over coming years.
Inflation 
expectations
•	 Elevated near-term inflation expectations are assumed to persist, putting upward pressure on 
inflation. Over the medium term, inflation expectations are expected to moderate in line with 
falling headline inflation.


Chapter 6 Economic projections
48
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
Figure 6.3
Unemployment rate
(unemployed as share of labour force, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Charts
Figure 6.1
Inflation breakdown
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Dotted lines show the projection from the August Statement.
Figure 6.2
Private sector LCI wage inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.4
House price growth
(annual)
Source: CoreLogic, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.5
Production GDP
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.6
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 6 Economic projections
49
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
Figure 6.9
Business investment
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.7
Private consumption
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.8
Residential investment
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.10
Government consumption
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.11
Total exports
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.12
Total imports
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 7 Appendices
50
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
Red Crater, Tongariro National Park. Photo: Nele McHattie
CHAPTER 
07
Appendices


Chapter 7 Appendices
51
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
CHAPTER 7
Appendices
Appendix 1: 
Statistical tables
Table 7.1
Key forecast variables
GDP growth 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Annual
Unemployment 
rate
TWI
OCR
2020
Mar
-1.1
0.8
2.5
4.2
70.9
0.9
 
Jun
-10.4
-0.5
1.5
4.0
69.7
0.3
 
Sep
13.7
0.7
1.4
5.3
72.0
0.3
 
Dec
-0.4
0.5
1.4
4.9
72.9
0.3
2021
Mar
1.7
0.8
1.5
4.6
74.9
0.3
 
Jun
2.3
1.3
3.3
3.9
74.7
0.3
 
Sep
-3.9
2.2
4.9
3.3
74.4
0.3
 
Dec
3.0
1.4
5.9
3.2
74.3
0.6
2022
Mar
-0.2
1.8
6.9
3.2
72.6
0.9
 
Jun
1.7
1.7
7.3
3.3
72.1
1.6
 
Sep
0.8
2.2
7.2
3.3
70.6
2.7
 
Dec
0.6
1.7
7.5
3.2
70.0
3.8
2023
Mar
0.4
1.8
7.5
3.6
70.0
4.6
Jun
-0.5
1.1
6.9
3.9
70.0
5.4
Sep
-0.3
1.3
6.0
4.4
70.0
5.5
Dec
-0.1
0.7
5.0
4.8
70.0
5.5
2024
Mar
-0.1
0.7
3.8
5.0
70.0
5.5
Jun
0.0
0.5
3.3
5.3
70.0
5.5
Sep
0.0
0.9
2.9
5.4
70.0
5.4
Dec
0.2
0.4
2.6
5.6
70.0
5.3
2025
Mar
0.3
0.5
2.4
5.7
70.0
5.1
Jun
0.5
0.5
2.3
5.7
70.0
4.9
Sep
0.7
0.7
2.0
5.7
70.0
4.6
Dec
0.7
0.4
2.0
5.6
70.0
4.4


Chapter 7 Appendices
52
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
Table 7.2
Measures of inflation, inflation expectations, and asset prices
2021
2022
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Inflation (annual rates)
CPI
1.5
3.3
4.9
5.9
6.9
7.3
7.2
CPI non-tradables
2.1
3.3
4.5
5.3
6.0
6.3
6.6
CPI tradables
0.5
3.4
5.7
6.9
8.5
8.7
8.1
Sectoral factor model
estimate of core inflation
2.6
3.2
3.8
4.3
4.8
5.2
5.4
CPI trimmed mean
(30 percent measure)
1.7
3.0
4.0
4.3
5.2
5.8
6.4
CPI weighted median
2.3
3.0
3.3
3.8
3.9
4.8
5.0
GDP deflator (expenditure)
0.4
2.2
3.8
5.1
6.2
5.9
Inflation expectations
ANZ Business Outlook – inflation 
1 year ahead (quarterly average to date)
1.9
2.2
2.9
4.0
5.4
6.0
6.1
6.1
RBNZ Survey of Expectations – 
inflation 2 years ahead
1.9
2.0
2.3
3.0
3.3
3.3
3.1
3.6
RBNZ Survey of Expectations – 
inflation 5 years ahead
2.0
2.1
2.0
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.3
2.4
RBNZ Survey of Expectations – 
inflation 10 years ahead
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.1
2.1
2.1
2.2
Long-run inflation expectations*
2.1
2.1
2.1
2.1
2.2
2.2
2.2
2.3
Asset prices (annual percent changes)
Quarterly house price index 
(CoreLogic NZ)
24.0
29.9
30.5
27.2
13.8
REINZ Farm Price Index (quarterly 
average)
6.9
6.3
15.1
20.5
25.6
31.0
8.2
NZX 50 (quarterly average to date)
14.4
17.1
10.3
3.0
-3.9
-9.0
-11.3
-14.1
Source: ANZ, Consensus Economics, RBNZ estimates.
*Long-run expectations are extracted from a range of surveys using a Nelson-Siegel model.


Chapter 7 Appendices
53
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
Table 7.3
Measures of labour market conditions	
(seasonally adjusted, changes expressed in annual percent terms, unless specified otherwise)	
2021
2022
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Household Labour Force Survey
Unemployment rate
4.6
3.9
3.3
3.2
3.2
3.3
3.3
Underutilisation rate
12.1
10.5
9.2
9.2
9.3
9.2
9.0
Labour force participation rate
70.4
70.6
71.1
71.0
70.9
70.9
71.7
Employment rate (percentage of 
working-age population)
67.1
67.8
68.7
68.8
68.6
68.5
69.3
Employment growth
0.1
1.5
3.9
3.3
2.6
1.4
1.2
Average weekly hours worked
33.9
34.0
31.2
33.5
33.4
33.7
33.6
Number unemployed
(thousand people)
133
114
97
93
94
96
97
Number employed (million people)
2.75
2.78
2.82
2.82
2.82
2.82
2.85
Labour force (million people)
2.88
2.89
2.92
2.91
2.91
2.91
2.95
Extended labour force
(million people)
2.99
2.98
3.00
2.99
3.00
3.00
3.03
Working-age population
(million people, age 15 years+)
4.09
4.10
4.10
4.10
4.11
4.11
4.12
Quarterly Employment Survey – QES
Filled jobs growth
0.5
2.5
4.0
4.1
4.2
1.5
1.5
Average hourly earnings growth 
(private sector, ordinary time)
4.1
4.4
3.6
4.1
5.3
7.0
8.6
Other data sources
Labour cost index growth,
private sector, adjusted
1.6
2.2
2.5
2.8
3.1
3.4
3.9
Labour cost index growth,
private sector, unadjusted
2.8
3.7
4.1
4.5
5.0
5.2
5.6
Estimated net migration
(published, thousands, quarterly)
-3.5
-4.8
-3.3
-3.4
Change in All Vacancies Index
26.7
163.7
52.1
34.5
19.3
3.4
10.3
Note: The All Vacancies Index is produced by MBIE as part of the monthly Jobs Online report, which shows changes in job vacancies advertised by businesses 
on internet job boards. The unadjusted LCI is an analytical index that reflects quality change in addition to price change (whereas the official LCI measures price 
changes only). For definitions of underutilisation, the extended labour force and related concepts, see Statistics New Zealand (2016), Introducing underutilisation in 
the labour market. Estimated net migration (published) is the Stats NZ outcomes-based measure.


Chapter 7 Appendices
54
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
Table 7.4
Composition of real GDP growth
(annual average percent change, seasonally adjusted, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Final consumption expenditure
Private
3.3
4.2
6.4
4.8
4.5
2.5
0.5
4.6
1.8
-1.0
0.3
Public authority
2.9
2.1
1.9
3.7
3.4
5.8
7.5
10.3
4.1
-0.3
-0.9
Total
3.2
3.7
5.4
4.5
4.3
3.2
2.1
6.0
2.4
-0.8
0.0
Gross fixed capital formation
Residential
8.3
7.1
8.8
-1.8
-0.1
2.8
1.8
3.0
3.2
-7.0
-5.1
Other
8.0
2.5
-0.1
10.3
7.0
2.5
-6.8
9.6
5.3
-2.9
-3.3
Total
8.1
3.6
2.2
6.9
5.2
2.5
-4.7
7.9
4.8
-3.9
-3.7
Final domestic 
expenditure
4.3
3.7
4.6
5.1
4.5
3.1
0.5
6.4
3.0
-1.5
-0.9
Stockbuilding*
0.5
-0.3
0.1
0.2
-0.2
-0.2
-0.2
0.7
-0.3
-0.1
0.0
Gross national 
expenditure
4.6
3.2
4.8
5.6
4.3
2.8
-0.7
7.9
2.8
-1.5
-0.9
Exports of goods and 
services
4.7
6.9
2.0
3.8
3.3
0.4
-17.6
1.4
9.9
8.1
4.8
Imports of goods and 
services
7.7
2.6
5.6
7.8
4.3
1.0
-15.9
17.2
6.7
1.2
0.8
Expenditure on GDP
3.6
4.5
3.7
4.3
4.0
2.7
-0.3
3.7
3.2
0.0
0.0
GDP (production)
3.8
3.8
3.8
3.6
3.4
2.2
-1.5
5.0
3.0
0.1
0.1
GDP (production, 
March qtr to March qtr)
3.8
4.1
3.3
3.6
3.3
0.5
3.2
1.0
3.6
-0.9
0.6
*Percentage point contribution to the growth rate of GDP.


Chapter 7 Appendices
55
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
Table 7.5
Summary of economic projections
(annual percent change, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Price measures
CPI 
0.3
0.4
2.2
1.1
1.5
2.5
1.5
6.9
7.5
3.8
2.4
Labour costs
1.8
1.8
1.5
1.9
2.0
2.4
1.6
3.1
4.9
5.5
4.1
Export prices
(in New Zealand dollars) 
-8.0
0.7
4.1
3.3
1.1
6.8
-6.2
21.4
3.8
-3.1
-0.5
Import prices
(in New Zealand dollars) 
-3.4
1.2
0.6
1.8
4.3
2.5
-2.5
19.0
7.7
-3.1
-1.1
Monetary conditions
OCR (year average)
3.4
2.9
2.0
1.8
1.8
1.2
0.3
0.5
3.2
5.5
5.4
TWI (year average)
79.3
72.6
76.5
75.6
73.4
71.7
72.4
74.0
70.7
70.0
70.0
Output
GDP (production, annual 
average % change)
3.8
3.8
3.8
3.6
3.4
2.2
-1.5
5.0
3.0
0.1
0.1
Potential output (annual 
average % change)
3.1
3.2
3.3
3.3
3.2
2.8
-1.3
2.8
2.6
2.4
2.1
Output gap (% of potential 
GDP, year average)
-0.7
-0.2
0.3
0.6
0.8
0.2
-0.1
2.1
2.6
0.2
-1.8
Labour market
Total employment 
(seasonally adjusted)
3.6
2.2
5.9
2.9
1.5
2.6
0.1
2.6
1.5
-0.5
0.4
Unemployment rate 
(March qtr, seasonally 
adjusted)
5.5
5.3
4.9
4.4
4.2
4.2
4.6
3.2
3.6
5.0
5.7
Trend labour productivity 
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.5
0.5
Key balances
Government operating 
balance* (% of GDP, 
year to June)
0.2
0.7
1.5
1.9
2.4
-7.2
-1.4
-5.0
-2.2
-2.0
-1.3
Current account balance 
(% of GDP)
-3.5
-2.4
-2.6
-3.1
-3.8
-2.3
-2.5
-6.7
-8.2
-7.9
-7.2
Terms of trade
(SNA measure, annual 
average % change)
0.1
-3.0
2.5
4.4
-2.5
1.9
-1.0
0.4
-2.4
-1.6
0.2
Household saving rate 
(% of disposable income)
-0.8
-0.5
0.0
-0.2
0.7
2.9
5.8
2.5
1.9
1.3
1.5
World economy
Trading-partner GDP 
(annual average % change)
3.7
3.4
3.5
3.9
3.5
1.7
-0.7
5.8
2.8
2.4
3.3
Trading-partner CPI 
(TWI weighted)
1.0
1.2
1.9
1.8
1.4
2.4
0.8
4.0
5.4
2.3
2.2
*Government operating balance is a model-based estimate of OBEGAL divided by nominal GDP in the projection.
The estimate is partial because it relies on projections for some components from Budget 2022.


Chapter 7 Appendices
56
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
Appendix 2: Chart pack
Figure 7.1
Composition of CPI inflation
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 7.2
Output gap and output gap indicators
(share of potential)
Source: NZIER, MBIE, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The output gap indicators based on information about the labour market 
are shown separately from the other indicators. For each group of indicators, the 
shaded area shows the range of values and the line shows the mean value.
Figure 7.3
Unemployment and underutilisation rates
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 7.4
OCR and neutral OCR indicator suite
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area indicates the range between the maximum and minimum 
values from our suite of long-run nominal neutral OCR indicators (section 4.1).
Figure 7.5
GDP and potential GDP
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 7.6
Measures of core inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Core inflation measures exclude the GST increase in 2010.


Chapter 7 Appendices
57
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2022
Figure 7.7
Inflation expectations
(annual) 
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: Inflation expectations are estimates from the RBNZ inflation expectations 
curve, based on surveys of businesses and professional forecasters.
Figure 7.9
House price inflation
(annual, nominal) 
Source: REINZ.
Source: Stats NZ, Global Dairy Trade, Reuters, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 7.12
Terms of trade, dairy and oil price indices
Figure 7.10
Mortgage interest rates
Source: interest.co.nz, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The rates shown for the fixed terms are the average of the advertised 
rates from ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac, shown as weekly data. The floating 
rate represents the monthly yield on floating housing debt from the RBNZ 
Income Statement survey.
Figure 7.8
Private sector wage growth
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Private sector wage growth is measured by the labour cost index, all 
salary and wage rates, private sector. Real labour cost index is deflated with 
headline CPI inflation.
Figure 7.11
New Zealand dollar exchange rates
(quarterly average) 
Source: Reuters, RBNZ.
