BANK: RBNZ
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: Monetary Policy Statement August 2022
DATE: 16/08/2022
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/monetary-policy-statements/2022/mps-aug22/august-2022-monetary-policy-statement.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

08/2022
Monetary Policy
STATEMENT


ii
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
STATEMENT
of the MPC’s monetary policy strategy
The Monetary Policy Committee’s (MPC’s) monetary policy strategy is its 
overarching plan for how it will formulate monetary policy under different 
circumstances to achieve its objectives.1 It outlines a consistent approach 
to how the MPC intends to achieve its objectives across time, accounting 
for trade-offs and uncertainty. Agreeing on and publishing a strategy 
promotes transparency, public understanding, and accountability.
1	
For a more in-depth discussion of monetary policy strategy in New Zealand, see J. Ratcliffe and R. Kendall (2019), ‘Monetary policy strategy in New Zealand’, 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Bulletin, Vol. 82, No. 3, April.
2	
These economic objectives contribute to the overall purpose of the Act, which is to promote the prosperity and well-being of New Zealanders, and contribute to 
a sustainable and productive economy. See monetary policy framework for more information on New Zealand’s monetary policy framework, including the full 
text of the Remit.
Monetary policy 
framework and objectives
Under the Reserve Bank of 
New Zealand Act 1989 (the 
Act), the MPC is responsible for 
formulating monetary policy to 
maintain a stable general level of 
prices over the medium term and 
to support maximum sustainable 
employment.2 Operational 
objectives for monetary policy are 
set out in the Remit. The current 
Remit sets out a flexible inflation 
targeting regime, under which the 
MPC must set policy to: 
•	 keep future annual inflation 
between 1 and 3 percent over 
the medium term, with a focus 
on keeping future inflation 
near the 2 percent mid-point; 
and
•	 support maximum sustainable 
employment, considering 
a broad range of labour 
market indicators and taking 
into account that maximum 
sustainable employment is 
largely determined by non-
monetary factors.
In pursuing these objectives, 
the Remit requires the MPC to 
have regard to the efficiency 
and soundness of the 
financial system, seek to avoid 
unnecessary instability in the 
economy and financial markets, 
and discount events that have 
only transitory effects on inflation. 
The MPC must also assess the 
effects of its monetary policy 
decisions on the Government’s 
policy to support more 
sustainable house prices.
The Reserve Bank’s flexible 
inflation targeting framework 
and the MPC’s monetary policy 
strategy reflect the fact that: 
•	 low and stable inflation is 
monetary policy’s best long-
run contribution to the well-
being of New Zealanders;
•	 in the short to medium term, 
monetary policy can influence 
real variables such as 
employment, and hence policy 
trade-offs can arise; and
•	 monetary policy is more 
effective if the Bank’s policy 
targets are credible, so policy 
should be formulated in a 
way that ensures credibility is 
maintained.
Key aspects of monetary 
policy strategy
The MPC practises forecast 
targeting, which means that it 
sets monetary policy such that 
it expects to achieve its inflation 
and employment goals in the 
medium term. In most instances 
the MPC aims to return inflation 
to the target mid-point within a 
one- to three-year horizon. The 
appropriate horizon at each 
policy decision will vary based 
on how different policy paths 
will contribute to maximum 
sustainable employment, whether 
price-setters’ expectations are 
consistent with the inflation 
target, and other considerations 
such as the balance of risks to the 
MPC’s central economic outlook.


iii
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
The MPC does not attempt to 
return inflation and employment 
to target immediately, because 
monetary policy actions take time 
to transmit through the economy. 
Attempting to return inflation to 
target too quickly would result 
in unnecessary instability in the 
economy and financial markets. 
The 1 to 3 percent target range for 
inflation provides the MPC with 
flexibility to ensure that managing 
inflation variability does not come 
at the cost of excessive variability 
in the real economy. For similar 
reasons, the MPC does not 
attempt to offset events that are 
expected to have only transitory 
effects on inflation. 
The MPC takes into account both 
its inflation and employment 
objectives when setting policy. In 
the long run, no trade-off exists 
between the MPC’s objectives. 
In the short to medium term, 
there may be situations where 
monetary policy can move one 
objective closer to target only 
at the cost of the other, resulting 
in a trade-off. When a trade-off 
does arise, the MPC will consider 
outcomes for both objectives 
in setting policy. In general, if 
employment is projected to be 
below its long-run sustainable 
level, the MPC would let inflation 
overshoot the target mid-point 
for a time, and vice versa (while 
staying within the 1 to 3 percent 
target range). 
The MPC responds to both 
deviations above target and 
deviations below target. The 
MPC sets policy to stabilise 
employment near its maximum 
sustainable level, and to return 
inflation near to the target mid-
point, regardless of whether 
inflation is currently below or 
above 2 percent. This approach 
helps to anchor inflation 
expectations at the target mid-
point and promotes sustainable 
growth and employment by 
dampening fluctuations in the 
business cycle.
The MPC considers the balance 
of risks to its objectives that 
arise from uncertainty about 
the economic outlook and 
the transmission of its policy 
decisions. In general, the MPC 
will incorporate likely future 
developments into its central 
economic projections and set 
monetary policy in response. 
However, the MPC will also take 
into account risks to its central 
projections when setting policy. 
Under extreme uncertainty, the 
MPC may choose to publish 
scenarios instead of central 
projections to illustrate the 
range of possible situations and 
economic outcomes that could 
occur when circumstances are 
highly unpredictable.
The MPC has regard to the 
efficiency and soundness of 
the financial system, while 
recognising that in most 
instances prudential policy is 
better suited to leaning against 
risks to financial stability. The 
Reserve Bank takes prudential 
policy settings into account when 
setting monetary policy, and 
vice versa.
Implementation of strategy
The MPC applies the following 
process when formulating a 
policy decision:
1.	 Firstly, it assesses the outlook 
for the economy and the 
implications for its policy 
objectives. It then discusses 
risks to achieving its policy 
objectives.
2.	 Next, it considers which stance 
of monetary policy is most 
consistent with its monetary 
policy strategy given the 
current economic outlook, 
risks, and trade-offs.
3.	 Finally, the MPC decides how 
it will achieve the desired 
stance of monetary policy, 
including whether or not 
to adjust its policy settings 
at the current meeting and 
how it will communicate the 
policy outlook. The MPC has 
a suite of monetary tools to 
achieve its goals, and uses its 
Principles for Monetary Tools 
to make decisions on which 
tools to deploy.


REPORT AND SUPPORTING NOTES PUBLISHED AT:
www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/monetary-policy-statement
Subscribe online: www.rbnz.govt.nz/email-updates
Copyright © 2022 Reserve Bank of New Zealand
This report is published pursuant to section  
15C of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 1989. 
ISSN 1770-4829
rbnz.govt.nz
Cover image: Arthur’s Pass. Photo: Rebecca Williams
Thank you to RBNZ staff for photography in this report.


The projection was finalised on 12 August 2022. The Official Cash Rate (OCR) 
projection incorporates an outlook for monetary policy that is consistent with the 
MPC’s monetary policy assessment, which was finalised on 17 August 2022. 
08/2022
Monetary Policy
STATEMENT
Contents
Statement of the MPC’s monetary policy strategy	
ii
1.	 Policy assessment	
2
Summary Record of meeting	
4
2.	 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook	
8
3.	 Special topics	
19
	
3.1	 Global inflation developments	
21
	
3.2	 Assessing recent inflation surprises	
25
	
3.3	 Business conditions	
28
4.	 Financial conditions	
32
5.	 Economic projection	
37
6.	 Appendices	
43
	
Appendix 1: Statistical tables	
44
	
Appendix 2: Chart pack	
49


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
2
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
CHAPTER 
01
Policy  
assessment
Aerial view of the Timber Trail, Pureora Forest Park. Photo: Paul Conway


Chapter 1 Policy assessment
3
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
CHAPTER 1
Policy assessment
Tēnā koutou katoa, welcome all.
The Monetary Policy Committee today increased 
the Official Cash Rate (OCR) to 3 percent from 
2.5 percent. The Committee agreed it remains 
appropriate to continue to tighten monetary 
conditions at pace to maintain price stability and 
contribute to maximum sustainable employment. 
Core consumer price inflation remains too high and 
labour resources remain scarce. 
Global consumer price inflation has continued 
to rise, albeit with some recent reprieve from 
lower global oil prices. The war in Ukraine 
continues to underpin high commodity prices, with 
global production costs and constraints further 
exacerbated by supply-chain bottlenecks due to the 
ongoing COVID-19 health challenge. The outlook for 
global growth continues to weaken, reflecting the 
ongoing tightening in global monetary conditions.    
In New Zealand, domestic spending has remained 
resilient to global and local headwinds to date. 
Spending levels are supported by a robust 
employment level, continued fiscal support, an 
elevated terms of trade, and sound household 
balance sheets in aggregate.  
However, production is being constrained by acute 
labour shortages, heightened by seasonal and 
COVID-19 related illnesses. In these circumstances, 
spending and investment continues to outstrip 
supply capacity, and wage pressures are 
heightened. A range of indicators highlight broad-
based domestic pricing pressures.  
Committee members agreed that monetary 
conditions needed to continue to tighten until 
they are confident there is sufficient restraint on 
spending to bring inflation back within its 1-3 percent 
per annum target range. The Committee remains 
resolute in achieving the Monetary Policy Remit.
Meitaki, thanks.
Adrian Orr 
Governor 


4
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
SUMMARY 
Record of meeting 
The Monetary Policy 
Committee discussed 
developments 
affecting the outlook 
for inflation and 
employment in New 
Zealand. Consumer 
price inflation is 
currently too high 
and labour remains 
scarce. The Committee 
agreed to continue 
increasing the Official 
Cash Rate (OCR) at 
pace to achieve price 
stability and to support 
maximum sustainable 
employment. The 
Committee is resolute 
in its commitment 
to ensure consumer 
price inflation returns 
to within the 1 to 3 
percent target range.
The Committee judged that the 
global economic outlook has 
weakened since May, reflecting 
tightening financial conditions, 
ongoing geopolitical tensions, 
and continued disruption to 
global supply of goods and 
services. The war in Ukraine has 
put upward pressure on global 
commodity prices, especially 
oil and food, and disrupted 
global trade. Lockdowns in 
some Chinese cities to combat 
the spread of COVID-19 has 
contributed to supply-chain 
bottlenecks and shipping times 
and costs remain elevated. 
Inflation is at the highest level in 
many decades in most advanced 
economies, due to disrupted and 
curtailed global supply coupled 
with a strong recovery of demand 
following the disruptions and 
uncertainties caused by earlier 
phases of the pandemic. Most 
central banks are raising interest 
rates, in many cases at a much 
faster pace than has been seen 
in recent history. Higher interest 
rates abroad have placed 
downward pressure on New 
Zealand’s exchange rates, making 
our imports more expensive while 
supporting exporter returns. 
Developments in the New 
Zealand economy were 
discussed by the Committee. 
Demand has remained resilient to 
global and domestic headwinds 
to date. However, output is being 
constrained by the disrupted 
global supply of goods and 
services and acute labour 
shortages, made worse by high 
levels of sickness from COVID-19 
and other illnesses. 
Members discussed the outlook 
for domestic demand. Residential 
construction activity has been 
strong, but the Committee 
discussed downside risks to 
future construction activity, with 
some construction firms reporting 
a fall in forward orders. Business 
surveys and direct reports from 
businesses suggest a more 
general slowing in business 
activity in the coming months. 
However, inbound international 
tourism is recovering from a low 
base and that is expected to 
provide some offset to weaker 
domestic spending.


5
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
Household balance sheets on 
the whole are strong, but higher 
interest rates and rising costs 
of living are putting pressure 
on household finances, and are 
expected to reduce household 
spending and house prices. 
House prices have steadily 
dropped from high levels since 
November last year, and are 
expected to keep falling over 
the coming year towards more 
sustainable levels. 
Production capacity pressures 
remain. In particular, labour 
shortages are a major constraint 
on business activity. Wage 
growth has continued to pick 
up in line with tightness in the 
labour market, and there is 
some evidence from discussions 
with businesses that firms 
are increasing wages more 
frequently. However, hourly wage 
rates are rising more slowly than 
inflation. The Committee was 
encouraged by recent declines 
in survey measures of inflation 
expectations, but remains alert 
to the risk of a more pronounced 
change in wage and price setting 
behaviour.
The Committee discussed the 
outlook for fiscal policy, and 
noted upside risks to overall 
government spending due to 
the rising cost of delivering 
government services. 
The Committee expects some 
easing of the rate of inflation 
in the near term due to falling 
petrol prices and stabilisation 
in international shipping costs. 
However, inflation pressures 
have broadened and measures 
of core inflation have increased. 
Nevertheless, inflation is 
expected to return to the 
Committee’s 1-3 percent target 
range by the middle of 2024, but 
this will require a better balance 
between supply and demand. 
The Committee discussed 
changes in the level of 
commercial bank cash balances 
held at the central bank. 
Noting current high levels, the 
Committee discussed the factors 
influencing those balances, 
including the Large Scale Asset 
Purchases (LSAP) and Funding for 
Lending programmes (FLP). Both 
of these programmes provided 
monetary stimulus through 
lowering longer-term interest 
rates. 
The Committee noted that the 
volume of commercial bank 
lending is determined by several 
factors including customer 
demand for loans, banks’ 
perception and appetite for risk, 
and prudential requirements on 
banks’ capital, cash and other 
liquid assets and funding. The 
LSAP and FLP programmes 
did support bank funding and 
liquidity positions, but there is 
no evidence that this is currently 
having a direct impact on lending 
activity over and above their 
impact on interest rates. Credit 
growth is modest in the context 
of rising interest rates. Settlement 
cash balances will gradually 
reduce as the Reserve Bank 
sells back government bonds 
to the government as the LSAP 
programme is unwound.


6
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
The drawdown window of the 
FLP will expire in early December, 
and some further usage of 
the programme is expected 
in the coming months. In total, 
the programme will fund no 
more than 6 percent of bank 
lending. The programme has 
lowered funding costs for banks, 
which has contributed to lower 
lending rates for borrowers and 
provided additional stimulus to 
the economy while the OCR was 
low. However, the Committee 
sets policy to achieve the overall 
desired level of monetary 
conditions, and has offset the 
impact of the FLP with a higher 
OCR as monetary policy stimulus 
has been removed. The Bank’s 
experience using monetary 
policy instruments such as LSAP 
and FLP will be reviewed as part 
of the five-yearly Review and 
Assessment of the Formulation 
and Implementation of  
Monetary Policy.
The Committee discussed the 
possibility that neutral interest 
rates may be higher. For example, 
market-based estimates of neutral 
nominal interest rates have 
increased over the past year. Staff 
will be undertaking further work 
to review their estimates. 
The Committee agreed that 
further increases in the OCR were 
required in order to meet their 
Remit objectives, and discussed 
the appropriate pace at which 
to raise rates. The Committee 
discussed whether more rapid 
increases could improve the 
credibility of the inflation target 
and reduce the risk of a significant 
increase in inflation expectations. 
However, the Committee agreed 
that maintaining the recent pace 
of tightening remains the best 
means by which to meet their 
Remit. 
The Committee noted that a 
number of central banks had 
increased interest rates by more 
than 50 basis points recently, but 
that most of these countries had 
started increasing interest rates 
later than New Zealand did and 
were often starting at a lower 
level of interest rates. 
The Committee agreed that 
domestic inflationary pressures had 
increased since May and to further 
bring forward the timing of OCR 
increases. The Committee agreed 
to continue increasing the OCR 
until it is confident that monetary 
conditions are sufficient to maintain 
expectations of low inflation in the 
longer term and bring consumer 
price inflation to within the target 
range. The Committee viewed 
this strategy as consistent with 
achieving their primary inflation and 
employment objectives without 
causing unnecessary instability 
in output, interest rates and the 
exchange rate.


7
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
On Wednesday 17 August, the 
Committee reached a consensus 
to increase the OCR to 3 percent 
from 2.5 percent.
Attendees:
Reserve Bank members  
of MPC: 
Adrian Orr, Christian Hawkesby, 
Karen Silk, Adam Richardson
External MPC members: 
Bob Buckle, Peter Harris, 
Caroline Saunders
Reserve Bank observer: 
Paul Conway
Treasury Observer: 
Dominick Stephens
MPC Secretary: 
Chris Bloor


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
8
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
CHAPTER 
02
Current 
economic 
assessment 
and monetary 
policy outlook
Mangawhai Heads. Photo: Paul Conway


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
9
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
CHAPTER 2
Current economic assessment 
and monetary policy outlook
Key points
•	 Demand in the New Zealand economy 
has remained resilient to global and 
domestic headwinds to date. Household 
spending has held up over the first half of 
2022, despite low consumer confidence 
and high inflation. Overall household 
budgets have been bolstered by high 
levels of employment, savings built 
up during COVID-19 lockdowns, and 
government support payments. However, 
there are very early signs that spending 
growth may be slowing. 
•	 The New Zealand economy is being 
constrained by acute labour shortages, 
made worse by high levels of sickness 
from COVID-19 and other illnesses. The 
unemployment rate is very low at 3.3 
percent. Global and local supply-chain 
bottlenecks for some materials are also 
limiting and delaying production of goods, 
and adding to overall costs.
•	 Consumers Price Index (CPI) inflation has 
continued to increase. Due to a mix of 
domestic and international factors, annual 
inflation was 7.3 percent in the June 
2022 quarter – well above the MPC’s 1 
to 3 percent target band. Measures of 
persistent or ‘core’ inflation have also 
increased. Expectations for inflation one, 
two and five years ahead have eased 
recently, but remain elevated relative to 
history.
•	 Global events have been a significant 
contributor to high headline inflation in 
New Zealand in recent quarters. The 
war in Ukraine initially resulted in sharp 
increases in the prices of oil and other 
commodities, including food. International 
trade patterns have been impacted by the 
war and by COVID-19-related lockdowns 
in major Chinese cities, adding to 
production and trade bottlenecks.  
•	 Central banks around the world have 
responded to high inflation by raising 
interest rates, often rapidly. Higher interest 
rates globally have placed downward 
pressure on the New Zealand dollar 
trade-weighted index (TWI) exchange 
rate. A lower New Zealand dollar over the 
first half of 2022 supported incomes for 
exporters, and made our imported goods 
and services more expensive. Annual 
tradables inflation was 8.7 percent in the 
June 2022 quarter. 
•	 The very tight labour market is adding 
to high CPI inflation. Wage growth is 
increasing, adding to business costs but 
supporting household spending. Annual 
non-tradables inflation was 6.3 percent in 
the June 2022 quarter.
•	 In response to rising inflationary pressures 
and a tight labour market, the MPC began 
tightening monetary policy from mid-2021. 
The MPC has been increasing the Official 
Cash Rate (OCR) since October 2021, to 
bring demand in the economy to a more 
sustainable rate of growth. So far, tighter 
monetary policy has contributed to a 
decline in nationwide house prices, and 
supported a higher New Zealand dollar 
exchange rate than otherwise.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
10
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
•	 However, a period of more moderate 
growth is needed to better match demand 
with production capacity in New Zealand. 
Higher interest rates are intended to slow 
the pace of household and business 
spending growth, with the usual lag 
of several quarters. In parallel, global 
growth is expected to ease as central 
banks respond to higher inflationary 
pressure in their own economies. Lower 
global activity will reduce demand for 
our exports, and eventually lead to lower 
import prices.
•	 Conditional upon our central economic 
outlook, the OCR is projected to increase 
by more than was assumed at the time of 
the May Statement. The higher outlook for 
interest rates reflects stronger inflationary 
pressures (global and domestic) than 
had been previously assumed. These 
pressures more than offset the weaker 
outlooks for the housing sector and global 
growth. Higher interest rates will ensure 
that demand growth slows enough for  
the MPC to meet its employment and 
inflation objectives.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
11
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
Figure 2.2
Electronic card transactions
(nominal, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 2.3
Employment rate
(seasonally adjusted, share of working-age population)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.1
Production GDP
(real, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Demand has remained resilient to 
economic headwinds to date
Underlying demand in the New Zealand 
economy has remained resilient to date, 
although there are early signs that growth 
may be slowing. High levels of government 
expenditure, ongoing construction activity, 
and elevated world prices for our commodity 
exports have underpinned economic growth. 
While quarterly GDP growth was weaker 
over the first three months of this year than 
previously assumed (figure 2.1), much of 
this weakness was likely due to significant 
capacity constraints associated with high 
COVID-19 case numbers. Additionally, the 
increase in government consumption in 
the March quarter 2022 was smaller than 
indicated in the 2022 Budget. 
Household consumption increased 4.6 
percent in the March 2022 quarter. This 
quarterly increase was higher than otherwise 
due to changing seasonal factors since 
the onset of the COVID-19 pandemic. More 
recent electronic card transaction data 
indicate that nominal spending held up at a 
national level during the June quarter (figure 
2.2), despite weak consumer confidence. 
Spending growth is showing very early signs 
of slowing in the latest monthly data.
High employment (figure 2.3) and savings 
built up during lockdowns have boosted 
household balance sheets on aggregate. 
In the near term, the Government’s Cost of 
Living Payment – being transferred to a large 
share of New Zealand’s adult population – 
will boost household spending temporarily. 
Although aggregate spending appears 
resilient there will be many households 
throughout New Zealand finding current 
economic conditions very challenging as  
the rising cost of living has outpaced  
income growth.
Current economic assessment


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
12
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
Construction sector activity has remained 
at a high level, although the outlook for 
residential construction has weakened 
as forward orders have slowed. While 
there have been declines in some of 
New Zealand’s export prices recently, 
global demand for our goods exports has 
stayed relatively strong. This has supported 
exporters’ incomes and industries that serve 
agricultural producers. The recent increase in 
international visitor arrivals following the full 
reopening of New Zealand’s border will likely 
have provided a boost to demand for our 
tourism and hospitality sectors (figure 2.4). 
However, this will be partly offset by more 
New Zealanders travelling and spending 
abroad.
Output is being constrained by 
labour shortages
Although underlying demand has remained 
resilient, output is being held back by 
widespread labour shortages. In the 
Quarterly Survey of Business Opinion 
(QSBO), businesses are reporting that labour 
is the factor most limiting production (figure 
2.5). Labour shortages are being worsened 
by workers having to stay home sick or 
to care for sick family members, due to 
COVID-19 and other winter illnesses. More 
people are leaving New Zealand than new 
migrants are arriving, so net migration has 
also been negative since 2020 and made 
labour shortages worse. Many businesses 
are having to cut output, shorten hours or 
close temporarily because they can’t find 
enough staff (see section 3.3).
Acute labour and materials shortages in the 
construction sector have constrained activity 
and added to inflationary pressures, as 
discussed later in this chapter. The number 
of building consents issued had been rising 
strongly since late 2020 with the level of 
consent issuance recently reaching a record 
level. However, the rate of translation of 
consents into completions appears to have 
slowed down, and the level of new consents 
has declined slightly in recent months  
(figure 2.6).
Figure 2.6
Building consents and code of 
compliance certificates issued
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.4
Air passenger arrivals and departures
(7-day moving average)
Source: NZ Customs.
Figure 2.5
QSBO factor most limiting production
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: NZIER, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
13
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
Figure 2.7
Distribution of annual wage increases
(labour cost index, all sectors combined, salary 
and ordinary time wage rates)
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 2.8
Maximum sustainable employment 
(MSE) indicator suite
Source: NZIER, Stats NZ, MBIE, ANZ Bank, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The Reserve Bank uses a range of indicators when assessing MSE and regards 
the December 2019 quarter as a period when this selection of indicators pointed to 
employment being at MSE. However, current outturns should not be directly compared 
to the December 2019 quarter as the level of MSE is likely lower (discussed further in 
the August 2021 Statement). The vertical lines on the left-hand and right-hand sides 
represent the lowest and highest data outcomes since 2000, respectively. An orange 
dot to the right of a black dot means that the latest data outcome was stronger than in 
the December 2019 quarter.
Employment is well above its 
maximum sustainable level
Acute labour shortages have resulted in an 
increase in staff turnover, with businesses 
finding it increasingly difficult to retain staff. 
Workers are being offered higher wages to 
change roles or to stay in current ones. This 
is reflected in average hourly earnings in the 
Quarterly Employment Survey increasing 
by 7.0 percent in the year to the June 2022 
quarter. 
Business contacts noted that the higher 
cost of living is being increasingly factored 
in to wage negotiations, and the increase 
in the minimum wage is to some extent 
being passed on to those already above the 
minimum rate. The proportion of same-job 
wage increases greater than 5 percent now 
sits near 25 percent (figure 2.7). 
The unemployment rates for different 
ethnicities, age groups, and genders are 
all at very low levels by historic standards, 
although differences persist. A wide range  
of indicators point to employment being  
well above its maximum sustainable level  
(figure 2.8).


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
14
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
Domestic inflationary pressures 
are high
Pressure on available resources and 
increasing wage inflation are adding to 
domestic inflation. Annual non-tradables 
inflation – which captures price changes for 
goods and services that are relatively less 
exposed to international competition – was 
6.3 percent in the June 2022 quarter. Much 
of this reflected construction, rent, and 
other housing-related price growth (figure 
2.9). Inflation in these groups is expected to 
ease eventually as housing market activity 
continues to decline. 
The increases in measures of core inflation 
over the past 18 months (figure 2.10) and 
tightness in the labour market suggest that 
domestic inflationary pressures will remain 
elevated in the near term, as discussed 
in section 3.2. Expectations for inflation 
one, two and five years ahead have eased 
recently, but remain elevated relative to 
history (figure 2.11).
Figure 2.11
Inflation expectations
(annual, years ahead)
Source: RBNZ Survey of Expectations (Business).
Figure 2.9
Contributions to non-tradables inflation
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.10
Core inflation measures
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
15
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
The global growth outlook is 
weaker, but inflationary pressures 
remain elevated
The war in Ukraine resulted in an initial spike 
in global commodity prices and disrupted 
global trade. At their peak, Dubai oil prices 
had increased 64 percent since the start of 
2022 (figure 2.12), leading to higher petrol 
prices in New Zealand and around the 
world. Lockdowns in some Chinese cities to 
combat the spread of COVID-19 also added 
to existing supply-chain bottlenecks and 
increased shipping times and costs. 
Faced with high inflation and underlying 
inflationary pressures in their respective 
economies (discussed further in section 3.1), 
many central banks around the world have 
started to rapidly raise interest rates. Higher 
interest rates and elevated geopolitical 
uncertainty have led to large downwards 
revisions to the outlook for global growth. 
Higher interest rates abroad have placed 
downward pressure on the New Zealand 
dollar TWI exchange rate, making our imports 
more expensive while supporting exporters’ 
returns. 
High global inflation has also contributed 
to high inflation within New Zealand, with 
annual tradables inflation reaching 8.7 
percent in the June 2022 quarter. Petrol and 
food have made the largest contributions 
(figure 2.13). However, the world prices for 
other goods that New Zealand imports have 
also increased sharply over the past year 
(figure 2.14). These price increases have 
been across all types of imports, but notably 
consumer goods and intermediate goods 
used in domestic production. 
Figure 2.12
Petrol and Dubai oil prices
Source: Datamine – Gaspy data, Stats NZ, Reuters, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Gaspy fuel prices are indexed to the petrol CPI level in the December 2019 quarter.
Figure 2.14
Ex-oil import prices
(nominal world terms, seasonally adjusted, SNA)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.13
Contributions to tradables inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
16
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
Inflation is too high
At 7.3 percent on an annual basis, headline 
CPI inflation in New Zealand is well above 
the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target band. High 
inflation is accounted for by both domestic 
and global factors, in roughly equal measure 
(figure 2.15). As discussed in section 3.2, 
some of the reasons for inflation being higher 
than expected are events that could not 
have reasonably been anticipated at the start 
of the year, including the Russian invasion 
of Ukraine. Moreover, there were initially 
widespread expectations that the impact of 
the pandemic would lead to a decline in the 
rate of CPI inflation in the medium term (see 
figure 2.11). However, non-tradables inflation 
has also been higher than forecast, which 
may reflect that the degree of labour market 
tightness has been greater than previously 
assumed. 
Higher interest rates are lowering 
house prices
The MPC began tightening monetary policy 
from mid-2021 in response to growing 
inflationary pressures and a tight labour 
market. The actual and forecast increases 
in the OCR have caused mortgage rates to 
increase rapidly over the past 12 months. 
Higher mortgage rates – along with 
regulatory measures (such as changes 
to the Credit Contracts and Consumer 
Finance Act and tighter loan-to-value ratio 
restrictions), weaker population growth, and 
strong building activity – have contributed to 
the decline in house prices since late 2021 
(figure 2.16). 
Figure 2.15
Contributions to CPI inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.16
House prices
(nominal)
Source: CoreLogic, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
17
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
While there is considerable uncertainty 
about the outlook for house prices, the 
central projection assumes that prices will 
continue to decline until the September 2023 
quarter. This would result in a total decline 
of 15 percent from the December 2021 
quarter peak, slightly more than assumed 
in the May Statement. Lower house prices 
and higher mortgage rates are assumed 
to result in weaker household spending, 
as households feel less wealthy and more 
of their incomes go towards servicing their 
debts. As discussed in section 4.2 of the May 
Statement, there is a portion of recent home 
buyers who are most vulnerable to rising 
interest rates, notably those who borrowed 
for the first time in 2021. Household 
consumption growth is assumed to decline 
on a per capita basis over much of the 
projection (figure 2.17).
While residential construction activity is 
starting from a strong position, the outlook 
has cooled. The weaker outlook reflects 
tighter credit conditions, higher interest rates, 
labour and materials shortages, and lower 
house prices, which all make residential 
property development less attractive. 
Residential investment is assumed to ease 
fairly gradually in the near term as builders 
work through the large pipeline of consented 
projects, before declining as a share of the 
economy over the medium term (figure 2.18).
Figure 2.18
Residential investment
(real, share of potential output, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.17
Household consumption per capita
(real, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
18
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
Tighter monetary policy in New Zealand has 
kept the New Zealand dollar exchange rate 
higher than it would have otherwise been 
in the face of higher interest rates abroad. 
A weaker global outlook due to monetary 
policy tightening is expected to lower the 
prices of our exports over the medium term, 
while the prices of our imported goods ease 
only gradually. The net result is a lower terms 
of trade over the projection (figure 2.19). 
Lower export prices, higher interest rates, 
easing demand, and elevated uncertainty are 
also assumed to slow the pace of business 
investment over the projection.
Overall, the pace of economic growth in  
New Zealand is expected to ease over 
coming years. This easing in growth is 
required to bring employment towards its 
sustainable level and inflation to target over 
the medium term. Actual GDP growth will 
likely be boosted in the near term by the 
recovery in international tourism, which may 
create considerable volatility in the published 
data. Nominal government spending is 
assumed to grow in a manner consistent  
with  the fiscal forecasts outlined in the  
2022 Budget. Any government expenditure 
above this is likely to require higher interest 
rates in response, to enable the domestic 
economy to rebalance and reach a more 
sustainable pace of growth. 
Figure 2.20
Annual CPI inflation
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.19
Terms of trade
(goods and services, seasonally adjusted, SNA)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
19
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
Figure 2.22
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.21
Unemployment rate
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Higher interest rates are needed 
CPI inflation is higher over the projection than 
assumed in the May Statement. Imported 
inflation remains elevated for longer as 
global supply constraints linger. Domestic 
labour and materials constraints, coupled 
with slightly more domestic spending 
resilience, underpin momentum in non-
tradables inflation. The decline in domestic 
spending growth due to higher interest rates 
and an easing in global demand are assumed 
to reduce pressure on available resources, 
and ease domestic inflationary pressure. 
Imported inflation is assumed to decline as 
higher global interest rates slow inflation 
abroad and some supply bottlenecks ease. 
Annual CPI inflation is projected to return 
to the target band by mid-2024, and to 2 
percent by the end of the projection (figure 
2.20). The decline in economic growth and 
gradual increase in labour supply as net 
immigration recovers are assumed to result 
in an unemployment rate that is closer to a 
more sustainable level (figure 2.21).
Conditional upon our central economic 
outlook and assumptions, the OCR is 
projected to increase by more than was 
assumed at the time of the May Statement 
(figure 2.22). The higher outlook for interest 
rates reflects stronger inflationary pressures 
(global and domestic) than had been 
previously assumed. These pressures more 
than offset the weaker outlooks for the 
housing sector and global growth. Higher 
interest rates will ensure that demand 
slows sufficiently for the MPC to meet its 
employment and inflation objectives.
Monetary policy outlook


Chapter 3 Special topics
20
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
CHAPTER 
03
Special topics
Central Otago. Photo: Paul Conway


Chapter 3 Special topics
21
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
CHAPTER 3 
Special topics 
Before each Statement, the MPC is provided with analysis  
of some topical issues.
Topics for the August Statement included:
1.	 Global inflation developments.
2.	 Assessing recent inflation surprises.
3.	 Business conditions. 
Previous special topics in the past 12 months
Topic
Date/publication
Global inflation developments
MPS May 2022 (Chapter 4)
The outlook for household spending, house prices, and 
construction
MPS May 2022 (Chapter 4)
International developments and risks
MPS February 2022 (Chapter 4)
Inflation expectations
MPS February 2022 (Chapter 4)
Transmission of global developments to  
New Zealand’s economy
MPS November 2021 (Chapter 4)
Outlook for New Zealand’s productive capacity
MPS November 2021 (Chapter 4)
Climate change and inflation
MPS November 2021 (Chapter 4)
The recovery of New Zealand’s labour market
MPS August 2021 (Chapter 4)
The neutral interest rate
MPS August 2021 (Chapter 4)


Chapter 3 Special topics
22
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
            Global inflation developments
Inflation has risen sharply across the globe, 
reaching new multi-decade highs in many 
economies (figure 3.1). Commodity prices, 
particularly for food and energy, remain 
elevated due to supply issues caused by 
the Ukraine war and strong global demand. 
Ongoing supply-chain disruptions have 
put upward pressure on consumer goods 
prices. Underlying inflationary pressure has 
broadened as consumer demand for both 
goods and services has strengthened, and 
tight labour markets have contributed to 
rising wage growth. 
Core and headline inflation measures are 
elevated in most countries due to shared 
international influences, with similar patterns 
across inflation subcomponents like food, 
transport, and housing. Despite similar 
trends, there are substantial differences 
in inflation between economies. These 
differences reflect both regional factors such 
as exposure to the war in Ukraine, and local 
economic conditions. 
Pricing pressures remain high, 
but are showing early signs of 
moderation 
Rapid and large fiscal and monetary 
support following the onset of the COVID-19 
pandemic in 2020, coupled with strict 
activity restrictions, saw a sharp rise in goods 
demand worldwide.  As most countries lifted 
mobility restrictions, demand for services also 
increased. Strong aggregate demand has 
contributed to higher inflation across a broad 
range of goods and services, as observed in 
measures of core inflation. 
Capacity pressures have been increasing 
globally, although the extent varies across 
countries. Unemployment rates remain low 
in most advanced economies (table 3.2), with 
high levels of job vacancies. Tight labour 
markets, in addition to higher consumer price 
inflation, have led to rising wage pressures 
as employers offer increasingly competitive 
wages. 
These labour capacity constraints have been 
exacerbated by tighter supplies of some 
global commodities following the start of the 
Ukraine war in early 2022. These pressures 
have been particularly pronounced in 
food and energy markets.  Further, recent 
COVID-19 lockdowns in some major cities 
across China have disrupted the production 
and transport of some goods globally, 
creating widespread pressures in the prices 
of materials and manufactured goods (see 
section 4.1 of the May 2022 Statement). 
Figure 3.1
Latest headline consumer price inflation 
across selected OECD countries
(annual)
Source: Organization for Economic Cooperation & Development (OECD). 
Note: OECD average excludes Turkey; data is for the month of June 2022 except for 
Australia and New Zealand which is for the June 2022 quarter.
1


Chapter 3 Special topics
23
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
Supply-chain and war-related disruptions 
will continue to be important determinants 
of the future path of inflation. There have 
been very early signs that global supply 
chains are improving as shipping costs 
for some routes and certain goods have 
declined this year (figure 3.2), and survey 
measures of global delivery times for orders 
have improved. Strict COVID-19 lockdown 
measures over the first half of the year in 
a number of Chinese cities disrupted the 
production and transportation of goods, 
but activity resumed following the easing of 
some restrictions. Oil and a number of other 
commodity prices have declined in recent 
months due to easing supply-side pressures 
and expectations of lower global demand, 
although prices remain elevated.
Inflationary pressures differ across 
regions 
A number of shared global trends are 
boosting inflation, such as rising food and 
energy prices, supply-chain disruptions 
that impact goods prices, rising wages, and 
strong global demand. However, there are 
some substantial differences in inflation 
between economies. These differences 
reflect both local economic conditions and 
exposure to disruptions resulting from the 
Ukraine war.
The rise in headline inflation in Europe has 
been amplified by the regional impacts of 
the Ukraine war. This is partly due to Russia’s 
role as a major supplier of natural gas to 
Europe. The increasing risk of a further 
reduction in gas flows to Europe has resulted 
in a significant increase in prices. Prices of 
other types of energy such as coal, which is a 
power generation substitute for natural gas, 
are also higher. These increases in energy 
prices are making a larger contribution to 
inflation in Europe than they are in other 
regions.
In China, inflation remains lower than in the 
rest of the world. In part, prices in China have 
been sheltered from global pressures due to 
domestic production and reserves reducing 
the reliance on imported food and energy. 
Domestic demand pressures have been 
lower as COVID-19 lockdowns in a number of 
major cities have increased uncertainty and 
suppressed activity.
New Zealand, Australia, and the United 
States are experiencing similar trends in 
headline and core CPI inflation (figure 3.3). 
Compared to New Zealand, inflation is higher 
in the US and slightly lower in Australia. 
Although international factors are important 
influences on inflation in all three countries, 
varied economic conditions are contributing 
to the relative differences in inflationary 
pressures. We can see differences in some 
of the key subcomponents of inflation across 
the three economies (table 3.1). 
Figure 3.2
Global cross-border transportation costs
(Index = 100 at 1 Jan 2019)
Source: Refinitiv. 
Note: Baltic airfreight index, Baltic dry index, and Baltic container index.
Figure 3.3
Headline and core inflation
Source: Stats NZ, Australian Bureau of Statistics, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Haver Analytics.
Note: Solid lines refer to headline inflation, dashed lines refer to the average across a 
number of core inflation measures.


Chapter 3 Special topics
24
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
•	 Food: Food price increases are higher 
in the US compared to New Zealand 
and Australia, in part due to higher 
transportation costs and input prices 
like agricultural chemicals. Food price 
inflation is highest in the US across most 
sub-groups including dairy, meat, and 
restaurant meals.
•	 Petrol: Petrol price inflation is notably 
stronger in the US, causing transport 
inflation to be higher than it is in 
New Zealand and Australia. All three 
countries have cut taxes on fuel to help 
consumers with the elevated costs. Tax 
on US petrol is significantly less than it is 
in Australia and New Zealand, resulting 
in oil price fluctuations having a larger 
proportional impact on consumer fuel 
prices in the US.
•	 Consumer goods: Prices for a range 
of goods have increased faster in the 
US than in Australia and New Zealand, 
including prices for new cars and apparel. 
•	 Housing: Rent inflation is lower in 
Australia than it is in New Zealand and 
the US, in part reflecting the increase in 
housing stock in Australia since 2015. 
Rental inflation is increasing across 
all three countries. Construction cost 
inflation is very high in both Australia and 
New Zealand due to significant shortages 
of workers and construction materials 
(construction costs are not included in the 
US CPI basket).
•	 Services: Services inflation is rising due 
to a combination of elevated demand 
as activity resumes and tighter labour 
markets. Wage pressures play an 
important role in the services component 
of inflation. Compared to New Zealand, 
wage inflation is higher in the US 
and slightly lower in Australia. This is 
consistent with the relative degrees 
of consumer price inflation and labour 
market tightness across the economies.
Table 3.1
Subcomponents of annual CPI inflation, June quarter 2022
New Zealand
Australia
United States
Food 
6.5%
5.9%
10.0%
Petrol
32.5%
32.1%
58.7%
Rents
4.3%
1.6%
5.3%
Construction costs
18.3%
20.3%
N/A
Services (ex. housing)
3.7%
3.4%
6.9%
Note: US figures represent an average of the months over the June quarter. Construction costs are not included in the US CPI basket. 
Sources: Stats NZ, Australian Bureau of Statistics, Bureau of Labor Statistics, Haver Analytics.


Chapter 3 Special topics
25
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
The outlook for inflation remains 
uncertain, but there are signs 
pressures are moderating
Globally, central banks are responding to 
high inflationary pressure by tightening 
monetary policy faster, and by more, than 
expected in early 2022. The US Federal 
Reserve, Bank of Canada, Reserve Bank of 
Australia, Bank of England, and European 
Central Bank have all raised their policy rates 
since the May Statement by 50 to 150 basis 
points (table 3.2). 
The rate at which inflation will decline back 
towards central bank targets will depend 
on how quickly demand moderates, supply 
chains improve, and geopolitical tensions are 
resolved. Most forecasters expect inflation in 
advanced economies to peak in 2022 and 
decline significantly over 2023, supported by 
lower commodity prices, an easing in supply-
chain constraints, and slowing aggregate 
demand growth as a result of central bank 
tightening. Measures of market-implied 
inflation expectations also suggest inflation 
will ease considerably over the next year, 
and long-term market inflation expectations 
remain near central bank targets.
There is considerable uncertainty about 
the outlook for inflation. Further supply-
chain or geopolitical disruptions could 
put additional upward pressure on global 
inflation. For example, China’s ongoing 
policy for COVID-19 elimination may result 
in further supply disruptions if containing 
future outbreaks requires strict lockdown 
measures. However, global demand could 
slow more sharply than anticipated in 
response to tightening monetary policy, 
resulting in a faster reduction in inflation. 
How global inflationary pressures evolve 
will have significant effects on inflation in 
New Zealand.
Table 3.2
Central bank snapshot as of 12 August 2022 
Fed
BoC
RBA
BoE
ECB
RBNZ
Policy rate
2.25-2.50%
2.50%
1.85%
1.75%
0.00%
2.50%
Policy rate as at the May Statement 
0.75-1.00%
1.00%
0.35%
1.00%
-0.50%
1.50%
Annual headline consumer price 
inflation
9.1%
8.1%
6.1%
9.4%
8.6%
7.3%
Unemployment rate
3.5%
4.9%
3.5%
3.8%
6.6%
3.3%
Source: US Federal Reserve (Fed), Bank of Canada (BoC), Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA), Bank of England (BoE), European Central Bank (ECB),  
Reserve Bank of New Zealand (RBNZ).


Chapter 3 Special topics
26
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
            Assessing recent inflation surprises
1	
World Economic Outlook Update (International Monetary Fund,  
July 2022).
The annual rate of CPI inflation in 
New Zealand is high, at 7.3 percent in 
the June 2022 quarter. It has also been 
significantly higher than the Reserve Bank 
and most private forecasters expected 
over the past year (figure 3.4). International 
forecasters have experienced similar 
challenges, with most central banks globally 
underestimating the rate of inflation.1 Global 
inflation forecasts have been revised steadily 
upwards over the last 18 months.1
Over the past five quarters, annual inflation 
in New Zealand has averaged around 0.5 
percentage points higher than the Reserve 
Bank’s one-quarter-ahead forecast published 
in each Statement (figure 3.5). While this 
average is skewed by two particularly large 
surprises in the June and September 2021 
quarters, the overall direction of the surprise 
has continued. This surprise has been 
accounted for by both tradables and non-
tradables inflation (figures 3.6 and 3.7).
Some of the unexpected strength in 
inflation can be explained by international 
developments, such as the COVID-19 
resurgence in China and the Russian 
invasion of Ukraine. Unanticipated global 
developments can also affect domestic 
prices, as workers seek higher wages to 
help afford the increased costs of imported 
items such as petrol. However, the size and 
persistence of the surprises in non-tradables 
inflation imply that domestic factors are also 
contributing.
2
Figure 3.4
Reserve Bank annual CPI inflation 
forecasts since 2021
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 3.5
CPI inflation vs forecast 
(one quarter ahead)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 3.6
Reserve Bank annual tradables 
inflation forecasts since 2021
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 3 Special topics
27
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
Figure 3.8 shows that three subgroups of 
the CPI have made the largest contributions 
to higher-than-forecast inflation one quarter 
ahead. These are the transport (mainly fuel), 
housing and household utilities (mainly home 
building costs), and recreation and culture 
groups.
Within the transport group, petrol and 
other vehicle fuels (which includes diesel) 
contributed the most to higher-than-forecast 
inflation. The Reserve Bank uses the 
pricing of oil futures in financial markets as 
an indicator for expected oil prices. Petrol 
price forecasts also take into account the 
exchange rate, assumptions regarding 
refining and retailer margins, and fuel tax 
changes. Energy prices increased much 
more rapidly than oil futures indicated 
over 2021 and the beginning of this year, 
particularly after the Russian invasion of 
Ukraine, which accounts for much of the 
forecast error.  
The upside surprises in the housing and 
household utilities group have been from the 
home ownership subgroup, which represents 
the cost of building a house. Most of the 
error occurred in the middle of 2021, when 
capacity constraints in the construction 
sector became particularly acute. We 
currently assume that high construction 
cost inflation remains more persistent than 
would historically be expected based on 
house price growth, given ongoing labour 
shortages and supply bottlenecks in 
materials. 
The ‘other’ recreational equipment and 
supplies subgroup, which includes board 
games and sports equipment, was another 
significant contributor to higher-than-forecast 
inflation. Much of this also occurred in the 
June and September quarters of 2021. These 
quarters coincided with the peak in supply-
chain issues related to global container 
shipping and the strong demand for durable 
goods due to pandemic-related lockdowns 
and border restrictions.
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Figure 3.8 plots the average one-quarter-ahead forecast error at the CPI group level. 
The sum of the bars is equal to the average total error.
Figure 3.8
Average forecast error contribution by CPI group
Figure 3.7
Reserve Bank annual non-tradables 
inflation forecasts since 2021
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 3 Special topics
28
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
While these groups have contributed the 
most on average to inflation being higher 
than expected, the direction and size of 
these errors have not been persistent across 
each quarterly forecast (figure 3.9). For the 
most part, the source of each quarterly error 
has been identified and corrected for in 
subsequent forecasts. 
Although it is important for the Reserve Bank 
to understand and correct for such errors, 
monetary policy takes time to influence 
the economy and can therefore do little to 
address near-term inflation developments. 
The Reserve Bank’s primary concern is to 
identify any inflation surprises in the most 
recent data that are likely to persist into the 
medium term. 
Even accounting for the subgroups 
discussed above, inflation – particularly for 
non-tradable domestic goods and services 
– has still been higher than expected. 
Non-tradables inflation is historically more 
persistent than tradables inflation, and is 
also more responsive to monetary policy. 
The acute shortage of workers in particular 
has been greater than anticipated (figure 
3.10) and has led to increased wage inflation 
across many industries. This broad-based 
pressure is consistent with generally higher-
than-forecast inflation. The tightness of the 
labour market reflects labour shortages due 
to earlier lockdowns and border restrictions, 
COVID-19 and the spread of other illnesses. 
It also reflects strong labour demand, in part 
due to expansionary monetary and fiscal 
policy in the initial response to the COVID-19 
pandemic.  
Looking ahead, we expect the balance of 
inflationary pressures to shift from tradables 
to non-tradables due to ongoing labour 
shortages. The inflationary consequences 
of this labour market tightness are assumed 
to be greater than they were at the time of 
the May Statement. Over 2021 and early 
2022, tradables inflation was high due to 
strong goods demand. This occurred during 
a period when international shipping delays 
and the war in Ukraine meant the ability to 
transport goods was heavily constrained and 
raw materials were getting more costly. 
As New Zealand has transitioned to living 
with COVID-19, spending patterns have 
changed with the reopening of the economy. 
This has led to a shift in demand from goods 
back towards services. This is occurring at 
a time when the biggest supply constraints 
are shifting to the services sector due to the 
incredibly tight labour market.
Figure 3.9
Forecast error contributions by CPI group
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Figure 3.9 plots the individual contribution from each CPI group to the overall CPI 
forecast error. The coloured bars are the four largest group contributions to the forecast 
error, with the grey bars capturing the residual seven groups. The black diamond indicates 
the total forecast error.
Figure 3.10
Reserve Bank unemployment rate forecasts since 2021
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 3 Special topics
29
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
  Business conditions
The Reserve Bank regularly meets with 
businesses, industry representatives, and 
other organisations across the country to 
learn more about economic conditions and 
challenges or constraints being faced. We 
use this information to complement data 
from surveys such as the QSBO and ANZBO, 
and from other sources such as Stats NZ. 
Insights from businesses are particularly 
useful when the economic environment is 
changing rapidly, and when the structure of 
the economy appears to be shifting. 
In the past month, Reserve Bank staff have 
spoken with representatives from a range of 
industries and regions. The key observations 
from these discussions are summarised 
in this section, supported by insights from 
economic data.
Demand remains resilient, but 
output is constrained
While businesses are facing many headwinds 
– as reflected in very low levels of business 
confidence – business activity has remained 
resilient to date (figures 3.11 and 3.12). As 
discussed in chapter 2, aggregate retail 
spending is holding up. Most businesses and 
sector representatives we spoke to, including 
exporters, had yet to see any decline in 
demand. Consistent with larger business 
surveys, businesses related to residential 
construction were the exception, with the 
easing in demand apparent only in recent 
months (figure 3.13).
Figure 3.11
General business confidence
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: ANZ Bank, NZIER. 
Figure 3.12
Own trading activity
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: ANZ Bank, NZIER. 
Figure 3.13
ANZBO expected construction sector activity
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: ANZ Bank.


Chapter 3 Special topics
30
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
Although demand remains resilient, output 
is being constrained by an acute shortage of 
labour across all sectors. The labour market 
appears to be the tightest it has been in 50 
years, indicated by labour exceeding orders 
as the factor most limiting production for 
the first time since 1972 (figure 3.14). These 
general labour shortages are being made 
worse by high levels of worker sickness 
due to COVID-19 and other illnesses. Some 
businesses either reported occasions 
when more than half their labour force was 
unable to work, or levels of sickness two 
or three times higher than usual for this 
time of year. Some businesses, particularly 
smaller operators, are having to reduce 
their operating hours, reduce their levels 
of service, or close entirely on a temporary 
basis due to a lack of staff.
While supply-chain disruptions remain an 
issue, there was a general perception that 
businesses were able to adapt to these 
challenges. Many had built up inventory to 
enable them to better manage production, 
and some had been able to pass on the 
storage costs to customers who recognised 
it would likely be cheaper than trying to 
source materials later. Several also noted that 
they had needed to improve their planning 
processes significantly given longer lead 
times for inputs. Most felt there was a general 
recognition from customers that orders 
would take longer, so they were not losing 
customers as a result.
A tight labour market is putting 
upward pressure on wages
The tight labour market has meant that 
employee retention has been increasingly 
difficult, with turnover at historically high 
levels (figure 3.15). Businesses have seen 
only slight relief in finding staff since the 
opening of the New Zealand border. The 
open border was widely expected to make 
the overall labour situation worse on net, as 
more workers (particularly younger ones) 
were looking to relocate overseas. 
Figure 3.14
QSBO labour and orders as the 
factors most limiting production
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: NZIER. 
Figure 3.15
Labour turnover
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: NZIER.


Chapter 3 Special topics
31
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
As reflected in the QSBO, labour has been 
difficult to find across all skill levels (figure 
3.16). Wage pressures were continuing to 
increase. Numerous contacts said that the 
high inflation rate and frequent discussion 
in the media about the cost of living had 
resulted in workers seeking higher wages. 
Some contacts said that staff who would 
normally not have paid much attention to 
inflation were now actively using it as part 
of the wage bargaining process. As shown 
in chapter 2, the share of annual wage and 
salary increases above 5 percent has been 
increasing since 2021. 
Some businesses were also increasing the 
frequency of wage and salary reviews in 
response to tight labour market conditions. 
Many contacts noted that employees were 
being offered higher salaries by competitors. 
Poaching of staff was increasingly common, 
as were financial incentives for existing staff 
if they found an additional worker for the 
company.
Investment is weakening due to 
higher interest rates and elevated 
global uncertainty
To address labour shortages, some 
businesses were looking to increase 
automation where possible. Some larger 
businesses were continuing with investment 
projects that had been planned for some 
time. Smaller businesses were holding 
back on investment (beyond repairs and 
maintenance) in the face of significant global 
uncertainty (figure 3.17). At the aggregate 
level, reported investment intentions have 
declined in recent quarters, across different 
investment types (figure 3.18).
Figure 3.16
Difficulty in finding labour
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: NZIER. 
Figure 3.17
National economic uncertainty index
Source: Sense Partners. 
Figure 3.18
Investment intentions
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: NZIER. 


Chapter 3 Special topics
32
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
Firms are passing on higher costs
Businesses told us that they were passing 
on most of the higher labour and materials 
costs they were facing. Many said that strong 
demand made this possible, and others 
said that they simply had no choice given 
low profit margins. Builders have not been 
providing fixed-price contracts for some time. 
Labour was the most significant cost for 
many contacts across sectors, although 
prices for manufacturing input materials and 
construction materials had also increased. 
Consistent with the QSBO, where expected 
costs and prices are at very high levels 
(figure 3.19), many contacts expected cost 
and price pressures to remain elevated for 
some time. When asked why this was the 
case, most attributed this to global factors. 
For the first time, we heard several reports 
of businesses increasing the frequency 
with which they adjust prices and wages. 
While data on this has been available in past 
business operations surveys, it is collected 
sporadically and has not been updated 
recently.
With continued demand and the ability to 
pass on higher costs into prices in most 
cases, profitability remains relatively resilient 
to date (figure 3.20). Outside the property 
development sector, businesses did not 
report difficulties accessing credit, although 
this was generally acquired at higher interest 
rates than experienced recently. Business 
sector credit growth has been gradually 
increasing, with much of this reflecting 
demand for working capital in order to 
address cash flow challenges  
posed by unpredictable supply chains. 
Source: NZIER. 
Figure 3.19
Reported costs and selling prices
(seasonally adjusted)
Figure 3.20
Reported profitability
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: NZIER. 


Chapter 4 Financial conditions
33
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
CHAPTER 
04
Financial 
conditions
Autumn leaves at Arrowtown. Photo: Paul Conway


Chapter 4 Financial conditions
34
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
CHAPTER 4
Financial conditions
A key way monetary policy affects economic activity is by 
influencing financial conditions in New Zealand. These include 
the interest rates at which households and businesses save 
and borrow, the exchange rate, and other factors such as credit 
availability. 
Financial conditions have tightened slightly since the 
May Statement
The MPC has been tightening monetary 
conditions since mid-2021. Since the May 
Statement, the MPC has continued to 
increase the OCR and domestic financial 
conditions have continued to tighten 
somewhat. The OCR is above our current 
estimate of its neutral level, indicating that 
monetary conditions are likely reducing 
economic demand. Over recent months, 
mortgage and term deposit rates have 
increased. Wholesale interest rates have 
also risen, largely tracking changes in global 
interest rates, and movements have been 
increasingly volatile. Global financial market 
volatility has been elevated as investors 
balance expectations of central bank 
tightening to counter inflationary pressure in 
the near term, and a deteriorating outlook for 
economic activity in the medium term. 
Wholesale interest rates have 
been driven by overseas 
developments
The MPC has continued raising the OCR 
since the May Statement, to above our 
average estimate of neutral of about 2 
percent. This indicates that monetary 
policy is likely acting to slow down the 
rate of spending growth, easing domestic 
inflationary pressure. Furthermore, with 
the market pricing further OCR increases, 
financial conditions overall are more 
restrictive than the level of the OCR alone 
would imply. Pricing for overnight indexed 
swap (OIS) contracts suggests that market 
participants believe the OCR is likely to reach 
at least 3.75 percent by November 2022 
(figure 4.1), and remain around this level over 
the first half of 2023. 
Figure 4.1
Market expectations for the OCR
Source: Bloomberg.
Note: The three lines represent market expectations of the level of the OCR at a given 
point in the future, as measured by overnight indexed swap pricing. For example, the 
August 2022 Statement line shows expectations for the OCR at the time of the August 
2022 Statement.


Chapter 4 Financial conditions
35
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
The higher OCR projection in the May 
Statement and the faster pace of monetary 
policy tightening offshore contributed to 
higher market expectations for the OCR. 
Expectations for future settings of the OCR 
have an important influence on financial 
conditions today. This is because fixed-term 
interest rates for households and businesses 
are influenced by wholesale rates at those 
terms, which are in turn influenced by 
expectations of the OCR.
Domestic wholesale rates at terms most 
relevant to households – one and two years 
– have increased, although longer-term 
wholesale rates have not. The 2-year interest 
rate swap – a key wholesale benchmark rate 
– is now higher than both the 5-year and 10-
year interest rate. This suggests the market 
expects the OCR to rise in the short term, but 
to settle at a lower rate in the longer term. 
This pattern in interest rate expectations is 
similar to those in several other economies 
including the US, and consistent with the 
shape of the OCR projection presented in 
chapter 2.
Domestic wholesale rates have been 
subject to significant volatility recently, 
and this is linked to similar volatility in 
overseas wholesale markets. We have 
observed significant co-movement in the 
wholesale rate markets of the US, Australia 
and New Zealand (figure 4.2). Volatility in 
global wholesale markets has been high as 
markets perceive there to be considerable 
uncertainty about the future path of interest 
rates. Investors are facing uncertainty about 
how quickly and how far central banks will 
raise policy rates in order to return inflation to 
target, and how economies will be affected 
by tightening in monetary policy. Additionally, 
the pricing of these macroeconomic 
considerations has been complicated by a 
deterioration in market liquidity conditions 
linked to the volatility in global interest rate 
markets. This has meant that it has been 
more expensive for market participants to 
transact.
The New Zealand dollar is broadly 
unchanged
The New Zealand dollar exchange rate is 
broadly unchanged on a trade-weighted 
basis since the May Statement, with 
movements over this period largely aligning 
with changes in global investor risk appetite 
(figure 4.3). 
Figure 4.2
Global 2-year interest rate swap rates
Source: Bloomberg.
Figure 4.3
New Zealand dollar TWI and selected 
bilateral exchange rates
(Index = 100 at day of May Statement)
Source: RBNZ, NZFMA.


Chapter 4 Financial conditions
36
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
An initial period of New Zealand dollar 
weakness from June until mid-July was 
driven by deteriorating global risk appetite. 
This was due to the US Federal Reserve 
increasing its pace of monetary tightening 
in response to higher inflation, as well as 
the global growth outlook deteriorating. 
These factors increased investors’ demand 
for the US dollar given its status as a safe-
haven currency. Commodity prices have 
also weakened since the May Statement, 
and this has contributed to weakness in the 
New Zealand dollar.  
The subsequent appreciation in the 
New Zealand dollar has been driven by an 
improvement in investor sentiment since  
mid-July, supported by lower expectations 
for the peak of the US Federal Reserve’s 
policy rate. This improved sentiment was also 
seen in US equities, with July 2022 being the 
market’s strongest month since 2020. 
Bank credit spreads have 
increased 
Bank credit spreads, a measure of the 
additional cost above benchmark wholesale 
rates paid by banks to issue debt to 
wholesale investors, have trended higher 
over 2022 (figure 4.4). A higher credit spread 
suggests investors are seeking greater 
compensation to take on the risk of owning 
this debt. The widening in this spread is 
consistent with the deterioration in global risk 
sentiment and high volatility in global interest 
rates since the May Statement, particularly  
in June. 
Higher wholesale rates have been 
passed on to mortgage rates
Mortgage rates at the most popular 1- and 
2-year terms have increased by around 50 
and 20 basis points respectively since the 
May Statement (figure 4.5). Mortgage rates 
had moved even higher but have since 
retreated following the partial retracements 
in wholesale rates. Higher mortgage rates will 
continue to filter through to larger mortgage 
payments for many households over the 
remainder of the year. Roughly 10 percent 
of mortgages are on floating rates and one 
quarter of the remaining loans are are due to 
re-price in the final six months of 2022. 
Source: Bloomberg, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: This credit spread is the difference between banks’ secondary market bond yields 
and the interest rate swap curve. The bond yields used for the 5-year measure are the 
averages of bonds with a remaining maturity of five years issued in New Zealand dollars by 
ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac. A lower spread represents a lower implied borrowing cost.
Figure 4.4
5-year bank credit spread
Figure 4.5
Mortgage rates and average interest 
rate on outstanding mortgages
Source: interest.co.nz, RBNZ Income Statement survey.
Note: The mortgage rate shown for each term is the average of the latest ‘special’ fixed-
term rates on offer from ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac. The average rate is the average 
interest rate paid on all outstanding mortgages.


Chapter 4 Financial conditions
37
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
Term deposit rates are increasing 
as wholesale rates rise
Rates on term deposits, which make up 
around a quarter of bank funding, have 
increased by around 60 and 100 basis 
points respectively at the popular 6-month 
and 1-year terms since the May Statement 
(figure 4.6). Term deposit volumes have also 
increased as on-call deposit volumes have 
decreased (figure 4.7). This increases banks’ 
average funding costs because term deposit 
rates are higher than the interest rates for on-
call deposits. 
While term deposit rates have increased 
since the May Statement, the spread of term 
deposits to relevant benchmark wholesale 
rates remains very low (figure 4.8). Six-
month term deposits were priced roughly 
one percentage point above the relevant 
benchmark wholesale rate on average since 
2010, whereas currently they are priced close 
to one percentage point below. The relatively 
low term deposit rates in part reflect the fact 
that banks are currently well funded, and may 
not be competing strongly for term deposits 
despite them being a relatively cheap source 
of funding. 
Whether and when competition for retail 
deposits, and hence deposit rates, increases 
will influence the overall financial conditions 
faced by households and businesses. Banks 
are currently well funded and have strong 
liquidity buffers. Competition between banks 
for retail deposits is likely to increase as 
additional allocations from the Funding for 
Lending Programme end on 6 December. 
Term deposit rates are low relative to 
alternative funding sources. As a result, 
banks are likely to prefer term deposits 
as their wholesale funding matures. If the 
spread of deposit rates relative to wholesale 
rates begins to normalise, it will place upward 
pressure on banks’ funding costs, which 
may be passed through to their lending 
rates, resulting in a tightening of financial 
conditions for borrowers.
Figure 4.7
Monthly changes in deposit volumes
(3-month moving average)
Source: RBNZ Bank Balance Sheet survey.
Note: This shows the monthly change in 3-month moving average deposit volumes for 
locally incorporated registered banks. 
Figure 4.6
Term deposit rates
Source: interest.co.nz.
Note: The rate shown for each term is the average of the latest term deposit rates on offer 
from ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac.
Figure 4.8
6-month term deposit to bank bill spread
Source: Bloomberg, interest.co.nz.
Note: This chart shows the difference between the 6-month term deposit and the 6-month 
bank bill benchmark rate (BKBM).


Chapter 5 Economic projection
38
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
CHAPTER 
05
Economic 
projection
Mt Kaukau sunset. Photo: Rebecca Williams


Chapter 5 Economic projection
39
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
CHAPTER 5
Economic projection
This chapter summarises the economic projection that the MPC 
considered when making its policy assessment. The projection 
was finalised on 12 August 2022. 
This projection relies on a set of key 
assumptions about the global and domestic 
economy. These include:
•	 the pricing impacts of labour shortages 
and supply-chain bottlenecks, and how 
and when these delays in the production 
and delivery of goods are likely to ease;
•	 how the behaviour of businesses, 
consumers, and workers might adapt to 
living with COVID-19 in the community; 
•	 how businesses, consumers, and workers 
respond to rising costs and higher 
interest rates;
•	 the speed and strength of the recovery of 
international tourism in New Zealand;
•	 the pace and extent that central banks 
around the world are raising interest 
rates; and
•	 the outlook for global growth and 
inflation.
There is significant uncertainty about these 
assumptions, and outcomes could be 
different if they do not hold. 
The projection takes into account recent 
data, which show rising inflation and a very 
tight labour market. The factors underpinning 
this starting point are discussed in chapter 2.
Inflation will remain elevated in the near 
term. Global inflationary pressures stemming 
from COVID-19 and the war in Ukraine 
continue to feed through to domestic 
inflation. Additionally, domestic demand 
remained robust over the first half of 2022. 
This has led to ongoing labour and materials 
shortages and put upwards pressure on 
prices. 
Over the medium term, we assume that 
higher interest rates in New Zealand will 
reduce domestic demand growth. Supply 
constraints are also expected to ease due to 
gradual improvements in the availability of 
materials, population growth through natural 
increase and net immigration, and a fading 
impact of COVID-19 on staff absences. Oil 
prices are expected to fall, and the price 
increases of New Zealand’s other imports 
are expected to moderate. As a result, 
CPI inflation is expected to return to its 2 
percent target midpoint in 2025. A rising 
unemployment rate from exceptionally low 
levels will be required to achieve this target. 


Chapter 5 Economic projection
40
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
Table 5.1
Key projection assumptions
Key factors
House prices
•	 House prices have fallen by 7.9 percent since their monthly peak in November 2021. House 
prices are projected to continue to decline throughout 2022 and much of 2023, consistent 
with lower sales volumes in recent months. House prices are assumed to decline by 16 percent 
in total from their monthly peak in November 2021. Annual house price inflation turns positive 
towards the end of the forecast horizon, as interest rates ease and the population continues to 
grow.   
•	 Higher interest rates are expected to reduce house price growth and the incentive for new 
home building over the projection horizon. Rising costs for building materials and labour 
also curb home building, although these pressures are assumed to ease gradually over the 
projection.
•	 Recent house price falls are expected to slow household spending growth over the projection.
Global factors
•	 The global economic environment is highly inflationary, particularly in the near term.  High 
global inflation and a low exchange rate are assumed to feed directly into high import prices for 
New Zealanders. 
•	 The global growth outlook is substantially weaker than at the time of the May Statement. Growth 
in China is projected to remain subdued, as COVID-19 and associated restrictions continue to 
weigh on activity. Growth in developed nations is also expected to slow in line with Consensus 
forecasts. 
•	 Prices for the commodities New Zealand exports have declined in recent months. Goods export 
prices are assumed to decline by 7 percent on a trade-weighted basis over the forecast horizon, 
in line with softening global demand and a gradual recovery in global food supply following the 
Russian invasion of Ukraine.
•	 The New Zealand dollar trade-weighted index (TWI) is assumed to remain at 71.7 consistent with 
the current quarterly average.
•	 Oil prices are expected to remain relatively high, even as global demand softens. Oil prices are 
expected to gradually return from about USD 100 towards USD 85 per barrel, in line with risk-
adjusted futures market pricing.
COVID-19 
and health 
restrictions
•	 The spread of the Omicron variant of COVID-19 in the community and associated restrictions on 
activity are estimated to have reduced potential output over the first half of 2022. 
•	 Daily COVID-19 cases rose in July, after several months of steady decline. We assume that daily 
COVID-19 cases resume a gradual decline over the forecast horizon. Over time, this is expected 
to reduce pressure in the labour market.


Chapter 5 Economic projection
41
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
Economic growth
Production
•	 Some factors continue to support activity in the near term. High export prices, household savings 
built up during lockdowns, and government spending are supporting economic growth in 2022. 
International visitor arrivals suggest that international tourism has picked up since the border 
reopened, providing an additional boost to near-term growth.
•	 Although GDP declined slightly in the March 2022 quarter, most data sources suggest 
underlying resilience in economic activity over the first half of 2022. GDP is assumed to have 
rebounded in the June quarter of 2022.  
•	 Over the medium term, higher interest rates, lower consumer confidence, and recent falls in 
house prices will contribute to weaker economic growth over the forecast horizon. Annual 
average GDP growth of just 1.4 percent is expected by the end of 2023.
•	 The average annual output gap in 2022 is estimated to be 2.1 percent of potential GDP, 
compared to 1.95 percent in 2021. This reflects both a tighter labour market and elevated 
capacity pressure in the goods market.
•	 We expect the output gap to start closing quickly, as households and businesses respond to 
higher interest rates in the economy.
•	 Over the medium term, the supply of goods and services is also expected to improve. We 
assume that supply-chain bottlenecks continue to ease and that labour supply is bolstered by 
the resumption of migration, resulting in a negative output gap in the latter part of the projection.
Consumption
•	 Consumption growth appears robust over the first half of 2022. We assume that consumption 
continues to be supported in the near term by the Government’s Cost of Living Payment and 
extra savings built up during the pandemic. Incomes have also been buoyed by high export 
prices and government support for jobs and businesses, but these factors are projected to 
dissipate over the projection horizon.
•	 High interest rates, lower house prices, and falling real (inflation-adjusted) incomes are expected 
to slow consumption growth over coming quarters. Consumption is expected to decline on a 
per-capita basis over 2023.
Investment
•	 We assume that the outlook for business investment remains weak, relative to its trend. Factors 
supporting business investment in recent quarters are expected to wane over the projection 
horizon. These factors include previous low interest rates, higher export prices, fiscal support, 
and capacity pressures.  
•	 We have revised our outlook for residential construction significantly lower than assumed in 
the May Statement as the effects of capacity pressures, higher interest rates, and tighter credit 
conditions on house prices and residential construction become more evident. Despite the 
softening housing market, building consent issuance has so far remained elevated. Due to 
capacity, cost, and financial pressures facing the construction sector, we expect some consented 
projects to be postponed or cancelled. 
Government
•	 We assume that government consumption and investment evolve in line with the fiscal forecasts 
in the 2022 Budget. We assume a smoother profile for government consumption as measured in 
the System of National Accounts (SNA) relative to the May Statement. 
Exports and 
imports
•	 International tourist arrivals and departures have increased considerably since border 
restrictions began easing earlier in the year. Both exports of services (international visitors to 
New Zealand) and imports of services (New Zealanders travelling overseas) are expected to 
increase considerably over 2022. However, the ongoing impacts of the pandemic, higher global 
inflation, and lower global growth are expected to dampen the rebound in tourism demand, 
particularly out of China. Exports of services are assumed to remain below pre-pandemic peaks. 
•	 Global food shortages, resilient demand, and a lower New Zealand dollar have boosted 
prices for our meat and dairy exports. However, severe capacity constraints and bad weather 
conditions led to a fall in seasonally-adjusted goods export volumes in the March 2022 quarter. 
While a small rebound is expected in the June 2022 quarter, export growth is expected to 
moderate over the medium term, reflecting declining global demand.


Chapter 5 Economic projection
42
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
Labour market
Employment 
and wages
•	 The New Zealand labour market remains robust. The unemployment rate increased slightly 
to 3.3 percent in the June 2022 quarter, from 3.2 percent in the previous quarter. Our suite 
of labour market indicators continue to suggest that the economy is well above Maximum 
Sustainable Employment. 
•	 Labour market pressures are projected to gradually ease in line with moderating demand and 
gradual growth in the labour force. Job numbers are expected to be flat in 2023, in order for 
employment to return to its maximum sustainable level over the medium term. Employment 
may need to fall below its maximum sustainable level for a short time to combat accumulated 
inflationary pressure. This is consistent with the unemployment rate rising to about 5 percent by 
the end of the projection as workforce supply growth outstrips additional labour demand.
•	 Annual Labour Cost Index (LCI) private-sector wage inflation is expected to continue to increase, 
peaking at around 5.0 percent in 2023. This is due to ongoing labour shortages, expected 
further rises in the minimum wage, and workers seeking compensation for higher living costs. 
Inflation
Headline 
•	 Annual CPI inflation is assumed to decline from 7.3 percent in the June 2022 quarter to 6.4 
percent in the September 2022 quarter, partly due to the strong quarterly increase from 
September 2021 dropping out of the annual calculation.
•	 Over 2023, annual headline inflation is projected to continue declining gradually, returning to the 
top of the 1 to 3 percent target band by early 2024.
•	 Annual headline inflation is expected to continue to trend down in the latter half of the projection 
horizon, reaching the 2 percent midpoint of the target band at the end of the projection in 2025. 
Tradables
•	 Annual tradables inflation is assumed to decline from its peak of 8.7 percent in the June quarter 
2022 to 5 percent by the end of the year. This reflects slowing global demand and falling oil 
prices.
•	 Supply-chain bottlenecks are expected to persist in the near term, contributing to imported 
inflation.
•	 Over the medium term, weaker global demand and a gradual easing of international supply 
constraints are expected to see tradables inflation decline.
Non-tradables
•	 Annual non-tradables inflation remains high but declines over the projection, from 6.3 percent in 
the June 2022 quarter to just below 3 percent by the end of the projection horizon.
•	 Materials and labour shortages in the construction industry continue to underpin housing-related 
cost increases. However, capacity pressures are assumed to ease as interest rates rise, house 
prices keep falling, and home building slows. Slower domestic activity growth and lower house 
prices over 2022 are expected to see annual non-tradables inflation steadily ease over coming 
years.


Chapter 5 Economic projection
43
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
Figure 5.3 
Unemployment rate 
(share of labour force, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Charts
Figure 5.1
Inflation breakdown
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Dotted lines show the projection from the May Statement.
Figure 5.2 
Private sector LCI wage inflation
(annual, nominal)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 5.4 
Annual house price growth
(quarterly, nominal, seasonally adjusted)
Source: CoreLogic, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 5.5
Quarterly production GDP
(real, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 5.6
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 6 The MPC’s risk appetite statement
44
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
CHAPTER 
06
Appendices
Lake Rotorua sunrise. Photo: Rebecca Williams


Chapter 6 Appendices
45
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
CHAPTER 6
Appendices
Appendix 1:  
Statistical tables
Table 6.1
Key forecast variables
GDP growth 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Annual
Unemployment 
rate
TWI
OCR
2020
Mar
-1.2
0.8
2.5
4.2
70.9
0.9
 
Jun
-10.3
-0.5
1.5
4.0
69.7
0.3
 
Sep
13.7
0.7
1.4
5.3
72.0
0.3
 
Dec
-0.4
0.5
1.4
4.9
72.9
0.3
2021
Mar
1.7
0.8
1.5
4.6
74.9
0.3
 
Jun
2.4
1.3
3.3
3.9
74.7
0.3
 
Sep
-3.8
2.2
4.9
3.3
74.4
0.3
 
Dec
3.0
1.4
5.9
3.2
74.3
0.6
2022
Mar
-0.2
1.8
6.9
3.2
72.6
0.9
 
Jun
1.8
1.7
7.3
3.3
72.1
1.6
 
Sep
0.6
1.4
6.4
3.3
71.7
2.7
 
Dec
0.2
0.8
5.8
3.5
71.7
3.7
2023
Mar
0.4
1.3
5.3
3.8
71.7
4.0
Jun
0.0
0.9
4.5
4.1
71.7
4.1
Sep
0.1
1.0
4.1
4.4
71.7
4.1
Dec
0.2
0.6
3.8
4.5
71.7
4.1
2024
Mar
0.2
0.6
3.1
4.6
71.7
4.1
Jun
0.2
0.5
2.6
4.7
71.7
4.1
Sep
0.2
0.8
2.4
4.8
71.7
4.0
Dec
0.3
0.3
2.2
4.9
71.7
3.9
2025
Mar
0.4
0.4
2.0
5.0
71.7
3.8
Jun
0.5
0.4
1.9
5.0
71.7
3.7
Sep
0.6
0.8
1.9
5.0
71.7
3.6


Chapter 6 Appendices
46
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
Table 6.2
Measures of inflation, inflation expectations, and asset prices
2020
2021
2022
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Inflation (annual rates)
CPI
1.4
1.5
3.3
4.9
5.9
6.9
7.3
CPI non-tradables
2.8
2.1
3.3
4.5
5.3
6.0
6.3
CPI tradables
-0.3
0.5
3.4
5.7
6.9
8.5
8.7
Sectoral factor model 
estimate of core inflation
2.3
2.5
3.1
3.7
4.2
4.6
4.8
CPI trimmed mean 
(30 percent measure)
2.2
1.7
3.0
4.0
4.3
5.2
5.8
CPI weighted median
2.7
2.3
3.0
3.3
3.8
3.9
4.8
GDP deflator (expenditure)
0.7
0.4
2.4
3.8
5.0
6.1
Inflation expectations
ANZ Business Outlook – inflation one 
year ahead (quarterly average to date)
1.5
1.9
2.2
2.9
4.0
5.4
6.0
6.2
RBNZ Survey of Expectations – 
inflation 2 years ahead
1.6
1.9
2.0
2.3
3.0
3.3
3.3
3.1
RBNZ Survey of Expectations – 
inflation 5 years ahead
1.9
2.0
2.1
2.0
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.3
RBNZ Survey of Expectations – 
inflation 10 years ahead
2.1
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.1
2.1
2.1
Long-run inflation expectations*
2.0
2.1
2.1
2.1
2.1
2.2
2.2
2.3
Asset prices (annual percent 
changes)
Quarterly house price index 
(CoreLogic NZ)
16.9
24.0
29.8
30.6
27.2
REINZ Farm Price Index (quarterly 
average)
-0.5
6.9
6.3
15.1
20.5
25.6
31.0
NZX 50 (quarterly average)
13.4
14.5
16.7
10.3
3.0
-4.0
-9.3
-12.4
Source: ANZ, Consensus Economics, RBNZ estimates.
*Long-run expectations are extracted from a range of surveys using a Nelson-Siegel model.


Chapter 6 Appendices
47
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
Table 6.3
Measures of labour market conditions	
(seasonally adjusted, changes expressed in annual percent terms, unless specified otherwise)	
2020
2021
2022
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Household Labour Force Survey
Unemployment rate
4.9
4.6
3.9
3.3
3.2
3.2
3.3
Underutilisation rate
11.9
12.1
10.5
9.2
9.2
9.3
9.2
Labour force participation rate
70.2
70.4
70.5
71.2
71.0
70.9
70.8
Employment rate (percentage of 
working-age population)
66.8
67.1
67.7
68.8
68.8
68.6
68.5
Employment growth
0.6
0.1
1.5
4.0
3.4
2.7
1.6
Average weekly hours worked
34.9
33.9
34.0
31.2
33.5
33.4
33.7
Number unemployed 
(thousand people)
141.0
133.0
114.0
97.0
93.0
94.0
96.0
Number employed (million people)
2.7
2.7
2.8
2.8
2.8
2.8
2.8
Labour force (million people)
2.9
2.9
2.9
2.9
2.9
2.9
2.9
Extended labour force 
(million people)
3.0
3.0
3.0
3.0
3.0
3.0
3.0
Working-age population 
(million people)
4.1
4.1
4.1
4.1
4.1
4.1
4.1
Quarterly Employment Survey – 
QES
Filled jobs growth
0.2
0.5
2.5
4.0
4.1
4.2
1.6
Average hourly earnings growth 
(private sector, ordinary time)
4.6
4.1
4.4
3.6
4.1
5.3
7.0
Other data sources
Labour cost index growth, 
private sector
1.5
1.6
2.2
2.5
2.8
3.1
3.4
Labour cost index growth, 
private sector, unadjusted
2.4
2.8
3.7
4.1
4.5
5.0
5.2
Estimated net migration 
(published, thousands, quarterly)
-2.5
-3.5
-4.7
-4.0
Change in All Vacancies Index
14.6
123.6
55.2
28.0
19.8
4.3
3.3
Note: The All Vacancies Index is produced by MBIE as part of the monthly Jobs Online report, which shows changes in job 
vacancies advertised by businesses on internet job boards. It is converted to quarterly and seasonally adjusted by the Reserve 
Bank. The unadjusted LCI is an analytical index that reflects quality change in addition to price change (whereas the official LCI 
measures price changes only). For definitions of underutilisation, the extended labour force, and related concepts, see Statistics 
New Zealand (2016), Introducing underutilisation in the labour market. Estimated net migration (published) is the Stats NZ 
outcomes-based measure.


Chapter 6 Appendices
48
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
Table 6.4
Composition of real GDP growth
(annual average percent change, seasonally adjusted, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Final consumption expenditure
Private
3.3
4.2
6.4
4.8
4.5
2.5
0.6
4.5
2.7
-0.7
1.3
Public authority
2.9
2.2
1.9
3.7
3.4
5.8
7.5
10.4
5.3
-0.1
-0.9
Total
3.2
3.7
5.4
4.5
4.3
3.2
2.2
5.9
3.4
-0.6
0.7
Gross fixed capital formation
Residential
8.3
7.1
8.8
-1.8
-0.1
2.8
1.8
7.1
-0.5
-3.1
0.1
Other
8.0
2.5
-0.1
10.3
7.0
2.4
-6.8
10.0
5.2
0.8
-1.8
Total
8.1
3.6
2.2
7.0
5.2
2.5
-4.7
9.2
3.8
-0.1
-1.3
Final domestic 
expenditure
4.3
3.7
4.6
5.1
4.5
3.1
0.6
6.6
3.5
-0.5
0.3
Stockbuilding*
0.5
-0.3
0.1
0.2
-0.2
-0.2
-0.2
0.8
-0.7
0.2
0.0
Gross national 
expenditure
4.6
3.2
4.8
5.6
4.3
2.8
-0.6
8.1
2.7
-0.1
0.3
Exports of goods and 
services
4.7
6.8
2.1
3.8
3.4
0.3
-17.6
2.0
7.8
8.4
4.6
Imports of goods and 
services
7.7
2.6
5.6
7.8
4.3
1.0
-15.9
17.1
7.1
3.5
1.8
Expenditure on GDP
3.6
4.4
3.7
4.3
4.0
2.7
-0.2
4.1
2.5
0.8
0.9
GDP (production)
3.8
3.8
3.8
3.6
3.4
2.2
-1.4
5.1
2.8
0.8
1.0
GDP (production, 
March qtr to March qtr)
3.8
4.1
3.3
3.6
3.3
0.5
3.3
1.2
3.0
0.5
1.2
*Percentage point contribution to the growth rate of GDP.


Chapter 6 Appendices
49
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
Table 6.5
Summary of economic projection
(annual percent change, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Price measures
CPI 
0.3
0.4
2.2
1.1
1.5
2.5
1.5
6.9
5.3
3.1
2.0
Labour costs
1.8
1.8
1.5
1.9
2.0
2.4
1.6
3.1
4.8
4.6
3.7
Export prices 
(in New Zealand dollars) 
-8.0
0.7
4.2
3.3
1.2
6.8
-6.2
21.3
1.9
-3.2
0.3
Import prices 
(in New Zealand dollars) 
-3.4
1.2
0.6
1.8
4.3
2.5
-2.5
19.1
4.7
-3.0
-1.0
Monetary conditions
OCR (year average)
3.4
2.9
2.0
1.8
1.8
1.2
0.3
0.5
3.0
4.1
4.0
TWI (year average)
79.3
72.6
76.5
75.6
73.4
71.7
72.4
74.0
71.8
71.7
71.7
Output
GDP (production, annual 
average % change)
3.8
3.8
3.8
3.6
3.4
2.2
-1.4
5.1
2.8
0.8
1.0
Potential output (annual 
average % change)
3.0
3.2
3.3
3.3
3.2
2.8
-1.2
2.9
3.0
2.6
2.1
Output gap (% of potential 
GDP, year average)
-0.7
-0.1
0.4
0.7
0.9
0.3
-0.1
2.1
2.0
0.1
-0.9
Labour market
Total employment 
(seasonally adjusted)
3.6
2.2
5.9
2.9
1.5
2.5
0.1
2.7
-0.1
0.1
0.7
Unemployment rate 
(March qtr, seasonally 
adjusted)
5.5
5.3
4.9
4.4
4.2
4.2
4.6
3.2
3.8
4.6
5.0
Trend labour productivity 
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.9
1.0
0.9
0.9
0.8
Key balances
Government operating 
balance (% of GDP,  
year to June)
0.2
0.7
1.5
1.9
2.4
-7.2
-1.4
-4.9
-2.5
-1.9
-0.8
Current account balance 
(% of GDP)
-3.5
-2.4
-2.6
-3.0
-3.7
-2.3
-2.4
-6.4
-7.9
-7.9
-7.3
Terms of trade 
(SNA measure, annual 
average % change)
0.1
-3.1
2.5
4.5
-2.5
1.9
-1.0
0.4
-1.7
-1.6
0.7
Household saving rate  
(% of disposable income)
-0.8
-0.5
0.0
-0.2
0.7
2.9
5.8
2.8
1.2
1.1
0.9
World economy
Trading-partner GDP 
(annual average % change)
3.7
3.4
3.5
3.9
3.5
1.7
-0.7
5.7
3.2
3.1
3.2
Trading-partner CPI  
(TWI weighted)
1.0
1.2
1.9
1.8
1.4
2.4
0.8
4.0
4.4
2.3
2.2


Chapter 6 Appendices
50
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
Appendix 2: Chart pack
Figure 6.1
Composition of CPI inflation
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 6.2
Output gap and output gap indicators
(share of potential)
Source: NZIER, MBIE, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The output gap indicators based on information about the labour market 
are shown separately from the other indicators. For each group of indicators, the 
shaded area shows the range of values and the line shows the mean value.
Figure 6.3
Unemployment and underutilisation rates
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 6.4
OCR and neutral OCR indicator suite
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area indicates the range between the maximum and minimum 
values from a suite of neutral OCR indicators.
Figure 6.5
GDP and potential GDP
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.6
Measures of core inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Core inflation measures exclude the GST increase in 2010.


Chapter 6 Appendices
51
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2022
Figure 6.7
Inflation expectations
(annual) 
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: Inflation expectations are estimates from the RBNZ inflation expectations 
curve, based on surveys of businesses and professional forecasters.
Figure 6.9
House price inflation
(annual, nominal) 
Source: REINZ.
Source: Stats NZ, Global Dairy Trade, Reuters, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.12
Terms of trade, dairy and oil price indices
Figure 6.10
Mortgage rates
Source: interest.co.nz, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The rates shown for the fixed terms are the average of the advertised 
rates from ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac, shown as weekly data. The floating 
rate represents the monthly yield on floating housing debt from the RBNZ 
Income Statement survey.
Figure 6.8
Private sector wage growth
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Private sector wage growth is measured by the labour cost index, all 
salary and wage rates, private sector. Real labour cost index is deflated with 
headline CPI inflation.
Figure 6.11
New Zealand dollar exchange rates
(quarterly average) 
Source: Reuters, RBNZ.
