BANK: RBNZ
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
DATE: 24/05/2022
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/monetary-policy-statements/2022/mpsmay22.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

05/2022
Monetary Policy
STATEMENT


ii
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
STATEMENT
of the MPC’s monetary policy strategy
The Monetary Policy Committee’s (MPC) monetary policy strategy is its 
overarching plan for how it will formulate monetary policy under different 
circumstances to achieve its objectives.1 It outlines a consistent approach 
to how the MPC intends to achieve its objectives across time, accounting 
for trade-offs and uncertainty. Agreeing on and publishing a strategy 
promotes transparency, public understanding, and accountability.
1	
For a more in-depth discussion of monetary policy strategy in New Zealand, see J. Ratcliffe and R. Kendall (2019), ‘Monetary policy strategy in New Zealand’, 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Bulletin, Vol. 82, No. 3, April.
2	
These economic objectives contribute to the overall purpose of the Act, which is to promote the prosperity and well-being of New Zealanders, and contribute to 
a sustainable and productive economy. See monetary policy framework for more information on New Zealand’s monetary policy framework, including the full 
text of the Remit.
Monetary policy 
framework and objectives
Under the Reserve Bank of 
New Zealand Act 1989 (the 
Act), the MPC is responsible for 
formulating monetary policy to 
maintain a stable general level of 
prices over the medium term and 
to support maximum sustainable 
employment.2 Operational 
objectives for monetary policy are 
set out in the Remit. The current 
Remit sets out a flexible inflation 
targeting regime, under which the 
MPC must set policy to: 
•	 keep future annual inflation 
between 1 and 3 percent over 
the medium term, with a focus 
on keeping future inflation 
near the 2 percent mid-point; 
and
•	 support maximum sustainable 
employment, considering 
a broad range of labour 
market indicators and taking 
into account that maximum 
sustainable employment is 
largely determined by non-
monetary factors.
In pursuing these objectives, 
the Remit requires the MPC to 
have regard to the efficiency 
and soundness of the 
financial system, seek to avoid 
unnecessary instability in the 
economy and financial markets, 
and discount events that have 
only transitory effects on inflation. 
The MPC must also assess the 
effect of its monetary policy 
decisions on the Government’s 
policy to support more 
sustainable house prices.
The Reserve Bank’s flexible 
inflation targeting framework 
and the MPC’s monetary policy 
strategy reflect the fact that: 
•	 low and stable inflation is 
monetary policy’s best long-
run contribution to the well-
being of New Zealanders;
•	 in the short to medium term, 
monetary policy can influence 
real variables such as 
employment, and hence policy 
trade-offs can arise; and
•	 monetary policy is more 
effective if the Bank’s policy 
targets are credible, so policy 
should be formulated in a 
way that ensures credibility is 
maintained.
Key aspects of monetary 
policy strategy
The MPC practises forecast 
targeting, which means that it 
sets monetary policy such that 
it expects to achieve its inflation 
and employment goals in the 
medium term. In most instances 
the MPC aims to return inflation 
to the target mid-point within a 
one to three year horizon. The 
appropriate horizon at each 
policy decision will vary based 
on how different policy paths 
will contribute to maximum 
sustainable employment, whether 
price-setters’ expectations are 
consistent with the inflation 
target, and other considerations 
such as the balance of risks to the 
MPC’s central economic outlook.


iii
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
The MPC does not attempt to 
return inflation and employment 
to target immediately, because 
monetary policy actions take time 
to transmit through the economy. 
Attempting to return inflation to 
target too quickly would result 
in unnecessary instability in the 
economy and financial markets. 
The 1 to 3 percent target range for 
inflation provides the MPC with 
flexibility to ensure that managing 
inflation variability does not come 
at the cost of excessive variability 
in the real economy. For similar 
reasons, the MPC does not 
attempt to offset events that are 
expected to have only transitory 
effects on inflation. 
The MPC takes into account both 
its inflation and employment 
objectives when setting policy. In 
the long run, no trade-off exists 
between the MPC’s objectives. 
In the short to medium term, 
there may be situations where 
monetary policy can move one 
objective closer to target only 
at the cost of the other, resulting 
in a trade-off. When a trade-off 
does arise, the MPC will consider 
outcomes for both objectives 
in setting policy. In general, if 
employment is projected to be 
below its long-run sustainable 
level, the MPC would let inflation 
overshoot the target mid-point 
for a time, and vice versa (while 
staying within the 1–3 percent 
target range). 
The MPC responds to both 
deviations above target and 
deviations below target. The 
MPC sets policy to stabilise 
employment near its maximum 
sustainable level, and to return 
inflation near to the target mid-
point, regardless of whether 
inflation is currently below or 
above 2 percent. This approach 
helps to anchor inflation 
expectations at the target mid-
point and promotes sustainable 
growth and employment by 
dampening fluctuations in the 
business cycle.
The MPC considers the balance 
of risks to its objectives that 
arise from uncertainty about 
the economic outlook and 
the transmission of its policy 
decisions. In general, the MPC 
will incorporate likely future 
developments into its central 
economic projections and set 
monetary policy in response. 
However, the MPC will also take 
into account risks to its central 
projections when setting policy. 
Under extreme uncertainty, the 
MPC may choose to publish 
scenarios instead of central 
projections to illustrate the 
range of possible situations and 
economic outcomes that could 
occur when circumstances are 
highly unpredictable.
The MPC has regard to the 
efficiency and soundness of 
the financial system, while 
recognising that in most 
instances prudential policy is 
better suited to leaning against 
risks to financial stability. The 
Reserve Bank takes prudential 
policy settings into account when 
setting monetary policy, and 
vice versa.
Implementation of strategy
The MPC applies the following 
process when formulating a 
policy decision:
1.	 Firstly, it assesses the outlook 
for the economy and the 
implications for its policy 
objectives. It then discusses 
risks to achieving its policy 
objectives.
2.	 Next, it considers which stance 
of monetary policy is most 
consistent with its monetary 
policy strategy given the 
current economic outlook, 
risks, and trade-offs.
3.	 Finally, the MPC decides how 
it will achieve the desired 
stance of monetary policy, 
including whether or not 
to adjust its policy settings 
at the current meeting and 
how it will communicate the 
policy outlook. The MPC has 
a suite of monetary tools to 
achieve its goals, and uses its 
Principles for Monetary Tools 
to make decisions on which 
tools to deploy.


REPORT AND SUPPORTING NOTES PUBLISHED AT:
www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/monetary-policy-statement
Subscribe online: www.rbnz.govt.nz/email-updates
Copyright © 2022 Reserve Bank of New Zealand
This report is published pursuant to section  
15C of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 1989. 
ISSN 1770-4829
rbnz.govt.nz


The projection was finalised on 19 May 2022. The OCR projection incorporates 
an outlook for monetary policy that is consistent with the MPC’s monetary policy 
assessment, which was finalised on 25 May 2022. 
05/2022
Monetary Policy
STATEMENT
Contents
Statement of the MPC’s monetary policy strategy	
ii
1.	 Policy assessment	
2
	
Summary Record of meeting 	
4
2.	 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook	
8
3.	 Financial conditions	
20
4.	 Special topics	
26
	
4.1		
Global inflation developments	
28
	
4.2	 The outlook for household spending, house prices  
	
	
	
and construction	
32
5.	 Economic projection	
38
6.	 Appendices	
44
	
Appendix 1: Statistical tables	
45
	
Appendix 2: Chart pack	
50


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
2
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
CHAPTER 
01
Policy  
assessment


Chapter 1 Policy assessment
3
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
CHAPTER 1
Policy assessment
Tēnā koutou katoa, welcome all.
The Monetary Policy Committee today increased 
the Official Cash Rate (OCR) to 2.0 percent. The 
Committee agreed it remains appropriate to 
continue to tighten monetary conditions at pace 
to maintain price stability and support maximum 
sustainable employment. The Committee is resolute 
in its commitment to ensure consumer price inflation 
returns to within the 1 to 3 percent target range. 
Consistent with the economic outlook and risks 
ahead, monetary conditions need to act as a 
constraint on demand until there is a better match 
with New Zealand’s productive capacity. A larger 
and earlier increase in the OCR reduces the risk of 
inflation becoming persistent, while also providing 
more policy flexibility ahead in light of the highly 
uncertain global economic environment.  
The level of global economic activity is generating 
rising inflation pressures, exacerbated by ongoing 
supply disruptions driven by both COVID-19 
persistence and the Russian invasion of Ukraine. 
The latter continues to cause very high prices for 
food and energy commodities. 
The pace of global economic growth is slowing. 
The broad-based tightening in global monetary 
and financial conditions is acting to slow spending 
growth, accentuated by the high costs of basic 
food and energy staples. European geopolitical 
uncertainty is also weighing heavily on business 
confidence and investment intentions worldwide. 
Likewise, COVID-19 restrictions in significant regions 
of China are exacerbating supply-chain disruptions 
and adding cost and complexity to trade.
In New Zealand, underlying strength remains in the 
economy, supported by a strong labour market, 
sound household balance sheets, continued fiscal 
support, and a strong terms of trade. The reduction 
in COVID-19 health-related restrictions is also 
enabling increased economic activity, including 
hospitality and tourism.
However, headwinds are strong. Heightened 
global economic uncertainty and higher inflation 
are dampening global and domestic consumer 
confidence. Asset prices, in particular house 
prices, have also declined, reflecting in part higher 
mortgage interest rates and increased supply of 
housing. 
On balance, a broad range of indicators highlight 
that productive capacity constraints and ongoing 
inflation pressures remain prevalent. Employment 
remains above its maximum sustainable level, 
with labour shortages now the major constraint 
on production. The Reserve Bank’s core inflation 
measures are above 3 percent. 
The Committee agreed to continue to lift the 
OCR at pace to a level that will confidently bring 
consumer price inflation to within the target range. 
The Committee viewed the projected path of 
the OCR as consistent with achieving its primary 
inflation and employment objectives without causing 
unnecessary instability in output, interest rates and 
the exchange rate. Once aggregate supply and 
demand are more in balance, the OCR can then 
return to a lower, more neutral, level.
Meitaki, thanks.
Adrian Orr 
Governor 


4
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
SUMMARY 
Record of meeting 
The Monetary Policy 
Committee discussed 
developments affecting 
the outlook for inflation 
and employment 
in New Zealand. 
Members noted that 
current inflation and 
employment were 
above their target 
and sustainable 
levels respectively. 
Members agreed that 
while the direction of 
their monetary policy 
decision was clear, the 
extent and timing of 
future increases in the 
Official Cash Rate (OCR) 
still depends on the 
economic outlook and 
avoiding major risks.
The Committee agreed that 
global economic activity was 
slowing more than previously 
expected, and that further 
weakening in global economic 
growth was likely. Members 
noted that while international 
fiscal and monetary policy actions 
have partly cushioned the effect 
of the COVID-19 pandemic 
on household incomes and 
employment so far, significant and 
ongoing disruption is now  
being felt.  
The recent rise in global inflation 
pressures has led central banks 
to raise their policy interest rates 
and signal further tightening to 
come. These measures have 
been aimed to deliberately slow 
demand to be more consistent 
with the current constrained 
supply capacity of goods and 
services.  
The Committee noted that the 
disruption caused by the Russian 
invasion of Ukraine has added 
to the underlying global inflation 
pressures. The cost of living has 
risen significantly, in particular 
due to shortages of food and fuel. 
This rise in costs is necessitating 
lower non-essential spending by 
households globally. High global 
commodity prices are likely to 
persist for some time, creating 
long-lasting cost pressure for 
firms and households, even as 
general consumer price  
inflation slows.
Economic activity globally, and 
especially in China at present, is 
still being severely disrupted by 
COVID-19. Members agreed that 
China’s regional health-related 
economic restrictions are having 
a direct impact on global growth, 
supply chain efficiency, and  
New Zealand’s trade outlook. 
New Zealand’s trade performance 
is strongly linked to China’s 
economy.
The recent rise in central banks’ 
policy interest rates, and forward 
guidance for more increases, has 
led to a significant fall in global 
equity prices, albeit from high 
levels. The Committee noted 
that a rise in official rates creates 
a higher hurdle for investment 
decisions. 
Members discussed 
developments in the New Zealand 
economy. It was noted that 
rising global interest rates have 
narrowed interest rate differentials 
with New Zealand, adding to 
downward pressure on the  
New Zealand dollar exchange rate. 
The Committee noted that the 
lower New Zealand dollar raises 
import prices – exacerbating the 
effect of elevated global prices. 


5
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
The Committee agreed that both 
high food and energy costs, and 
rising mortgage interest rates 
for those with debt, will affect 
household budget decisions 
and lead to less discretionary 
spending. Members noted that 
over the past year or so, wage 
growth has been less than 
consumer price inflation, adding 
further pressure on discretionary 
spending.
Recent and expected increases 
in mortgage interest rates are 
likely to contribute to falls in 
house prices, further reducing 
households’ willingness to spend. 
It was agreed that household 
consumption was likely to be 
relatively subdued in coming 
quarters. The Committee 
noted that house prices are 
now headed toward a more 
sustainable level. 
The Committee noted 
the Government’s Budget 
announcements. It was agreed 
that fiscal policy is currently 
supporting economic activity, 
but that this stimulus is expected 
to reduce in coming years. The 
current level of fiscal spending is 
contributing to a modest increase 
in demand. This is expected to 
diminish over time as a result 
of the end to the large, broad 
based, fiscal support packages 
the Government delivered during 
the initial phase of the COVID-19 
economic response. 
The Committee noted that 
measures of core consumer price 
inflation are above their target 
range. Surveyed measures of 
near-term inflation expectations 
are also high, in line with actual 
consumer price inflation. It was 
noted, however, that the medium-
term measures of inflation 
expectations have remained near 
the centre of the target range, 
albeit heightened somewhat.  
The Committee agreed that it was 
critical for these medium-term 
inflation expectations to remain 
around 2 per cent. 
Members also noted the factors 
responsible for the current 
elevated consumer price 
inflation. New Zealand’s inflation 
rate reflects a relatively similar 
contribution of global imported 
price pressures and domestic 
price pressures. They observed 
that a key factor contributing to 
domestic inflation pressure is 
housing – including both the cost 
of construction and the operating 
costs of dwellings in general. 
On the costs of construction, 
members noted that the growing 
delay in accessing key building 
materials is significantly slowing 
activity, and increasing the 
financial risks associated with 
construction. The Committee 
observed that these delays, 
cost pressures, and associated 
uncertainty could limit the 
conversion of building permits 
into dwellings, exacerbating the 
pressure on housing supply. 
Members agreed that 
employment is above its 
maximum sustainable level, 
as highlighted by a suite of 
indicators. They agreed that rising 
wage pressures are an expected 
outcome, with access to labour 
the key constraint on firms’ 
productive capacity. With the 
global labour market tight, people 
are also more willing and able 
to take up new roles for higher 
wages.
The Committee noted that the 
reopening of the border should 
see a return to a net inflow of 
migrants into New Zealand over 
the next two years. Over time, this 
net immigration will help to  
ease New Zealand’s labour  
shortages. More immediately 
there is an outflow of  
New Zealanders creating supply 
capacity constraints. With the 
international border reopening, 
more immigrants will also bolster 
demand ahead of supply capacity 
as they settle. It was agreed that 
these patterns of migration will 
have an uncertain net effect on 
inflation pressure, as they will 
affect both supply and demand in 
the economy. As a result, these 
dynamics do not play a key role in 
determining monetary policy  
at present. 


6
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
The Committee noted the weaker 
outlook for employment growth 
in New Zealand, which is likely 
to be outpaced by labour force 
growth. As a result of the increase 
in labour supply, measured 
unemployment is expected to rise 
to around levels more consistent 
with maximum sustainable 
employment.
The Committee discussed the 
future path of the OCR based 
on the outlook for inflation and 
employment pressures. Members 
noted that both inflation and 
employment are currently higher 
than previously expected, and 
that this strength is broad-based, 
arising from a range of economic 
factors. 
Members agreed that a higher 
level of the OCR is necessary 
to ensure annual consumer 
price inflation returns to within 
its target range over the next 
two years. They agreed this was 
also consistent with ensuring 
employment remained near its 
maximum sustainable level.
Members discussed their ‘least 
regrets’ framework which in the 
current context amounted to the 
risk of tightening policy ‘too little, 
too late’ versus ‘too much, too 
soon’. The Committee agreed that 
at present, with persistent cost 
pressures and rising inflation, the 
risk of moving too slowly and not 
far enough remained the most 
costly option. 
On the risk of doing too much 
too soon, the Committee 
acknowledged that raising the 
OCR steeply puts pressure on 
some households’ spending 
decisions, especially those that 
are highly indebted. 
However, members noted that, 
on average, household balance 
sheets are healthy. Banks 
have been testing mortgage 
lending for higher interest rate 
possibilities – consistent with 
current projected levels – before 
recent home loans were made. 
They also noted that house 
prices are expected to remain 
above their pre-pandemic level. 
The Committee also noted that 
while higher interest rates will 
increase firms’ hurdle to investing, 
recent business surveys suggest 
labour shortages are the main 
constraint preventing an increase 
in production.
The Committee agreed that 
stabilising inflation is its priority. 
Members agreed that raising the 
OCR by more and sooner was 
consistent with avoiding higher 
future costs to employment and 
the economy in general as a 
result of high inflation. Stable 
inflation expectations will be a 
key indicator that the current 
monetary policy strategy is 
working. 
The Committee agreed to 
maintain its approach of briskly 
lifting the OCR until convinced 
that monetary conditions were 
sufficient to constrain inflation 
expectations and bring consumer 
price inflation to within the 
target range. Once aggregate 
supply and demand are more 
in balance, the OCR can then 
return to a lower, more neutral, 
level. The Committee viewed 
the projected path of the OCR as 
consistent with achieving their 
primary inflation and employment 
objectives without causing 
unnecessary instability in  
output, interest rates and the 
exchange rate. 


7
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
On Wednesday 25 May, the 
Committee reached a consensus 
to increase the OCR to 2.0 
percent. 
Attendees:
Reserve Bank members  
of MPC: 
Adrian Orr, Christian Hawkesby, 
Karen Silk, Adam Richardson
External MPC members: 
Bob Buckle, Peter Harris, 
Caroline Saunders
Reserve Bank observer: 
Paul Conway
Treasury Observer: 
Dominick Stephens
MPC Secretary: 
Gael Price 


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
8
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
CHAPTER 
02
Current 
economic 
assessment 
and monetary 
policy outlook


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
9
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
CHAPTER 2
Current economic assessment 
and monetary policy outlook
Summary
•	 Demand in the New Zealand economy 
has been resilient to the community 
spread of COVID-19 in recent months. 
Employment remains high and 
unemployment is very low. Home building 
work is strong. Government spending, as 
outlined in the 2022 Budget, is very high. 
Demand for New Zealand’s key export 
commodities remains firm, supporting 
exporter and regional incomes.
•	 However, there have not been enough 
workers and goods available to meet this 
strong demand. Employers are finding 
it increasingly difficult to hire suitable 
workers, and to bring in goods given 
bottlenecks in global supply chains. 
Measures of underemployment have 
declined. Workers being off sick or having 
to self-isolate during the recent Omicron 
outbreak throughout New Zealand have 
exacerbated labour shortages in the near 
term. This has also caused stress for many 
households and contributed to a decline 
in consumer confidence. 
•	 Disruptions to global supply chains have 
become worse in recent months, leading 
to more costly imports. The war in Ukraine 
has led to higher prices for a range of 
global commodities, especially fuel and 
food. Lockdowns in major Chinese cities 
have led to further bottlenecks in global 
production and trade. Central banks are 
responding to higher inflation by raising 
interest rates. Higher global interest 
rates are placing downward pressure on 
New Zealand’s exchange rate, making 
imported goods and services more 
expensive.
•	 The pressure on available resources is 
contributing to high consumers price 
index (CPI) inflation and increasing 
wage growth. Annual CPI inflation in 
New Zealand increased to 6.9 percent in 
the March 2022 quarter, above the MPC’s 
1 to 3 percent target band. This reflected a 
mixture of global and domestic influences. 
Measures of persistent (or ‘core’) inflation 
have also increased in recent quarters. 
Expectations for inflation one and two 
years ahead have increased recently. 
Expectations at longer horizons have also 
increased, but to a lesser extent. 
•	 The MPC has been tightening monetary 
conditions since mid-2021 in response 
to rising inflation and labour shortages. 
Interest rates faced by households and 
businesses have increased significantly in 
the past six months. In response to higher 
interest rates, slower population growth, 
strong home building activity, weak 
consumer confidence and regulatory 
measures, house prices have fallen in 
recent months, particularly in Auckland 
and Wellington. 
•	 Aggregate demand growth is expected 
to moderate from the second half of 
2022. Ongoing global uncertainty, lower 
house prices and higher spending by 
New Zealanders travelling abroad more 
than offset an expected gradual recovery 
in international tourism. 


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
10
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
•	 Annual CPI inflation is expected to have 
peaked in the first half of 2022. Prices for 
commodities – notably oil – are assumed 
to ease gradually over the medium term. 
The spike in import prices is expected to 
drop out of the annual inflation calculation 
as global prices for our imports stabilise, 
or grow at a slower pace. Moderating 
domestic demand will also reduce firms’ 
ability to pass on costs through larger 
increases in selling prices. 
•	 However, the current economic outlook 
means that higher interest rates will be 
needed over coming years than assumed 
at the time of the February Statement. 
This reflects a stronger starting point 
for capacity pressures than originally 
assumed, including even longer delays 
in making and delivering goods than 
anticipated. Higher interest rates will 
ensure that demand growth slows enough 
for the MPC to meet its inflation and 
employment objectives. 


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
11
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
Figure 2.2
Employment rate
(seasonally adjusted, share of working-age population)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.3
Real government consumption
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, New Zealand Treasury, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.1
Production GDP
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Current economic 
assessment
Demand has remained resilient
The New Zealand economy began 2022 
in a stronger position than expected. 
Economic activity (as measured by the 
production measure of gross domestic 
product (GDP)) increased 3 percent in the 
December 2021 quarter. This rebound was 
stronger than expected after the nationwide 
lockdown and prolonged COVID-19 public 
health restrictions (figure 2.1). The spread of 
COVID-19 throughout New Zealand since 
February 2022 has dampened demand in 
face-to-face sectors such as hospitality  
and retail, and has likely contributed to  
lower consumer confidence. However,  
there are early signs that demand has  
started to recover as daily case numbers 
have declined. 
Consistent with robust demand in the 
economy, employment is at a historically 
high level as a share of the working-age 
population (figure 2.2). Government support 
and strong overall demand have encouraged 
businesses to hold on to workers despite 
periods of significant disruption because of 
the pandemic. Activity in the construction 
sector remains high, although limited by 
the availability of materials and labour. 
Government spending, as outlined in 
the 2022 Budget, is contributing to 
domestic demand (figure 2.3). Demand for 
New Zealand’s primary goods exports has 
remained strong – reflected in particular by 
elevated dairy prices – boosting exporter 
income and investment. 


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
12
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
But the supply of labour and 
goods has not kept up with strong 
demand
While aggregate demand has remained 
robust, there have not been enough workers 
and goods to meet this demand. Pressure 
on available resources is high, particularly for 
labour (figure 2.4). The sharp decline in net 
migration has made it increasingly difficult for 
employers to find both skilled and unskilled 
labour (figure 2.5). The spread of COVID-19 
throughout New Zealand and more workers 
either being off sick or self-isolating have 
made labour shortages worse in the  
near term.
Figure 2.4
QSBO factors most limiting production
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: NZIER, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.5
QSBO difficulty in finding labour
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: NZIER.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
13
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
Figure 2.7
Unemployment rate by sex
(seasonally adjusted, share of labour force)
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 2.8
Unemployment rate by ethnicity
(seasonally adjusted, share of labour force)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.6
Unemployment rate by age group 
(seasonally adjusted, share of labour force)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Employment is above its  
maximum sustainable level
At the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, 
women, youth and Māori and Pasifika 
peoples were most affected by the sharp 
slowdown in economic activity. Since then a 
lot of workers have moved between sectors, 
for example from tourism and hospitality 
to construction and healthcare. As a result, 
the national unemployment rates of all 
demographic groups have declined to very 
low levels relative to history (figures 2.6, 2.7 
and 2.8). A wide range of measures suggest 
that employment in New Zealand is currently 
above its maximum sustainable level  
(figure 2.9).


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
14
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
A strong labour market and higher costs of 
living have driven wages higher in recent 
quarters. The share of annual wage increases 
greater than 5 percent is near its peak prior 
to the global financial crisis (GFC). Despite 
this, wage growth for those staying in the 
same job has not generally kept up with 
inflation. Overall, household incomes have 
been supported by workers switching jobs 
for higher pay, promotions with the same 
employer, and working longer hours (figure 
2.10). Once these factors are taken into 
account, aggregate labour income growth 
has been stronger than consumer price 
inflation over the course of the pandemic – 
albeit to a much lesser extent in the past year. 
The labour shortage and increases in the 
minimum wage are expected to result in 
further increases in wage inflation over 
the coming year. Higher wages are one of 
many increased costs that businesses are 
expecting to pass on into higher prices.
Figure 2.9
MSE indicator suite
Source: NZIER, Stats NZ, MBIE, ANZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The Reserve Bank uses a range of indicators when assessing MSE and regards the 
December 2019 quarter as a period when this selection of indicators pointed to employment 
being at MSE. However, current outturns should not be directly compared to December 2019 
quarter as the level of MSE is likely lower (discussed further in the August 2021 Statement). 
The vertical lines on the left-hand and right-hand sides represent the lowest and highest 
data outcomes since 2000, respectively. An orange dot to the right of a black dot means that 
the latest data outcome was stronger than in the December 2019 quarter.
Figure 2.10
Wage and labour income compared to CPI
(index=100 in 2019Q4)
Source: Stats NZ.
Note: The adjusted LCI (all sectors, all salary and wage rates) estimates wage growth for 
the same job, being done to the same quality and quantity. QES average hourly earnings 
(all industries, ordinary and overtime, seasonally adjusted) is an hourly labour income 
measure that reflects same job wage growth but also income changes due to productivity 
changes, job promotions and job switching. QES gross earnings (all industries, seasonally 
adjusted) per QES filled job (all industries, seasonally adjusted) includes all these factors as 
well as changes in the number of hours worked.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
15
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
Global developments have 
increased uncertainty and added 
to price pressures
In addition to pressure on domestic 
resources, inflation has been pushed up by 
international events. The war in Ukraine has 
had a devastating impact on the lives of many 
in the region. The war and related economic 
sanctions have also led to sharp increases 
in global oil, grain and other commodity 
prices (figure 2.11). This has led to heightened 
uncertainty and a weaker outlook for  
global growth.
Further, the war in Ukraine and the 
reintroduction of COVID-19 lockdowns in 
significant Chinese port cities have added 
to longer-lasting supply-chain bottlenecks, 
increasing shipping delays and costs (figure 
2.12). As a result, global inflationary pressures 
are expected to remain over 2022 (see 
figure 4.3). In response to higher realised 
and expected inflation, central banks have 
started to lift interest rates. Tighter actual 
and expected monetary policy abroad has 
contributed to a fall in the New Zealand 
dollar trade-weighted index (TWI). The TWI is 
lower than assumed at the time of the April 
Monetary Policy Review, making imports 
even more expensive but lifting exporter 
returns.  
Reflecting both global and 
domestic factors, annual CPI 
inflation increased to 6.9 percent
Annual CPI inflation increased to 6.9 percent 
in the March 2022 quarter – well above the 
MPC’s target band of 1 to 3 percent. This 
reflects ongoing supply-chain bottlenecks 
and other global factors, and pressure on 
available resources domestically. Inflation 
is being influenced by global and domestic 
factors, as reflected in the roughly equal 
contribution of tradable and non-tradable 
goods and services to overall consumer 
price inflation (figure 2.13). This follows an 
extended period when low tradables inflation 
helped to keep overall inflation low in 
New Zealand.
Figure 2.12
Shipping costs for consumer goods
(share of import value for duty)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: These series are estimated by taking the value of consumer merchandise imports 
including freight and insurance costs (CIF) and subtracting the reported value for duty 
(VFD), which excludes these costs. It is expressed as a percentage of the VFD figure.
Figure 2.11
Petrol and Dubai oil prices
Source: Datamine – Gaspy data, Stats NZ, Reuters, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Gaspy fuel prices are indexed to the petrol CPI level in the December 2019 
quarter.
Figure 2.13
Contributions to annual CPI inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
16
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
On the global side, oil prices and their 
pass-through to domestic petrol prices have 
played a particularly large role in the recent 
increase in tradables inflation (figure 2.14). 
Margins for refined oil products have risen 
significantly and are expected to contribute 
to high fuel price inflation in the near term. 
Food prices in New Zealand have also 
been increasing recently, in line with rising 
food prices around the world (see section 
4.1). Tradables inflation is much higher than 
was anticipated a year ago, reflecting the 
series of shocks from the war in Ukraine and 
ongoing COVID-19 lockdowns in China.
Domestically, construction and other 
housing-related prices have made the largest 
contribution to non-tradables inflation  
(figure 2.15). Construction and housing-
related prices have also risen much more 
than expected a year or so ago. This reflects 
both stronger-than-expected underlying 
domestic demand and shortages of labour 
and building materials. 
Inflation has broadened over recent quarters. 
Higher prices are being seen in an increasing 
share of goods and services. As a result, 
the distribution of price increases is moving 
higher (figure 2.16). Measures of ‘core’ 
inflation have increased to above 4 percent 
(figure 2.17).
Figure 2.14
Contributions to tradables inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 2.15
Contributions to non-tradables inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 2.16
Distribution of price movements in CPI classes
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ.
Note: There are more than 100 CPI classes – capturing prices for specific types of goods 
and services – for which the bands show the distribution of annual percent changes. 
Shaded areas represent: grey – middle 50 percent of CPI classes; purple – middle  
75 percent of CPI classes; light brown – middle 90 percent of CPI classes.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
17
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
Current expectations for future inflation have 
increased, particularly for one and two years 
ahead, as discussed in section 4.2 of the 
February Statement (figure 2.18). Expectations 
at longer horizons have increased slightly, 
but remain near the 2 percent target mid-
point. Higher expectations will contribute to 
further increases in wages and prices in the 
near term.
Financial conditions have already 
tightened, contributing to a 
decline in nationwide house prices
The MPC has been tightening monetary 
policy since mid-2021, in response to 
high actual and expected inflation and 
employment being above its maximum 
sustainable level. Interest rates faced by 
households and businesses have increased 
sharply over this period, as discussed in 
chapter 3 and section 4.2. An increase in 
mortgage interest rates, a fall in consumer 
confidence, weaker population growth, 
strong home building activity and the 
introduction of regulatory measures (such 
as changes to the Credit Contracts and 
Consumer Finance Act and tighter loan-to-
value ratio restrictions) have all contributed to 
a fall in house prices over recent months. 
Figure 2.17
Core inflation measures
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.18
Inflation expectations
(annual, years ahead)
Source: ANZ, RBNZ, Consensus Economics, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
18
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
Economic and monetary policy outlook
Economic growth is expected to 
slow from this year
House prices are expected to continue 
moving lower towards more sustainable 
levels over the coming year (figure 2.19). 
This easing in house prices is expected to 
slow household spending growth due to the 
reduction in wealth and higher mortgage 
interest payments (discussed further in 
section 4.2). Recent declines in real wages 
– wages adjusted for inflation – are also 
assumed to hold back spending growth.
Economic growth in the first half of 2022 
reflects an ongoing recovery from COVID-19 
restrictions last year, a waning impact of the 
initial Omicron wave, the border reopening 
and higher government spending. However, 
domestic demand growth is expected to 
slow from mid-2022. High global uncertainty, 
higher interest rates and weakening business 
confidence are assumed to limit business 
investment, despite current capacity 
pressures. Real government consumption 
is also assumed to ease, although from 
higher levels than assumed in the February 
Statement, consistent with the 2022 Budget. 
In addition, pent-up demand for travel by 
New Zealanders going overseas is expected 
to more than offset the gradual recovery in 
spending by international tourists here.
But more monetary tightening is 
needed to bring inflation back to  
2 percent
Slower growth in domestic demand is 
expected to coincide with a gradual  
freeing-up of supply bottlenecks. The 
shortage of workers is expected to moderate 
as fewer workers are off sick or self-isolating 
due to COVID-19 and net immigration 
returns toward its longer-term level. Inflation 
is forecast to decline as pressures on 
resources ease and oil prices decline in line 
with market expectations (figure 2.20).
Figure 2.19
House prices
(nominal) 
Source: CoreLogic, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: This index is the official measure of house price levels in New Zealand.
Figure 2.20
Annual CPI inflation
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
19
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
Figure 2.21
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Our projection implies that the MPC will 
need to increase the OCR by more than 
assumed in the February Statement, in order 
to achieve its economic objectives (figure 
2.21). The increase in projected monetary 
policy tightening required reflects greater 
global inflationary pressures and shortages of 
workers and materials domestically. Additional 
OCR increases are needed to soften demand 
for goods and services and reduce demand 
for labour until persistent supply-side 
shortfalls can be resolved. This is required to 
rein in broadening domestic inflation, helping 
to return annual CPI inflation towards the 
MPC’s target midpoint over the medium term, 
and to ensure employment returns towards its 
maximum sustainable level.


Chapter 3 Financial conditions
20
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
CHAPTER 
03
Financial 
conditions


Chapter 3 Financial conditions
21
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
Figure 3.1
Interest rate swap rates
Source: Bloomberg.
CHAPTER 3
Financial conditions
A key way Te Pūtea Matua – the Reserve Bank – affects 
economic activity is by influencing conditions in financial 
markets. Financial conditions include the interest rates at which 
households and businesses save and borrow, the exchange rate 
and other factors such as credit availability. Since the February 
Statement the MPC has continued to raise the OCR and 
domestic financial conditions have tightened further. The OCR 
has returned closer to our estimate of its neutral rate, where it 
is neither boosting nor slowing down the economy. However, 
domestic wholesale and retail interest rates have seen a greater 
magnitude of tightening, reflecting market expectations for the 
OCR to rise much further. As a result, consumers and businesses 
are experiencing higher borrowing and lending rates.
Financial conditions have tightened since the 
February Statement
Financial conditions have tightened since 
the February Statement, reflected in 
higher interest rates in a range of markets. 
Wholesale interest rates have increased 
rapidly due to the recent increases in the 
OCR, as well as financial market expectations 
of further increases to come. Domestic 
wholesale interest rates at terms most 
relevant to households and businesses (one 
and two years) are now near their highest 
levels since early 2015 (figure 3.1). Retail 
interest rates such as term deposit rates and 
mortgage rates have increased in line with 
wholesale rates. However, the New Zealand 
dollar exchange rate has depreciated on 
a trade-weighted basis in recent months, 
providing a small offset to the tightening in 
financial conditions.


Chapter 3 Financial conditions
22
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
Prices for overnight indexed swap (OIS) 
contracts indicate that financial market 
participants expect significant further OCR 
increases in coming months (figure 3.2). OIS 
contracts on Thursday 19 May suggested 
market participants fully anticipated one 
50-basis-point hike at the May Statement 
and around a further 70 basis points of hikes 
by the August Statement. Market pricing 
is consistent with expectations of the OCR 
rising to 3.25 percent by the November 2022 
Statement (figure 3.2), and continuing to rise 
after this. Expectations for future settings 
of the OCR are an important influence on 
financial conditions today. This is because 
fixed-term interest rates for consumers and 
businesses are influenced by wholesale 
rates at those timeframes, which are in turn 
influenced by expectations of the OCR in the 
future. 
Global economic and financial market 
changes have been a key influence 
contributing to higher domestic interest 
rates in recent months. New Zealand interest 
rates tend to move with global interest rates, 
particularly at longer maturities. Since the 
February Statement, global interest rates 
have risen sharply from low levels. Financial 
market participants have reassessed their 
expectations for global inflation and therefore 
the pace of monetary policy tightening 
by central banks (see section 4.1 for more 
discussion).
Uncertainty about how fast and how far 
central banks will need to raise interest rates 
has added to volatility in global financial 
markets, including in New Zealand. This 
uncertainty may be boosting domestic 
wholesale rates by increasing volatility and 
reducing liquidity. Market participants report 
that this has been most notable in short-term 
interest rate swap markets. Participants also 
report that the deterioration in conditions 
is partly due to domestic banks needing to 
hedge a large volume of recently refinanced 
fixed-term mortgages, and a drop in offshore 
participation in the market. These factors may 
be placing upward pressure on swap rates 
over and above expectations for the OCR, 
although the magnitude of this impact is 
difficult to assess. 
The New Zealand government bond (NZGB) 
market continues to function normally. 
One indicator to assess this is the bid-ask 
spread. This measures how far apart buyers 
and sellers are from reaching agreed 
prices to trade. In times of market stress, 
bid-ask spreads can widen significantly. 
Bid-ask spreads have not widened since 
the February Statement, despite increased 
volatility in the NZGB market. One indicator 
that illustrates the general increase in 
volatility in the NZGB market is the intra-day 
range observed in the prices of the 10-year 
New Zealand government bond. This has 
increased slightly this year, mirroring global 
trends in fixed-income markets, and has 
generally remained above its long-term 
average since January.
Figure 3.2
Market expectations for the OCR
Source: Bloomberg.
Note: Each line represents the expectations of the level of the OCR at a given point in time 
in the future, as measured by overnight indexed swap pricing. For example, the May 2022 
line shows expectations over time for what the OCR decision would be at the May 2022 
Statement.


Chapter 3 Financial conditions
23
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
The New Zealand dollar has 
weakened
The New Zealand dollar exchange rate 
has been volatile against a range of other 
currencies since the February Statement. 
Global commodity prices rose after 
the Ukraine war started, leading to an 
appreciation in the New Zealand dollar 
in March. However, since early April the 
New Zealand dollar TWI has fallen. 
A number of factors have led to the fall in 
the exchange rate. Rising expectations 
of interest rates abroad, especially in the 
United States and Australia, have narrowed 
the gap between wholesale interest rates 
in New Zealand and those offshore. Prices 
for New Zealand’s key export commodities, 
particularly dairy, have fallen from recent high 
levels. Investors have moved towards safer 
assets because market risk appetite has 
worsened in response to greater uncertainty 
about the impacts of the war in Ukraine and 
the weakening economic outlook in China. 
These factors have also contributed to 
general strength in the US dollar, which tends 
to strengthen during times of heightened 
investor risk aversion. This is due to the 
importance of the US dollar in the global 
financial system, and the perceived relative 
safety of US dollar assets.
Overall, the New Zealand dollar TWI has 
returned to a similar level to that assumed 
at the time of the February Statement. Falls 
have been greater against some currencies 
in the TWI basket of key trading partner 
currencies, such as the US and Australian 
dollars, than others (figure 3.3). The 
New Zealand dollar has remained relatively 
flat against the euro, as the economic outlook 
has worsened in Europe because of the war 
in Ukraine.
Figure 3.3
New Zealand dollar TWI and bilateral exchange rates
(Index = 100 at day of February Statement)
Source: Bloomberg.


Chapter 3 Financial conditions
24
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
Higher wholesale rates are being 
passed on to mortgage rates
Mortgage rates at the most popular one- 
and two-year terms increased by around 
20 and 5 basis points respectively between 
the November and February Statements. 
However, they have since increased by 
around 75 and 90 basis points respectively 
(figure 3.4). Rates at longer terms have 
increased more, with five-year mortgage 
rates currently 105 basis points higher than 
before the February Statement.
Higher mortgage rates will filter through 
to larger mortgage payments for many 
households over the coming year. Over half 
of the total mortgage debt is due for repricing 
during 2022. As mortgages are re-priced at 
higher rates, the average mortgage rate is 
likely to rise further. The average mortgage 
rate has risen to around 3 percent from 
2021’s low of 2.7 percent (see section 4.2 
for more discussion). The average mortgage 
rate tends to lag changes in the rates offered 
by banks for new mortgage lending, because 
it mostly comprises fixed-rate mortgages that 
were fixed at the mortgage rates prevailing  
in the past. 
Term deposit rates are also 
increasing, but more slowly
Rates on term deposits, which make up 
around a quarter of bank funding, have 
increased by around 60 and 45 basis points 
at the popular six-month and one-year terms 
respectively since just prior to the February 
Statement (figure 3.5). These increases are 
smaller than those seen in mortgage and 
swap rates, and the spread of term deposits 
to relevant benchmark wholesale rates is 
low compared to historical spreads. The 
relatively slow increase in deposit rates 
in part reflects favourable overall funding 
conditions for banks that reduce the need to 
compete strongly on deposit rates. However, 
deposit rates are likely to rise further as the 
OCR continues to increase and as the effects 
of additional monetary policy tools (such 
as the Funding for Lending Programme) on 
bank funding conditions wane over time. 
Further increases in deposit rates may add 
extra upwards pressure to mortgage rates as 
banks pass on the additional costs.
Figure 3.5
Term deposit rates
Source: interest.co.nz.
Note: The rate shown for each term is the average of the latest term deposit rates on offer 
from ANZ, ASB, BNZ and Westpac.
Figure 3.4
Mortgage rates and average interest rate 
on outstanding mortgages
Source: Reuters, RBNZ Income Statement survey.
Note: The mortgage rate shown for each term is the average of the latest ‘special’ fixed-
term rates on offer from ANZ, ASB, BNZ and Westpac. The average yield is the average 
interest rate of all outstanding mortgages.


Chapter 3 Financial conditions
25
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
Bank funding conditions remain 
relatively accommodative
Banks are well funded overall, and have 
strong liquidity buffers. This means they 
can afford to be selective when accessing 
wholesale markets. Because of this, the 
impact of rising wholesale rates and periods 
of heightened volatility in global financial 
markets on banks’ funding profiles has been 
limited to date. Short-term funding costs 
remain low, as evidenced by the three-
month BKBM-OIS spread (which captures the 
difference between the Bank Bill Benchmark 
rate and the OIS rate). Longer-term bank 
funding spreads have increased, and have 
returned to pre-COVID-19 levels (figure 3.6).
Banks report lower demand for 
household credit
Credit for housing is still growing, but the 
pace has slowed from its peak last year 
(figure 3.7). This slowdown is partly due to 
regulations, including changes to lending 
rules under the Credit Contracts and 
Consumer Finance Act (CCCFA) in late 
2021. These changes have slowed down 
mortgage approvals due to tighter lending 
standards from banks. With the higher 
outlook for mortgage rates, banks have also 
increased the test interest rates used to 
assess mortgage serviceability, restricting 
the maximum mortgage size homebuyers 
can borrow. The recently released March 
Credit Conditions Survey showed that 
banks reported a reduction in demand for 
household credit, and that the availability 
of this credit had fallen (see section 4.2 for 
more discussion). Banks expect demand for 
housing credit to continue to decline over the 
coming months. Personal consumer lending 
is falling, and the weak demand for this type 
of lending is expected to continue due to low 
consumer confidence, widespread COVID-19 
in New Zealand, and rising interest rates.
Business lending is growing faster than 
in 2021. Credit standards for businesses 
were reported to have changed little in the 
March Survey, although banks reported a 
small increase in demand for borrowing by 
businesses, mainly for purposes other than 
capital investment. Banks do not anticipate 
an increase in business appetite for capital 
expenditure in coming months, with business 
confidence expected to remain subdued. 
Lending to the agriculture sector is also 
falling on an annual basis, although the 
March Survey reported that demand for 
lending in this sector was starting to improve 
due to high commodity prices and a more 
positive outlook for the sector in general.
Figure 3.7
Sector lending growth 
(annual)
Source: RBNZ Bank Balance Sheet survey.
Figure 3.6
Bank funding costs
Source: Bloomberg, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Credit spreads are the differences between secondary market bond yields and the 
interest rate swap curve. The bond yields used for the five-year measure are the averages 
of bonds with a remaining maturity of five years issued in New Zealand dollars by ANZ, 
ASB, BNZ and Westpac. A lower spread represents a lower implied borrowing cost.


Chapter 4 Special topics
26
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
CHAPTER 
04
Special topics


Chapter 4 Special topics
27
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
CHAPTER 4 
Special topics 
Before each Statement, the MPC is provided with analysis  
of some topical issues.
Topics for the May Statement included:
1.	 Global inflation developments.
2.	 The outlook for household spending, house prices and construction.
Previous special topics in the past 12 months
Topic
Date/publication
International developments and risks 
MPS February 2022 (Chapter 4)
Inflation expectations
MPS February 2022 (Chapter 4)
Transmission of global developments to  
New Zealand’s economy
MPS November 2021 (Chapter 4)
Outlook for New Zealand’s productive capacity
MPS November 2021 (Chapter 4)
Climate change and inflation
MPS November 2021 (Chapter 4)
The recovery of New Zealand’s labour market
MPS August 2021 (Chapter 4)
The neutral interest rate
MPS August 2021 (Chapter 4)
Disruptions to global and domestic supply chains
MPS May 2021 (Chapter 4)
Monetary policy and house price sustainability
MPS May 2021 (Chapter 4)


Chapter 4 Special topics
28
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
Global inflation developments
Inflation has risen sharply across the globe 
in 2021 and 2022, reaching multi-decade 
highs in many economies. Price pressures 
for a variety of consumer goods emerged as 
supply-chain disruptions escalated during the 
height of the COVID-19 pandemic. Underlying 
inflationary pressure has also been building, 
as demand has strengthened and labour 
shortages have grown in many economies. 
More recently, the war in Ukraine has led to 
a sharp increase in global commodity prices, 
particularly energy and food prices.  
Central banks, including Te Pūtea Matua 
– the Reserve Bank – are raising official 
interest rates to lower inflation and promote 
price stability. 
Successive COVID-19 disruptions 
and war in Ukraine are 
constraining global supply
The combination of several supply shocks 
and strong consumer demand for goods has 
caused inflation to increase to multi-decade 
highs in many regions (figure 4.1). 
From early 2020, the COVID-19 pandemic led 
to a massive disruption in the production and 
transportation of goods. Consumer spending 
shifted from services towards goods such 
as computer and electronic equipment 
due to mobility restrictions. Higher demand 
for electronics has caused shortages 
of key production components, such as 
semiconductor chips. Mobility restrictions 
and social distancing requirements across 
economies have also reduced operating 
capacity at seaports, airports and other 
logistic hubs, creating transportation delays. 
The combination of these factors has 
resulted in higher prices for many  
consumer products.
As some of the pressures of the COVID-19 
disruptions began to ease early this year, the 
war in Ukraine disrupted energy and food 
markets. Russia is a major supplier of oil and 
natural gas, and Ukraine is a major producer 
of wheat, grains and chemicals that are key 
raw materials for manufacturers. The prices 
of oil, wheat and other commodities have 
increased sharply. These impacts might be 
persistent. For example, the war in Ukraine 
may interrupt the planting, production and 
transport of food beyond this production 
season. Energy trade patterns may also be 
changed permanently by the war. Market 
prices show that investors expect the prices 
of oil, wheat and other grains to remain 
high for an extended period. This includes 
elevated pricing in crude oil futures  
(figure 4.2). 
Figure 4.2
Brent crude oil futures
Source: Bloomberg.
Figure 4.1
Inflation in selected countries
(annual)
Source: Haver Analytics.
1


Chapter 4 Special topics
29
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
China continues to pursue its strict policy 
to eliminate the spread of COVID-19. In the 
past few months, major cities in China have 
been in lockdown. These are disrupting the 
production and transportation of goods, 
creating widespread pressures on the prices 
of materials and manufactured goods. The 
combined impact of supply disruptions from 
China and the war in Ukraine has intensified 
inflationary pressures for a broad set of food, 
consumer goods and energy supplies.
Inflation impacts have varied 
across countries 
Price rises have been uneven around the 
globe due to the relative strengths of growth 
and labour market recoveries. Countries 
closer to Ukraine have been more directly 
affected by the disruption caused by the war.
Inflation in the US is higher than in many 
other regions, reflecting strong demand 
and a tighter labour market. Economies 
in Europe have been more significantly 
impacted by the nearby war in Ukraine, 
due to having closer trade links with Russia. 
Energy prices have also risen more in Europe 
than elsewhere, making a more significant 
contribution to inflation than they have in 
other regions. 
China has also been affected by global 
inflationary pressures, but its economic 
circumstances have kept demand pressures 
relatively low recently. Many economic 
indicators suggest the pace of China’s 
recovery is slowing, in part due to ongoing 
lockdowns in its major cities to control 
the spread of Omicron. These lockdowns 
provide a drag on both production and 
consumption, and have materially slowed the 
pace of inflation in the country. 
In Australia, inflation has increased due to 
rising food, housing and transport prices in 
particular. Core inflation has risen quickly in 
the past year as capacity pressures have 
built up. These themes have been similar in 
New Zealand. However, housing and food 
price inflation has been slightly stronger in 
New Zealand, partially reflecting a stronger 
housing market and a slightly higher relative 
share of imports in the CPI. 
Inflation in New Zealand is affected by 
fluctuations in inflation among our trading 
partners, in particular for imported goods 
and services. New Zealand’s trading partner 
inflation has increased sharply in the past 
few months, reflecting higher inflation in most 
economies other than China (figure 4.3). 
Headline and core inflation have varied 
across countries. Headline inflation captures 
changes in all of the consumption basket, 
while core inflation estimates persistence in 
inflation by removing price movements that 
typically fluctuate significantly (for example, 
food and energy). The sharp increases in 
global energy and food prices in the past few 
months have pushed headline inflation up by 
considerably more than core inflation. This is 
especially true in Europe, where energy and 
food prices have risen faster due to the war 
in Ukraine. 
Figure 4.3
Trading partner inflation
Source: Consensus Economics, Haver Analytics, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 4 Special topics
30
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
Cross-country variations in wage 
growth are also resulting in 
different inflation dynamics
Another factor leading to uneven inflation 
outcomes between countries is differences 
in wage inflation. Global unemployment 
rates have fallen towards multi-decade 
lows, and job vacancies have increased. In 
response, employers have had to compete 
for labour by offering higher wages. Wages 
have started to rise, but increases have 
varied across countries and industries. 
Nominal wages have grown more quickly in 
the US than in the euro area and Australia, 
in part due to a tighter US labour market. 
Wages have been increasing more quickly 
in industries with strong post-pandemic 
recoveries, such as the retail services 
sector. Further price rises have the potential 
to feed into higher wages through wage 
negotiations. In turn, higher wage inflation 
may result in more persistent consumer  
price inflation, in particular for labour-
intensive services.
Long-term inflation expectations 
have been increasing but remain 
moderate 
Expectations of long-term inflation have 
started to increase in most economies, 
reflecting recent sharp increases in inflation. 
Inflation expectations represent the rate at 
which consumers and businesses expect 
prices to rise in the future. This belief informs 
consumer and business decisions such 
as hiring and investment, and influences 
pricing decisions today. Anchoring inflation 
expectations helps consumers and 
businesses to make longer-term decisions, 
and makes it easier for central banks to 
return inflation to target over time. Surveyed 
expectations of inflation one to two years 
out have increased to a greater extent. 
Surveyed expectations of long-term inflation 
have increased somewhat in the past year, 
but they still remain close to central bank 
targets around the globe (figure 4.4). 
This dynamic of higher near-term inflation 
expectations but relatively stable long-
term inflation expectations is also apparent 
in market measures, which represent 
the inflation outlook of financial market 
participants. Market-implied inflation 
expectation measures have increased across 
the globe (figure 4.5). The increase has been 
most pronounced in market expectations 
of inflation over the next two to five years. 
Expected inflation over the next 10 years has 
been more stable. 
Figure 4.4
Surveyed inflation expectations
 (5 years ahead)
Source: European Central Bank, Federal Reserve Bank of Cleveland.
Figure 4.5
Market-implied inflation expectations 
(5-year, 5-year USD inflation swap rate)
Source: Bloomberg. 


Chapter 4 Special topics
31
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
Inflationary pressures are 
prompting tighter monetary  
policy globally
Central banks are tightening monetary policy 
in order to lower inflation (table 4.1). The US 
Federal Reserve, Bank of Canada, Reserve 
Bank of Australia and Bank of England have 
all raised their policy rates since the start of 
April by 25 to 50 basis points and announced 
their intention to decrease the sizes of their 
balance sheets. The European Central Bank 
has also indicated that it expects to tighten 
policy soon. Market expectations for the 
future path of policy rates reflect a belief that 
central banks will continue to increase policy 
rates for some time.
Geopolitics and COVID-19 will 
affect future inflation 
Uncertainty about the global inflation 
outlook is high. Central banks are tightening 
monetary policy to ensure price stability, 
but the pace at which inflation returns to 
central bank targets is dependent on a 
range of factors that are difficult to predict. 
These include geopolitical developments 
and pandemic-related disruptions to global 
production and trade. 
Table 4.1
Central bank snapshot as of May 21, 2022
Fed
BoC
RBA
BoE
ECB
RBNZ
Policy rate
0.75-1%
1.00%
0.35%
1.00%
-0.5%
1.50%
Headline inflation
8.30%
6.8%
5.10%
9%
7.40%
6.90%
Unemployment
3.60%
5.20%
3.9%
3.7%
6.80%
3.20%
Source: US Federal Reserve (Fed), Bank of Canada (BoC), Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA), Bank of England (BoE), European Central Bank (ECB), Reserve Bank of  
New Zealand (RBNZ).


Chapter 4 Special topics
32
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
The outlook for household spending, house prices 
and construction
Households are facing many challenges 
this year. High consumer price inflation is 
affecting all households, with particularly 
pronounced impacts for those on lower 
incomes. Rising interest rates and falling 
house prices are placing pressure on 
indebted homeowners. For some, these 
challenges have been partly offset by 
increased job opportunities and relatively 
strong income growth in the past year. 
Individual household outcomes will vary 
widely and depend on a variety of factors 
including sources and levels of income, 
home ownership status and levels of 
accumulated equity in assets such as homes 
and shares. The analysis below considers the 
average household outlook. 
At an economy-wide level, households are 
starting from a relatively strong position. 
Many homeowners have high amounts of 
equity in their homes and savings built up in 
the past two years. However, rising interest 
rates will put pressure on some households 
and may cause them to cut back their 
spending. Declining house prices and higher 
interest rates may also slow the pace of 
growth in new-home building. 
There are risks that higher interest rates 
will lead to a more rapid decline in house 
prices than expected, which would cause 
a larger decline in household spending 
and construction than currently assumed. 
However, some slowing of domestic demand 
growth through household spending and 
construction is needed to bring inflation back 
towards its 2 percent target midpoint over 
the medium term and employment towards 
its maximum sustainable level. 
The housing market is cooling 
House prices have fallen by about 5 percent 
since their peak in November 2021, towards 
more sustainable levels. Many factors have 
contributed to the downward pressure on 
house prices and sales, including:
•	 higher mortgage rates,
•	 changes to the Credit Contracts and 
Consumer Finance Act (CCCFA),
•	 the removal of interest deductibility for 
investors,
•	 tighter loan-to-value ratio (LVR) 
requirements,
•	 lower net immigration growth,
•	 increased housing supply, with a recent 
record number of building consents.
Despite recent declines, house prices 
remain above sustainable levels
Despite recent declines, house prices remain 
above levels that are justified based on their 
economic fundamentals, as outlined in the 
May 2022 Financial Stability Report. These 
fundamentals include, but are not limited to, 
the supply of houses, yields from rents, the 
opportunity costs of other investments, the 
tax treatment of housing, and interest rates.
From their peak in November 2021, we 
currently expect house prices to fall by about 
14 percent by early 2024. While this seems 
like a relatively large decline compared to 
New Zealand’s history, it would bring prices 
back to only April 2021 levels (figure 4.6). 
That said, the size and speed of the fall in 
house prices are highly uncertain. 
2
Figure 4.6
House prices
(nominal)
Source: CoreLogic, RBNZ estimates.
Note: This index is the official measure of house price levels in New Zealand.


Chapter 4 Special topics
33
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
Rising interest rates are contributing to 
declines in house prices 
Rising interest rates have helped to cool 
the housing market. Mortgage rates have 
increased rapidly in the past 12 months, with 
fixed mortgage rates at the one- and two-
year horizon increasing by more than 225 
basis points. This has reduced demand from 
prospective buyers, especially in the context 
of high house prices (figure 4.7). As a result, 
house sales have declined, causing the 
stock of homes on the market to rise as some 
homeowners continue to list their properties 
for sale (figure 4.8). Gradually, sellers will 
adjust their price expectations lower to find 
buyers, or withdraw their listings. 
As existing mortgages have begun to be 
repriced, the average interest rate on all 
mortgage debt has risen by 31 basis points 
since its trough to 3.14 percent. Just over 
half of all existing fixed mortgages are 
due to reprice in the next year (figure 4.9). 
Wholesale market pricing implies that the 
average (or ‘effective’) interest rate of all 
mortgage debt will increase to 5.3 percent in 
the next year (figure 4.10).
Source: REINZ, realestate.co.nz.
Figure 4.8
House sales and inventories 
(seasonally adjusted)
Figure 4.7
Indicative mortgage payments for a new buyer
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: Calculated as the share of median household disposable income required to service 
a new 30-year mortgage on a median-priced house with a loan-to-value ratio of 80 percent 
at the average two-year mortgage rate.
Figure 4.9
Existing mortgage debt due to reprice 
Source: RBNZ Bank Balance Sheet survey, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 4 Special topics
34
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
Household credit growth is easing
Growth in new mortgage borrowing has 
slowed in recent months, after rising in 2020 
and 2021 (figure 4.11). Home buyers are 
finding it increasingly difficult to borrow at 
higher debt-to-income ratios due to banks’ 
stricter lending rules. A greater scrutiny of 
expenses after changes to the CCCFA late 
last year also made it more difficult for some 
individuals to get credit, and loan approvals 
have taken longer. 
Lower migration is weighing on 
housing demand
High net migration into New Zealand at the 
beginning of the pandemic contributed to 
housing market strength during 2020 and 
2021. Net immigration surged in all age 
groups (figure 4.12). Since then, people 
aged between 20 and 29 years have been 
departing steadily, and net migration has 
plateaued in other age groups. Our central 
projection assumes that net immigration in 
coming years will be lower than it was prior 
to the COVID-19 pandemic, in part due to 
the Government’s recent immigration policy 
announcements. This will reduce additional 
housing demand. 
Figure 4.10
Mortgage interest rates and average rate  
on housing debt
Source: RBNZ Income Statement survey, interest.co.nz, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 4.11
Household credit growth and new 
mortgage commitments
Source: RBNZ Bank Balance Sheet survey, RBNZ LVR New Commitments Survey.
Figure 4.12
Cumulative net immigration by age group
(since 2020Q1)
Source: Stats NZ.


Chapter 4 Special topics
35
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
Figure 4.13
Savings rate and accumulated savings
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Rising interest rates and declining 
house prices will lead to lower 
household spending
Rising interest rates and falling house prices 
are expected to reduce households’ ability 
and willingness to spend. About two-thirds of 
households own their homes, and about two-
thirds of those homeowners have mortgages. 
Households with the highest levels of debt 
relative to their incomes will likely need to cut 
back their spending on goods and services in 
order to service their mortgages. Households 
with less or no debt will still face pressure 
from the higher cost of living, which is being 
only partially offset currently by nominal wage 
growth and higher interest rates on deposits. 
Overall, households are starting from 
strong positions
Households have been saving on net 
since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, 
particularly during lockdown periods (figure 
4.13). Government support measures such 
as the Wage Subsidy scheme maintained 
household incomes while mobility restrictions 
stopped some spending (for example, going 
to restaurants and travelling overseas). These 
savings have yet to be spent, and will give a 
buffer for some households against higher 
inflation and interest rates. However, if the 
bulk of these savings are spent domestically, 
they could create more persistent demand, 
which could increase inflation and interest 
rates further.
Although a 14 percent house price decline is 
large compared to New Zealand’s history, a 
30 percent decline in house prices from their 
peak would be required to bring them back 
to their pre-COVID-19 levels. As a result, many 
homeowners have significant equity buffers 
(the value of their homes less their mortgage 
debts). A very small proportion of households 
– estimated at around one percent of total 
mortgage lending – would be in negative 
equity, where a home is worth less than its 
mortgage, in our central projection. If house 
prices returned to their pre-COVID-19 levels, 
we estimate that around 10 percent of housing 
debt would be in negative equity.


Chapter 4 Special topics
36
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
Figure 4.14
Projected mortgage interest 
rates and bank test rates
Source: interest.co.nz, RBNZ Credit Conditions survey, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Mortgage rate forecasts are based on forward wholesale market pricing. 
Dots represent the five largest banks’ test servicing rates. Some banks have 
announced further increases to their test rates since our latest data collection.
Most households are well placed to 
meet higher interest costs
Most borrowers have experienced higher 
mortgage rates in the past and have 
been tested on the ability to service their 
mortgages at interest rates over 7 percent. 
In addition, many have seen their incomes 
rise, at least in nominal terms, since they first 
borrowed. We expect that nominal income 
growth will continue to increase in the near 
term, given the strong labour market. 
Mortgage rates have not yet risen to a level 
that would cause many borrowers to have 
difficulty paying their mortgages. During 
2021, major banks tested new borrowers’ 
ability to service mortgages at interest 
rates of 5.5-6.5 percent (figure 4.14). These 
test rates are used to assess customers’ 
maximum borrowing capacity, and most will 
borrow less than the maximum. Therefore, 
mortgage rates up to these levels should 
result in relatively few borrowers having 
difficulty paying their mortgages. As a result, 
the reduction in aggregate household 
spending growth is expected to evolve 
as it has during previous monetary policy 
tightening cycles. 
People who first borrowed during  
2021 will find it more difficult to  
service their debts
Our current projection for the OCR implies 
that one- and two-year fixed mortgage rates 
will reach about 6 percent in the next year. If 
mortgage rates rise as forecast, there is a risk 
that a noticeable number of households that 
borrowed for the first time in 2021 will find it 
difficult to pay their mortgages and cover all 
their other usual expenses. This is because a 
6 percent mortgage rate is close to the level 
at which borrowers were tested during the 
COVID-19 period. There is a risk that these 
borrowers will need to cut back spending by 
more than currently assumed to meet their 
higher debt-servicing costs. 
More broadly, declining house prices 
are likely to reduce spending via 
households’ perceptions of their own 
wealth
Higher interest rates will reduce the 
disposable incomes of a large majority of 
mortgage holders, lowering household 
spending. Lower house prices will also 
weigh on consumption via the ‘wealth effect’. 
Typically people spend more as house 
prices rise, and less as they fall. Spending 
on long-lasting goods – such as whiteware 
appliances and furniture – will be particularly 
affected by a slowing housing market. 
Spending on these types of goods has  
been very strong throughout most of the  
COVID-19 pandemic. 


Chapter 4 Special topics
37
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
Figure 4.15
ANZBO construction intentions
(12 months ahead)
Source: ANZ.
Falling house prices will slow 
home building
The number of dwelling consents issued in 
the past year has been very high, and was 
continuing to grow as of March. However, 
builders are facing challenges often 
associated with construction booms. Strong 
demand has exceeded supply capacity for 
materials and closed borders have made 
labour shortages worse. The price of  
building a new house has been the largest  
contributor to non-tradables inflation in the 
past 12 months. 
Building consent growth is likely  
to slow
The combination of high construction 
costs, higher interest rates and house price 
declines will make it more difficult for housing 
developers to achieve their required return 
on investment. Developers will also find it 
increasingly difficult to secure pre-sales on 
new projects. As a result, we expect that the 
flow of new consents will begin to slow. Much 
of the strength in recent consent data is likely 
a lagged effect of housing market strength 
in the second half of 2021, as consents have 
been taking longer than usual to process. 
This aligns with recent ANZ Business Outlook 
(ANZBO) construction intentions data from 
surveyed construction firms (figure 4.15).
Lower residential construction demand 
should ease cost pressures
Lower demand for new residential 
construction should somewhat ease cost 
pressures on building materials, while the  
supply of building materials should gradually 
improve. We assume this will allow builders 
to work through their backlog of projects 
over the next year or two. Some construction 
firms and developers will experience more 
challenging financial conditions, as we have 
already seen. Still, the sector as a whole 
is expected to continue to operate near 
capacity. If the supply of building materials 
increases as anticipated, this should increase 
the number of completed dwellings.
There is a risk that interest rate increases 
and house price falls will lead to a large 
decline in construction-sector activity. In such 
a scenario, we would expect to see more 
developer insolvencies and a large number 
of incomplete or cancelled projects. This 
would result in a steep decline in residential 
investment and present downside risks 
to our medium-term outlook. However, 
New Zealand’s financial system is in a much 
stronger starting position than during the last 
major downturn in the construction sector 
following the global financial crisis in 2008. 
Therefore, the availability of credit should 
support construction sector activity, albeit at 
a higher interest rate. 


Chapter 5 Economic projection
38
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
CHAPTER 
05
Economic 
projection


Chapter 5 Economic projection
39
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
CHAPTER 5
Economic projection
This chapter summarises the economic projection that the  
MPC members considered when making their policy 
assessment. The projection was finalised on 19 May 2022. 
This projection out to mid-2025 relies on a 
set of key assumptions about the domestic 
and global responses to the ongoing 
COVID-19 pandemic and the war in Ukraine. 
These relate to:
•	 The duration and pricing impacts of 
supply-chain bottlenecks, and how and 
when these delays are likely to ease.
•	 The economic impacts of, and  
recovery from, pandemic-related 
COVID-19 lockdowns and other 
restrictions on activity.
•	 How businesses, employees and 
consumers might change their  
behaviour as they learn to live with 
COVID-19 in the community.
•	 The pace at which central banks around 
the world are raising interest rates.
There is significant uncertainty about these 
assumptions, and outcomes could be 
different if they do not hold. 
The projection takes into account recent 
data, which show rising inflation and a very 
tight labour market. The economy is starting 
from a stronger position than expected at 
the time of the February Statement. The 
factors underpinning this starting point are 
discussed in chapter 2, but include strong 
housing construction, robust demand for 
our goods exports and higher government 
spending (as outlined in the 2022 Budget).
The projection also accounts for the 
new timeline for the gradual reopening 
of New Zealand’s borders. Borders are 
expected to be fully open by 31 July 2022, 
in line with the most recent Government 
announcement. 
Inflation is expected to remain elevated 
in the near term. The war in Ukraine and 
renewed COVID-19 lockdowns in China 
have created additional capacity and price 
pressures on top of existing supply-chain 
disruptions and earlier increases in oil prices. 
As a result, these pressures are expected 
to continue for longer than previously 
expected. 
Over the medium term, we assume that 
higher interest rates in New Zealand will 
help to moderate domestic demand growth. 
Real government spending is also forecast 
to ease from mid-2022. The resumption 
of workers coming to New Zealand as the 
borders reopen will provide space for some 
supply-chain bottlenecks to ease. A gradual 
recovery in net immigration is expected to 
help fill widespread job vacancies. Also, 
global oil prices are expected to come down 
from recent peaks in the next few years. As a 
result, CPI inflation is expected to return to its 
2 percent target midpoint and employment 
towards its maximum sustainable level 
towards the end of the projection horizon.


Chapter 5 Economic projection
40
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
Table 5.1
Key projection assumptions
Key factors
House prices
•	 Higher interest rates are expected to constrain house price growth and new home building over 
the projection horizon. Rising costs for building materials and labour also curb home building 
although these pressures are assumed to ease gradually over the projection. 
•	 House prices (REINZ) have fallen by 5.0 percent since their peak in November 2021. House 
prices are projected to decline throughout 2022, consistent with fewer sales and higher listings 
volumes in recent months. From their peak in November 2021, house prices are forecast to fall  
by around 14 percent by early 2024 on a month-on-month basis.  
•	 Recent house price falls are expected to also slow household spending growth over the 
projection.
Global factors
•	 The global economic environment is highly inflationary, driven by recovering demand and 
prolonged supply-chain disruptions in the wake of COVID-19. Higher prices and a limited ability 
to increase production are now expected to persist for longer and peak higher than previously 
assumed due to the war in Ukraine and ongoing COVID-19 lockdowns in China. 
•	 The New Zealand dollar trade-weighted index (TWI) has fallen since the April Monetary Policy 
Review, pushing up import prices. The TWI is assumed to remain near its current level over the 
entire projection horizon.
•	 Oil prices are expected to remain relatively high, even as global demand softens. Prices have 
dipped slightly from recent peaks because of increased production and the recent release 
of global oil reserves. Dubai oil prices are expected to gradually return from about USD 105 
towards USD 80 per barrel, in line with risk-adjusted futures market pricing. Margins for refined 
oil products have risen significantly and are expected to keep fuel price inflation higher in the 
near term.
COVID-19 
and health 
restrictions
•	 We assume that the restrictions and self-isolation requirements associated with the COVID-19 
traffic light framework continue to weigh on both domestic demand and supply capacity. Illness, 
self-isolation and time out of work caring for those unwell have all weighed on labour supply, 
and contributed to shortages of materials and limited the amount businesses can produce. 
The Omicron outbreak has contributed to a drop in consumer confidence and spending, and 
weighed on economic growth in the first half of 2022.
•	 We expect the impacts of COVID-19 restrictions on activity to ease over the projection horizon as 
Omicron case numbers fall, allowing some supply capacity to recover.
•	 	New Zealand’s border restrictions will ease over 2022, as announced by the Government recently.


Chapter 5 Economic projection
41
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
Economic growth
Production
•	 The economic recovery from last year’s lockdowns was stronger than expected in the February 
Statement. Elevated export prices, household savings built up during lockdowns, and high 
government spending are contributing to economic growth in the near term.
•	 However, these factors are expected to fade over the forecast horizon. Higher interest rates, 
lower consumer confidence and recent falls in house prices will contribute to weaker growth 
over the second half of this year. Annual average GDP growth is then forecast to peak at 3.3 
percent in 2023.
•	 The spread of Omicron in the community and the associated restrictions on activity are 
estimated to have cut potential output by around 2 percent over the first half of 2022. A 
shortage of workers is expected to continue for the rest of the year.
•	 The output gap is estimated to be around 2.5 percent of potential GDP at the end of 2021.  
This reflects both a tighter labour market and elevated capacity pressure in the goods market.
•	 We expect the output gap to start closing after peaking in the first half of 2022, in part due to 
the relaxation of COVID-19 restrictions and fewer Omicron cases, which will allow businesses to 
increase production. 
•	 Over the medium term, higher interest rates, lower house prices and moderating real 
government spending (as outlined in the 2022 Budget) are expected to temper demand.  
We assume supply-chain bottlenecks continue to ease, and labour supply is bolstered by the 
resumption of migration.
Consumption
•	 Consumption has been volatile since the outset of the COVID-19 pandemic. However, underlying 
consumption growth was robust in the second half of 2021. We assume that consumption 
continues to be supported in the near term by robust household incomes and extra savings built 
up during the pandemic. Household incomes have also been buoyed by high export prices and 
government support for households and businesses. 
•	 High interest rates, lower house prices and falling real incomes (after adjusting for inflation) are 
expected to slow consumption growth from the second half of 2022. Consumption is expected 
to fall slightly on a per-capita basis over 2023.
Investment
•	 We assume that the outlook for business investment remains weak, relative to its trend. Factors 
supportive of business investment in recent quarters, including low interest rates, high export 
prices, fiscal support and capacity pressures, are expected to wane over the projection horizon. 
•	 We have lowered our outlook for new home construction relative to the February Statement, as 
the effects of capacity pressures, and higher interest rates on house prices, have become more 
evident. Despite the softening housing market, building consent issuance has so far remained 
elevated. We assume this is a lagged effect of housing market strength during the second half 
of 2021. Due to the capacity and cost pressures facing the construction sector, we expect some 
consented projects to be postponed or cancelled.
Exports and 
imports
•	 We assume that export prices remain high over 2022, reflecting the ongoing impacts of the war in 
Ukraine on global food, fertiliser and feed prices. 
•	 However, we assume that global food supply adjusts over the medium term, and that the demand 
for New Zealand’s exports softens in line with declining global growth expectations. Import 
prices are expected to remain higher for longer than previously expected. The Ukraine war and 
renewed lockdowns in China have added to existing supply constraints, pushing up prices. As 
a result, we expect export prices to fall further than import prices over the projection horizon, 
resulting in a fall in the terms of trade from high levels.
•	 Exports of tourism services are expected to recover gradually as New Zealand’s borders 
open. The ongoing impacts of the pandemic, higher trading partner inflation and lower trading 
partner growth are expected to limit tourist arrivals, particularly out of China. We assume exports 
of services will remain well below pre-COVID-19 levels throughout the projection. However, 
New Zealanders are assumed to be more likely to travel overseas in the coming months due 
to pent-up demand and the fact that New Zealanders typically travel overseas more in winter. 
Imports of services are therefore expected to recover more quickly than exports of services, 
which will weigh on domestic demand.


Chapter 5 Economic projection
42
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
Labour market
Employment 
and wages
•	 The New Zealand labour market is robust. The unemployment rate remained at 3.2 percent in 
the March 2022 quarter, matching its lowest level since the start of the Household Labour Force 
Survey in 1986. Our suite of labour market indicators continue to suggest that the economy is 
well above maximum sustainable employment. The unemployment rate is assumed to decline 
marginally further in the June quarter, reflecting tight capacity pressures. 
•	 Labour market pressures are projected to gradually ease in line with a closing output gap. 
Employment gradually returns towards its maximum sustainable level over the medium term 
as demand growth for workers softens and net immigration recovers. This is in line with the 
unemployment rate increasing from a low of 3.1 percent in the June 2022 quarter to 4.8 percent 
by the end of the forecast horizon. The gradual increase in the unemployment rate reflects 
higher interest rates, which slow growth and lead to an extended period of below-trend job 
growth. We also expect a gradual pick-up in net working-age immigration in the second half of 
the projection. 
•	 Annual Labour Cost Index (LCI) private sector wage inflation is expected to continue to increase, 
peaking at 4.6 percent in 2023. This is due to ongoing labour shortages, the increasing minimum 
wage and rising living costs. 
Inflation
Tradables
•	 Annual tradables inflation is expected to peak at 9.1 percent in the June 2022 quarter, and then 
fall to 7.1 percent by the end of 2022. This reflects easing, but still strong, inflationary pressures 
from ongoing global supply-chain disruptions. 
•	 Supply-chain disruptions are expected to persist for longer than previously assumed, with both 
oil and ex-oil import prices only gradually returning to their longer-run levels in the latter half of 
the projection horizon.
Non-tradables
•	 Annual non-tradables inflation remains high but declines over the projection period, from 6.0 
percent in the March 2022 quarter to 3.1 percent by the end of the forecast horizon.
•	 Materials and labour shortages in the construction industry continue to underpin housing-related 
cost increases. However, capacity pressures are assumed to ease as monetary policy tightens. 
Slower domestic activity growth and falling house prices over 2022 are expected to reduce non-
tradables inflation.
Headline
•	 Annual CPI inflation is expected to remain near its current peak of around 7.0 percent in the June 
2022 quarter, and decline steadily to 4.4 percent in the March 2023 quarter.
•	 Headline inflation is expected to continue trending lower in the latter half of the projection horizon, 
reaching the 2 percent midpoint of the target band at the end of the projection in early 2025. 


Chapter 5 Economic projection
43
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
Figure 5.3 
Unemployment rate 
(share of labour force, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Charts
Figure 5.1
Inflation breakdown
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Dotted lines show the projection from the February Statement.
Figure 5.2 
Private sector LCI wage inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 5.4 
Annual house price growth
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: CoreLogic, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 5.5
Quarterly production GDP
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 5.6
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 6 The MPC’s risk appetite statement
44
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
CHAPTER 
06
Appendices


Chapter 6 Appendices
45
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
CHAPTER 6
Appendices
Appendix 1:  
Statistical tables
Table 6.1
Key forecast variables
GDP growth 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Annual
TWI
OCR
2020
Mar
-1.5
0.8
2.5
70.9
0.9
 
Jun
-10.3
-0.5
1.5
69.7
0.3
 
Sep
13.9
0.7
1.4
72.0
0.3
 
Dec
-0.3
0.5
1.4
72.9
0.3
2021
Mar
1.3
0.8
1.5
74.9
0.3
 
Jun
2.5
1.3
3.3
74.7
0.3
 
Sep
-3.6
2.2
4.9
74.4
0.3
 
Dec
3.0
1.4
5.9
74.3
0.6
2022
Mar
0.7
1.8
6.9
72.6
0.9
 
Jun
1.3
1.4
7.0
71.8
1.6
 
Sep
0.6
1.5
6.2
71.8
2.7
 
Dec
0.5
0.8
5.5
71.8
3.4
2023
Mar
0.4
0.7
4.4
71.8
3.7
Jun
0.2
0.6
3.5
71.8
3.9
Sep
0.2
0.9
3.0
71.8
3.9
Dec
0.3
0.4
2.6
71.8
3.9
2024
Mar
0.4
0.6
2.5
71.8
3.9
Jun
0.3
0.4
2.3
71.8
3.9
Sep
0.2
0.8
2.2
71.8
3.8
Dec
0.3
0.2
2.1
71.8
3.7
2025
Mar
0.2
0.5
2.0
71.8
3.6
Jun
0.4
0.3
1.9
71.8
3.5


Chapter 6 Appendices
46
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
Table 6.2
Measures of inflation, inflation expectations, and asset prices
2020
2021
2022
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Inflation (annual rates)
CPI
1.4
1.4
1.5
3.3
4.9
5.9
6.9
CPI non-tradables
2.6
2.8
2.1
3.3
4.5
5.3
6.0
CPI tradables
-0.1
-0.3
0.5
3.4
5.7
6.9
8.5
Sectoral factor model 
estimate of core inflation
2.0
2.2
2.5
3.0
3.5
3.8
4.2
CPI trimmed mean 
(30 percent measure)
1.7
2.2
1.7
3.0
4.0
4.3
5.2
CPI weighted median
2.2
2.7
2.3
3.0
3.3
3.8
3.9
GDP deflator (expenditure)
1.8
0.7
0.4
2.3
3.7
4.9
Inflation expectations
ANZ Business Outlook – inflation one 
year ahead (quarterly average to date)
1.4
1.5
1.9
2.2
2.9
4.0
5.4
5.9
RBNZ Survey of Expectations – 
inflation 2 years ahead
1.4
1.6
1.9
2.0
2.3
3.0
3.3
3.3
RBNZ Survey of Expectations – 
inflation 5 years ahead
1.9
1.9
2.0
2.1
2.0
2.2
2.3
2.4
RBNZ Survey of Expectations – 
inflation 10 years ahead
2.0
2.1
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.1
2.1
Long-run inflation expectations*
2.0
2.0
2.1
2.1
2.1
2.1
2.2
2.2
Asset prices (annual percent 
changes)
Quarterly house price index 
(CoreLogic NZ)
10.8
16.9
24.1
29.7
30.6
REINZ Farm Price Index (quarterly 
average)
-3.7
-0.5
6.9
6.3
15.1
20.5
25.6
30.1
NZX 50 (quarterly average)
8.6
13.2
14.4
17.1
10.3
3.0
-3.9
-6.8
Source: ANZ, Consensus Economics, RBNZ estimates.
*Long-run expectations are extracted from a range of surveys using a Nelson-Siegel model.


Chapter 6 Appendices
47
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
Table 6.3
Measures of labour market conditions	
(seasonally adjusted, changes expressed in annual percent terms, unless specified otherwise)	
2020
2021
2022
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Household Labour Force Survey
Unemployment rate
5.3
4.9
4.6
4.0
3.3
3.2
3.2
Underutilisation rate
13.2
11.9
12.1
10.5
9.2
9.2
9.3
Labour force participation rate
70.1
70.2
70.4
70.5
71.2
71.1
70.9
Employment rate (percentage of 
working-age population)
66.5
66.8
67.2
67.7
68.8
68.8
68.6
Employment growth
0.4
0.6
0.1
1.5
4.1
3.5
2.8
Average weekly hours worked
33.7
34.9
33.9
34.0
31.2
33.5
33.4
Number unemployed 
(thousand people)
151
141
133
114
98
93
94
Number employed (million people)
2.71
2.73
2.75
2.77
2.82
2.82
2.83
Labour force (million people)
2.87
2.87
2.88
2.89
2.92
2.92
2.92
Extended labour force 
(million people)
2.97
2.97
2.99
2.98
3.01
3.00
3.01
Working-age population 
(million people)
4.08
4.09
4.09
4.10
4.10
4.11
4.12
Quarterly Employment Survey – 
QES
Filled jobs growth
-0.6
0.2
0.5
2.5
4.0
4.1
4.2
Average hourly earnings growth 
(private sector, ordinary time)
3.7
4.6
4.1
4.5
3.6
4.1
5.3
Other data sources
Labour cost index growth, 
private sector
1.6
1.5
1.6
2.2
2.5
2.8
3.1
Labour cost index growth, 
private sector, unadjusted
2.6
2.4
2.8
3.7
4.1
4.5
5.0
Estimated net migration 
(published, thousands, quarterly)
0.4
-2.5
-3.4
-3.4
Change in All Vacancies Index
-21.1
-1.9
21.0
156.5
58.0
35.1
25.5
Note: The All Vacancies Index is produced by MBIE as part of the monthly Jobs Online report, which shows changes in job 
vacancies advertised by businesses on internet job boards. It is converted to quarterly and seasonally adjusted by the Reserve 
Bank. The unadjusted LCI is an analytical index that reflects quality change in addition to price change (whereas the official LCI 
measures price changes only). For definitions of underutilisation, the extended labour force, and related concepts, see Statistics 
New Zealand (2016), Introducing underutilisation in the labour market. Estimated net migration (published) is the Stats NZ 
outcomes-based measure.


Chapter 6 Appendices
48
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
Table 6.4
Composition of real GDP growth
(annual average percent change, seasonally adjusted, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Final consumption expenditure
Private
3.3
4.2
6.5
4.8
4.5
2.5
0.6
4.5
1.7
0.7
1.9
Public authority
2.9
2.2
1.9
3.7
3.4
5.8
7.5
11.9
5.5
-4.7
-2.6
Total
3.2
3.7
5.4
4.5
4.3
3.2
2.2
6.3
2.6
-0.8
0.8
Gross fixed capital formation
Residential
8.3
7.1
8.8
-1.8
-0.1
2.8
1.8
7.2
4.4
2.9
2.5
Other
8.0
2.5
-0.1
10.3
7.0
2.4
-6.8
11.0
6.6
2.3
-0.8
Total
8.1
3.6
2.2
7.0
5.2
2.5
-4.7
10.0
6.1
2.5
0.0
Final domestic 
expenditure
4.3
3.7
4.6
5.1
4.5
3.1
0.6
7.1
3.4
0.0
0.6
Stockbuilding*
0.5
-0.3
0.1
0.2
-0.2
-0.2
-0.2
0.5
-0.3
0.0
0.0
Gross national 
expenditure
4.6
3.2
4.8
5.6
4.3
2.8
-0.5
8.3
3.3
0.1
0.6
Exports of goods and 
services
4.7
6.8
2.1
3.8
3.4
0.3
-17.7
4.2
6.7
8.9
4.3
Imports of goods and 
services
7.7
2.6
5.6
7.8
4.3
1.0
-15.9
19.2
7.5
2.9
1.7
Expenditure on GDP
3.6
4.4
3.7
4.3
4.0
2.7
-0.2
4.2
2.7
1.3
1.2
GDP (production)
3.8
3.8
3.8
3.6
3.4
2.2
-1.4
5.4
3.2
1.3
1.2
GDP (production, 
March qtr to March qtr)
3.8
4.1
3.3
3.6
3.2
0.4
3.2
2.5
2.9
1.1
1.1
*Percentage point contribution to the growth rate of GDP.


Chapter 6 Appendices
49
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
Table 6.5
Summary of economic projection
(annual percent change, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Price measures
CPI 
0.3
0.4
2.2
1.1
1.5
2.5
1.5
6.9
4.4
2.5
2.0
Labour costs
1.8
1.8
1.5
1.9
2.0
2.4
1.6
3.1
4.4
4.1
3.3
Export prices 
(in New Zealand dollars) 
-8.0
0.7
4.1
3.3
1.1
6.9
-6.4
23.1
0.0
-3.4
-0.1
Import prices 
(in New Zealand dollars) 
-3.4
1.2
0.6
1.8
4.3
2.5
-2.7
15.7
2.1
-1.9
-0.5
Monetary conditions
OCR (year average)
3.4
2.9
2.0
1.8
1.8
1.2
0.3
0.5
2.9
3.9
3.8
TWI (year average)
79.3
72.6
76.5
75.6
73.4
71.7
72.4
74.0
71.8
71.8
71.8
Output
GDP (production, annual 
average % change)
3.8
3.8
3.8
3.6
3.4
2.2
-1.4
5.4
3.2
1.3
1.2
Potential output (annual 
average % change)
3.0
3.2
3.3
3.2
3.2
2.8
-1.0
3.2
3.2
2.8
2.2
Output gap (% of potential 
GDP, year average)
-0.7
-0.1
0.4
0.7
0.9
0.3
-0.2
2.1
2.1
0.6
-0.4
Labour market
Total employment 
(seasonally adjusted)
3.6
2.2
5.9
3.0
1.5
2.6
0.1
2.8
0.4
0.5
0.9
Unemployment rate 
(March qtr, seasonally 
adjusted)
5.5
5.3
4.9
4.4
4.2
4.2
4.6
3.2
3.8
4.4
4.7
Trend labour productivity 
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.5
0.6
0.8
1.0
1.0
0.9
0.8
0.7
Key balances
Government operating 
balance (% of GDP,  
year to June)
0.2
0.7
1.5
1.9
2.4
-7.2
-1.4
-4.8
-2.4
-1.6
-0.5
Current account balance 
(% of GDP)
-3.5
-2.4
-2.6
-3.0
-3.7
-2.3
-2.4
-6.2
-7.1
-6.9
-6.5
Terms of trade 
(SNA measure, annual 
average % change)
0.1
-3.1
2.5
4.5
-2.5
1.9
-1.0
1.4
0.9
-1.8
0.2
Household saving rate  
(% of disposable income)
-0.8
-0.5
0.0
-0.2
0.7
2.9
5.8
3.5
3.0
2.3
1.6
World economy
Trading-partner GDP 
(annual average % change)
3.7
3.4
3.5
3.9
3.5
1.7
-0.8
5.7
3.6
3.4
3.2
Trading-partner CPI  
(TWI weighted)
1.0
1.2
1.9
1.8
1.4
2.4
0.8
4.0
3.4
2.1
2.2


Chapter 6 Appendices
50
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
Appendix 2: Chart pack
Figure 6.1
Composition of CPI inflation
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 6.2
Output gap and output gap indicators
(share of potential)
Source: NZIER, MBIE, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The output gap indicators based on information about the labour market 
are shown separately from the other indicators. For each group of indicators, the 
shaded area shows the range of values and the line shows the mean value.
Figure 6.3
Unemployment and underutilisation rates
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 6.4
OCR and neutral OCR indicator suite
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area indicates the range between the maximum and minimum 
values from a suite of neutral OCR indicators.
Figure 6.5
GDP and potential GDP
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.6
Measures of core inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Core inflation measures exclude the GST increase in 2010.


Chapter 6 Appendices
51
Monetary Policy Statement May 2022
Figure 6.7
Inflation expectations
(annual) 
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: Inflation expectations are estimates from the RBNZ inflation expectations 
curve, based on surveys of businesses and professional forecasters.
Figure 6.9
House price inflation
(annual) 
Source: REINZ.
Source: Stats NZ, Global Dairy Trade, Reuters, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.12
Terms of trade, dairy and oil price indices
Figure 6.10
Mortgage rates
Source: interest.co.nz, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The rates shown for the fixed terms are the average of the advertised 
rates from ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac, shown as weekly data. The floating 
rate represents the monthly yield on floating housing debt from the RBNZ 
Income Statement survey.
Figure 6.8
Private sector wage growth
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Private sector wage growth is measured by the labour cost index, all 
salary and wage rates, private sector. Real labour cost index is deflated with 
headline CPI inflation.
Figure 6.11
New Zealand dollar exchange rates
(quarterly average) 
Source: Reuters, RBNZ.
