BANK: RBNZ
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
DATE: 22/02/2022
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/monetary-policy-statements/2022/mpsfeb22.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

02/2022
Monetary Policy
STATEMENT


ii
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
STATEMENT
of the MPC’s monetary policy strategy
The Monetary Policy Committee’s (MPC) monetary policy strategy is its 
overarching plan for how it will formulate monetary policy under different 
circumstances to achieve its objectives.1 It outlines a consistent approach 
to how the MPC intends to achieve its objectives across time, accounting 
for trade-offs and uncertainty. Agreeing on and publishing a strategy 
promotes transparency, public understanding, and accountability.
1	
For a more in-depth discussion of monetary policy strategy in New Zealand, see J. Ratcliffe and R. Kendall (2019), ‘Monetary policy strategy in New Zealand’, 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Bulletin, Vol. 82, No. 3, April.
2	
These economic objectives contribute to the overall purpose of the Act, which is to promote the prosperity and well-being of New Zealanders, and contribute to 
a sustainable and productive economy. See monetary policy framework for more information on New Zealand’s monetary policy framework, including the full 
text of the Remit.
Monetary policy 
framework and objectives
Under the Reserve Bank of 
New Zealand Act 1989 (the 
Act), the MPC is responsible for 
formulating monetary policy to 
maintain a stable general level of 
prices over the medium term and 
to support maximum sustainable 
employment.2 Operational 
objectives for monetary policy are 
set out in the Remit. The current 
Remit sets out a flexible inflation 
targeting regime, under which the 
MPC must set policy to: 
•	 keep future annual inflation 
between 1 and 3 percent over 
the medium term, with a focus 
on keeping future inflation 
near the 2 percent mid-point; 
and
•	 support maximum sustainable 
employment, considering 
a broad range of labour 
market indicators and taking 
into account that maximum 
sustainable employment is 
largely determined by non-
monetary factors.
In pursuing these objectives, 
the Remit requires the MPC to 
have regard to the efficiency 
and soundness of the 
financial system, seek to avoid 
unnecessary instability in the 
economy and financial markets, 
and discount events that have 
only transitory effects on inflation. 
The MPC must also assess the 
effect of its monetary policy 
decisions on the Government’s 
policy to support more 
sustainable house prices.
The Reserve Bank’s flexible 
inflation targeting framework 
and the MPC’s monetary policy 
strategy reflect the fact that: 
•	 low and stable inflation is 
monetary policy’s best long-
run contribution to the well-
being of New Zealanders;
•	 in the short to medium term, 
monetary policy can influence 
real variables such as 
employment, and hence policy 
trade-offs can arise; and
•	 monetary policy is more 
effective if the Bank’s policy 
targets are credible, so policy 
should be formulated in a 
way that ensures credibility is 
maintained.
Key aspects of monetary 
policy strategy
The MPC practises forecast 
targeting, which means that it 
sets monetary policy such that 
it expects to achieve its inflation 
and employment goals in the 
medium term. In most instances 
the MPC aims to return inflation 
to the target mid-point within a 
one to three year horizon. The 
appropriate horizon at each 
policy decision will vary based 
on how different policy paths 
will contribute to maximum 
sustainable employment, whether 
price-setters’ expectations are 
consistent with the inflation 
target, and other considerations 
such as the balance of risks to the 
MPC’s central economic outlook.


iii
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
The MPC does not attempt to 
return inflation and employment 
to target immediately, because 
monetary policy actions take time 
to transmit through the economy. 
Attempting to return inflation to 
target too quickly would result 
in unnecessary instability in the 
economy and financial markets. 
The 1 to 3 percent target range for 
inflation provides the MPC with 
flexibility to ensure that managing 
inflation variability does not come 
at the cost of excessive variability 
in the real economy. For similar 
reasons, the MPC does not 
attempt to offset events that are 
expected to have only transitory 
effects on inflation. 
The MPC takes into account both 
its inflation and employment 
objectives when setting policy. In 
the long run, no trade-off exists 
between the MPC’s objectives. 
In the short to medium term, 
there may be situations where 
monetary policy can move one 
objective closer to target only 
at the cost of the other, resulting 
in a trade-off. When a trade-off 
does arise, the MPC will consider 
outcomes for both objectives 
in setting policy. In general, if 
employment is projected to be 
below its long-run sustainable 
level, the MPC would let inflation 
overshoot the target mid-point 
for a time, and vice versa (while 
staying within the 1–3 percent 
target range). 
The MPC responds to both 
deviations above target and 
deviations below target. The 
MPC sets policy to stabilise 
employment near its maximum 
sustainable level, and to return 
inflation near to the target mid-
point, regardless of whether 
inflation is currently below or 
above 2 percent. This approach 
helps to anchor inflation 
expectations at the target mid-
point and promotes sustainable 
growth and employment by 
dampening fluctuations in the 
business cycle.
The MPC considers the balance 
of risks to its objectives that 
arise from uncertainty about 
the economic outlook and 
the transmission of its policy 
decisions. In general, the MPC 
will incorporate likely future 
developments into its central 
economic projections and set 
monetary policy in response. 
However, the MPC will also take 
into account risks to its central 
projections when setting policy. 
Under extreme uncertainty, the 
MPC may choose to publish 
scenarios instead of central 
projections to illustrate the 
range of possible situations and 
economic outcomes that could 
occur when circumstances are 
highly unpredictable.
The MPC has regard to the 
efficiency and soundness of 
the financial system, while 
recognising that in most 
instances prudential policy is 
better suited to leaning against 
risks to financial stability. The 
Reserve Bank takes prudential 
policy settings into account when 
setting monetary policy, and 
vice versa.
Implementation of strategy
The MPC applies the following 
process when formulating a 
policy decision:
1.	 Firstly, it assesses the outlook 
for the economy and the 
implications for its policy 
objectives. It then discusses 
risks to achieving its policy 
objectives.
2.	 Next, it considers which stance 
of monetary policy is most 
consistent with its monetary 
policy strategy given the 
current economic outlook, 
risks, and trade-offs.
3.	 Finally, the MPC decides how 
it will achieve the desired 
stance of monetary policy, 
including whether or not 
to adjust its policy settings 
at the current meeting and 
how it will communicate the 
policy outlook. The MPC has 
a suite of monetary tools to 
achieve its goals, and uses its 
Principles for Monetary Tools 
to make decisions on which 
tools to deploy.


REPORT AND SUPPORTING NOTES PUBLISHED AT:
www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/monetary-policy-statement
Subscribe online: www.rbnz.govt.nz/email-updates
Copyright © 2022 Reserve Bank of New Zealand
This report is published pursuant to section 
15C of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 1989. 
ISSN 1770-4829
rbnz.govt.nz
Cover image: Basin Reserve. Wellington, New Zealand.


The projection was finalised on 17 February 2022. The OCR projection 
incorporates an outlook for monetary policy that is consistent with the MPC’s 
monetary policy assessment, which was finalised on 23 February 2022. 
02/2022
Monetary Policy
STATEMENT
Contents
Statement of the MPC’s monetary policy strategy	
ii
1.	 Policy assessment	
3
	
Summary – Record of meeting 	
4
2.	 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook	
9
	
Box A – How broad-based is inflation?	
16
	
Box B – The Monetary Policy Committee’s framework 
	
for the Large Scale Asset Purchase programme	
20
3.	 Financial conditions	
22
4.	 Special topics	
28
	
4.1.	 International developments and risks	
29
	
4.2.	Inflation expectations	
34
5.	 Economic projection	
36
6.	 Appendices	
42
	
Appendix 1: Our recent research	
43
	
Appendix 2: Statistical tables	
46
	
Appendix 3: Chart pack	
51


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
2
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
CHAPTER 
01
Policy 
assessment


Chapter 1 Policy assessment
3
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
CHAPTER 1
Policy assessment
Tēnā koutou katoa, welcome all.
The Monetary Policy Committee today increased the 
Official Cash Rate (OCR) to 1 percent. The Committee 
also agreed to commence the gradual reduction of 
the Reserve Bank’s bond holdings under the Large 
Scale Asset Purchase (LSAP) programme – through 
both bond maturities and managed sales. 
The Committee agreed it remains appropriate 
to continue reducing monetary stimulus so as 
to maintain price stability and support maximum 
sustainable employment (MSE). 
The level of global economic activity is generating 
rising inflation pressures, exacerbated by ongoing 
supply disruptions. The pace of global economic 
growth has slowed however, due to the general 
elevated uncertainty created by the persistent 
impacts of COVID-19, and clear signals that monetary 
conditions will tighten over the course of 2022.
In New Zealand, underlying strength remains in 
the economy, supported by aggregate household 
and business balance sheet strength, fiscal policy 
support, and continued strong export returns. 
However, some short-term economic disruption
is expected given the current growing COVID-19 
health challenge. The high vaccination rates
across New Zealand will assist significantly to
reduce this disruption.   
Economic capacity pressures have continued to 
tighten. Employment is now above its maximum 
sustainable level, with a broad range of economic 
indicators highlighting that the New Zealand 
economy continues to perform above its
current potential. 
Headline CPI inflation is well above the
Reserve Bank’s target range, but will return
towards the 2 percent midpoint over coming years. 
The near-term rise in inflation is accentuated by 
higher oil prices, rising transport costs, and the 
impact of supply shortfalls. These immediate relative 
price movements risk generating more generalised 
price rises, especially given the current domestic 
capacity constraints. 
The Committee agreed that further removal of 
monetary policy stimulus is expected over time 
given the medium-term outlook for growth and 
employment, and the upside risks to inflation.
Meitaki, thanks.
Adrian Orr
Governor  


4
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
SUMMARY 
Record of meeting 
The Monetary Policy 
Committee discussed 
developments 
affecting the outlook 
for monetary policy. 
Global economic 
activity experienced 
a robust recovery in 
2021. The pace of 
growth is expected 
to slow, weighed 
down by resource and 
production constraints.
Global inflation is expected to 
peak during 2022 and then 
moderate, as supply disruptions 
are gradually resolved. However, 
global inflation is currently higher, 
and expected to ease more 
gradually than anticipated in the 
November Statement. 
The Committee noted that 
central banks are now looking to 
increase interest rates sooner and 
by more than anticipated in the 
November Statement. The rise in 
global interest rates has resulted 
in a fall in the New Zealand dollar, 
as interest rate differentials have 
narrowed. Bond and equity 
prices have been more volatile 
of late, in part due to the shift in 
monetary policy expectations and 
a rise in geopolitical tensions. 
The Committee noted that asset 
valuations had been boosted by 
very low interest rates, and that 
higher interest rates may dampen 
these valuations in future.    
The New Zealand economy 
has been resilient in the face 
of the COVID-19 pandemic 
to date. Export prices have 
remained high, supported by 
the solid international economic 
recovery. Domestic spending 
and investment have also been 
robust. However, conditions 
have been very difficult for some 
businesses, especially in service 
industries. 
The recent emergence and 
spread of the Omicron COVID-19 
variant is expected to further 
disrupt economic activity in the 
near term. People’s ability and 
willingness to work and spend will 
be strongly determined by near-
term health outcomes. 
The Committee reconfirmed that 
house prices in New Zealand are 
above their sustainable level, but 
are expected to ease over time. 
They noted that house prices 
had begun to ease, with monthly 
falls in December and January. 
Mortgage lending growth has also 
slowed. Government regulatory 
and tax policy changes, and 
high rates of residential building 
are expected to slow house 
prices. Higher mortgage interest 
rates will also play a role in the 
transition of house prices toward 
a more sustainable level over 
coming years.  
Resource constraints are 
evident in the economy, and 
will be exacerbated by further 
disruptions from the Omicron 
outbreak. Employment is above 
its maximum sustainable level. 
The Committee noted that there 
has been some upward pressure 
on nominal wages, as expected, 
consistent with the tight labour 
market. They also noted that 
wage growth continues to lag
CPI inflation.  
The Committee discussed the 
outlook for net migration to New 
Zealand with the international 
borders being reopened in 
stages over coming months. 
The impact on labour supply is 
uncertain in the near term, but a 
positive inflow is expected over 
time as border flows return to 
normal. The Committee noted 
that net migration is assumed 
to increase slowly, helping to 
gradually ease skill shortages.
Annual CPI inflation has increased 
largely as expected in the 
November Statement, reflecting 
domestic capacity constraints and 
higher prices for imported goods, 
in particular oil. The Committee 
noted that annual inflation is 
expected to peak in early 2022, 
and then ease over the course of 
the year, returning to within their 
target range in mid-2023. The 
Committee agreed that further 
removal of monetary stimulus is 
necessary to achieve their Remit. 


5
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
The OCR remains the 
Committee’s preferred tool for 
implementing monetary policy, 
and the impact of additional 
monetary policy tools is 
considered when determining the 
level of the OCR. With regards to 
the latter, members noted that the 
Funding for Lending Programme 
(FLP) window closes this year. 
They also noted that the cost 
of bank funding from the FLP is 
rising in line with the OCR. 
The Large Scale Asset 
Purchase (LSAP) programme 
was introduced in March 2020, 
providing significant stimulus and 
supporting the functioning of the 
bond market. Purchases under 
the programme were halted in 
July 2021. 
The Committee agreed that 
managing down the Bank’s 
holdings of these bonds was now 
consistent with their monetary 
policy objectives. Members also 
agreed that managed sales of 
bond holdings, in addition to 
not investing the proceeds of 
maturities, were most consistent 
with achieving their mandate over 
time (further details below). 
The Committee discussed the 
extent of monetary tightening 
required to meet their price 
stability and maximum sustainable 
employment mandate. In doing 
so, the Committee applied their 
least regrets framework, noting 
that the most significant risk to be 
avoided at present was longer-
term inflation expectations rising 
above the target and becoming 
embedded in future price setting. 
It was agreed that more monetary 
tightening was needed than 
signalled in the November 
Statement. The Committee 
confirmed that the outlook for 
a higher OCR at the end of 
the projection horizon was a 
balanced reflection of the likely 
path of interest rates.
The pace at which monetary 
stimulus should be reduced was 
discussed by the Committee. 
Members agreed there were 
many factors to assess, 
balancing the need to reduce 
monetary stimulus with many 
uncertainties. They considered 
the balance of risks and noted 
that the behavioural responses of 
household and businesses in the 
face of higher interest rates would 
be important for the appropriate 
pace of tightening. 
The Committee agreed that 
while higher interest rates are 
necessary, households and firms 
may have become more sensitive 
to interest rate changes as their 
debt levels have risen. Members 
also noted that a significant 
proportion of mortgages will be 
reset at higher interest rates over 
calendar 2022. 
The current Omicron outbreak 
will lead to economic disruption 
and may weigh on consumer and 
investor confidence in the near 
term. Health outcomes will be 
important, in particular how these 
impact the supply capacity of the 
economy and level of demand.  
While government spending
and investment remains strong, 
the impulse to growth from
fiscal support is now ebbing
and will wane.   
The recent signs of slowing 
in demand for housing was 
discussed by the Committee, 
which noted that house prices 
may fall further. The Committee 
agreed that higher interest 
rates were consistent with 
house prices becoming more 
sustainable. They also noted the 
Reserve Bank’s recent policy 
adjustments to support the 
stability of the financial system, 
including tightening of loan-to-
value ratio restrictions last year 
and ongoing changes to improve 
the capital adequacy of banks. 
The Committee acknowledged 
that some recent, more highly-
leveraged, borrowers may be 
financially stretched in a higher 
interest rate environment.  
When deciding whether to move 
the OCR up by 25 or 50 basis 
points, many members saw this as 
a finely balanced decision. 
When considering the case for 
a 50 basis point increase, the 
Committee noted the high starting 
point for inflation and the drift 
upwards in measures of inflation 
expectations. The Committee 
agreed that maintaining stable 
longer-term inflation expectations 
near the midpoint of their target 
would greatly assist their purpose.
When considering the case for a 
25 basis point increase, members 
noted that interest rates had 
already increased significantly 
late last year, and are expected 
to continue rising as the OCR is 
progressively increased. They 
also noted that conditional on 
the outlook, the OCR is expected 
to peak at a higher level than 
assumed at the November 
Statement. In addition, sales of 
the Reserve Bank’s LSAP bond 
holdings may put some upward 
pressure on longer-term interest 
rates. Members of the Committee 
were conscious of broader 
uncertainty in the midst of the 
current Omicron wave. 


6
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
Weighing the options, the 
Committee came to a consensus 
to increase the OCR by 25 
basis points. The Committee 
also affirmed that it was willing 
to move the OCR in larger 
increments if required over 
coming quarters. 
On Wednesday 23 February, 
the Committee reached a 
consensus to:
•	 Increase the OCR to 1 percent. 
•	 Not reinvest the proceeds 
of any upcoming LSAP bond 
maturities.
•	 In addition, direct the 
Reserve Bank to sell nominal 
New Zealand Government 
Bonds and Inflation-indexed 
New Zealand Government 
Bonds to New Zealand 
Debt Management at a 
rate of $5 billion per fiscal 
year, commencing in July 
2022, provided it remained 
consistent with the Bank’s 
monetary policy objectives, 
and subject to market 
conditions. 
•	 Hold the Local Government 
Funding Agency bonds until 
maturity.
Attendees:
Reserve Bank members 
of MPC: 
Adrian Orr, Christian Hawkesby, 
Yuong Ha
External MPC members: 
Bob Buckle, Peter Harris,
Caroline Saunders
Treasury Observer: 
Bryan Chapple
MPC Secretary: 
Elizabeth Kendall


7
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
The Monetary 
Policy Committee’s 
deliberations on the 
gradual reduction of 
the LSAP portfolio 
The Committee discussed options 
for gradually managing down the 
size of the LSAP portfolio, guided 
by its principles for monetary 
policy tools (see Chapter 2, Box 
B). The Committee agreed that 
gradual reduction in the LSAP 
portfolio should seek to achieve 
three objectives:
•	 Have minimal impact on 
monetary stimulus – the bond 
holdings will not be actively 
used to remove monetary 
stimulus;
•	 Avoid harming the efficient 
functioning of financial markets 
which is essential for the 
functioning of the economy 
and the transmission of 
monetary policy; and
•	 Ensure that the MPC have 
the capacity to use the LSAP 
tool effectively, if economic 
and financial conditions 
deteriorate.
Reducing bond holdings will 
provide the Committee more 
scope to use LSAPs in the future 
and will support the management 
of liquidity in the financial system. 
Some members noted that some 
longer-term interest rates may 
change as the market analyses 
the net effect on bond supply. 
However, bond holdings will be 
gradually reduced to minimise 
unnecessary volatility in interest 
rates, consistent with the 
Committee’s Remit. 
The Committee considered 
whether selling bonds back into 
the secondary market would 
be appropriate and noted that 
selling bonds to New Zealand 
Debt Management (NZDM) would 
be the most efficient approach, 
providing the market with clarity 
around net bond supply. 
The Committee agreed not to 
reinvest the proceeds of any 
upcoming bond maturities and 
directed the Reserve Bank to 
sell the nominal New Zealand 
Government Bonds and 
Inflation-indexed New Zealand 
Government Bonds to NZDM at 
a rate of $5 billion per fiscal year. 
The Committee agreed to hold 
the Local Government Funding 
Agency Bonds until maturity, as 
the holdings of these bonds are 
comparatively small. 
This pace of sales would continue 
provided it remained consistent 
with the Reserve Bank’s monetary 
policy objectives, and subject 
to market conditions. The 
Committee reserves the right to 
change the rate of sales or halt 
sales should conditions change, 
but do not foresee such changes 
to be common. The Reserve 
Bank intends to commence 
bonds sales in July following 
further consultation with the 
NZDM, and will issue a market 
announcement in coming months 
outlining operational details prior 
to commencement. 
In accordance with the LSAP 
indemnity, staff consulted the 
NZDM on a range of options 
for reducing the LSAP portfolio. 
The Committee’s decision to 
sell bonds back to the NZDM 
will have implications for the 
NZDM’s funding programme and 
the NZDM will provide updated 
issuance guidance at the Budget 
in May. 
Members noted that the bond 
holdings would continue to 
provide a small amount of 
ongoing marginal monetary 
stimulus, which would gradually 
reduce over time as bonds 
holdings are reduced. Members 
reiterated that the OCR remains 
the most effective and efficient 
way of adjusting monetary 
stimulus in either direction. 
Therefore, the stance of 
monetary policy will continue 
to be communicated primarily 
via changes to the OCR and 
conditional forward guidance 
through the published OCR track.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
8
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
Fiordland National Park, New Zealand.
CHAPTER 
02
Current
economic 
assessment
and monetary 
policy outlook


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
9
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
CHAPTER 2
Current economic assessment 
and monetary policy outlook
Summary
•	 The New Zealand economy has remained 
robust in the face of the COVID-19 
pandemic to date. The economy has been 
aided by high export prices, low interest 
rates and government support for workers 
and businesses.
•	 Economic activity will likely remain volatile 
in the near term. The spread of the 
Omicron variant is expected to weigh on 
household and business spending in the 
first half of this year. This reflects greater 
uncertainty, some hesitancy to go out and 
spend in places like restaurants and bars, 
and increased sick leave for workers. 
•	 Strong demand has put pressure on 
available resources. This has been 
worsened by supply-chain bottlenecks, 
and border restrictions causing fewer 
international workers to come to 
New Zealand. The labour market remains 
tight, with the unemployment rate at 
its lowest-ever recorded level and 
wage inflation picking up. Employment 
is currently assessed to be above its 
maximum sustainable level.
•	 Annual Consumer Price Index (CPI) 
inflation increased to 5.9 percent in the 
December 2021 quarter and measures 
of core inflation have also risen. High 
inflation has been due to international 
factors, such as an increase in oil prices 
and the prices of other goods we import, 
and strong domestic demand. These 
influences are expected to persist 
in coming months. In addition, the 
New Zealand dollar has recently fallen 
against a basket of key trading partner 
currencies, making imports
more expensive.
•	 Expectations for inflation one and two 
years ahead have increased significantly, 
consistent with recent high CPI inflation 
outturns. Looking five and ten years 
ahead, inflation expectations remain near 
the 2 percent midpoint of the target band. 
Elevated near-term inflation expectations 
are expected to contribute to higher 
inflationary pressures in the short term. 
•	 Interest rates faced by households 
and businesses have increased only 
slightly following a sharp rise before 
the November Statement. However, 
expectations for further increases in the 
Official Cash Rate (OCR) have risen. Our 
central projection assumes that higher 
interest rates will be required to dampen 
demand pressures and domestic inflation 
over the next few years. Tradables 
inflation is assumed to ease as global 
oil prices fall back and supply-chain 
bottlenecks are at least partially cleared. 
•	 Conditional on our current economic 
assessment and the balance of risks, the 
outlook for the OCR is higher than in the 
November Statement. This ensures the 
MPC meets its inflation and employment 
objectives. 


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
10
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
Current economic 
assessment
The New Zealand economy 
remains robust
The New Zealand economy has remained 
robust in the face of the COVID-19 pandemic 
to date. This strength has been supported by 
low interest rates and significant government 
support to help workers and businesses, as 
well as continued high demand and strong 
prices for our goods exports. Restrictions 
over the second half of 2021 to slow the 
spread of COVID-19 have created significant 
challenges for many businesses and 
individuals. However, the overall impact 
on economic activity appears smaller than 
anticipated as households and firms have 
likely adapted to the ongoing disruption 
(figure 2.1).
Economic activity has remained volatile due 
to the prolonged restrictions in parts of the 
North Island in late 2021 and the nationwide 
move to the red traffic light setting under 
the Government’s COVID-19 Protection 
Framework in January. High-frequency data 
suggest that the impact of the move to red 
has been fairly limited to date (figures 2.2 
and 2.3). However, conditions could change 
quickly as the Omicron variant becomes 
more widespread. A variety of factors have 
led to more subdued domestic tourism and 
travel this summer holiday period compared 
to a year ago (figure 2.4). These factors likely 
include uncertainty related to the spread of 
the virus, more opportunities for international 
travel later in the year, and less pent-up 
demand.
Figure 2.2
Household mobility
(change from baseline)
Source: Google.
Note: The data show individuals’ movements from their Google location history. The 
measure is the percentage change compared to the median value in the five-week period 
from 3 January to 6 February 2020.
Figure 2.3
Driving mobility
(7-day moving average) 
Source: Apple.
Note: The data show individuals’ movements from Apple Maps data. The measure is 
indexed to a baseline value taken on 13 January 2020.
Figure 2.1
Quarterly production GDP
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
11
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
Omicron spread to weigh on 
household and business spending 
in the near term
The accelerating spread of the Omicron 
variant is expected to weigh on household 
and business spending in the first half of this 
year. This reflects greater uncertainty, some 
hesitancy to go out and spend in places like 
restaurants and bars, and more workers off 
sick or needing to self-isolate and/or care for 
family. The economic impacts of COVID-19 
becoming widespread in the community 
depend on the frequency with which regions 
face tighter restrictions and how households 
and businesses respond to developments, 
as discussed in the November Statement.
Economic activity is expected to recover in 
the latter part of 2022, as New Zealanders 
adapt to widespread COVID-19 and border 
restrictions are gradually eased. Household 
consumption is assumed to be supported 
by high employment and people spending 
some of the money saved during lockdowns. 
Business investment is assumed to be 
supported by high prices for our key goods 
exports and ongoing capacity pressures. 
The recently announced timing of a gradual 
freeing up of the border is assumed to see a 
slow recovery in international visitors towards 
the end of 2022. However, the number of 
visitors is expected to remain below pre-
COVID-19 levels for several years.   
Financial conditions have tightened only 
slightly this year. This follows a tightening 
of conditions in the lead-up to the 
November Statement. Aside from the recent 
depreciation of the New Zealand dollar 
trade-weighted index (TWI), New Zealand’s 
financial conditions as experienced by most 
households and businesses have been 
relatively unaffected by the recent increase 
in volatility in global markets (see chapters 
3 and 4.1). Alongside elevated export 
prices, the lower New Zealand dollar will 
add further support to already-high export 
incomes. Overall, monetary conditions are 
still supporting the economy but financial 
conditions are expected to tighten as 
the OCR is increased, weighing on gross 
domestic product (GDP) growth.
Figure 2.4
Domestic travel by region
(December 2021 to January 2022, relative to the same period last year) 
Source: Tourism New Zealand, Data Ventures, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The data are based on anonymised location information of mobile phone devices. A 
device outside its home area is captured as domestic travel. The home area is based on 
the most common night-time location over the previous 14 days. Devices with international 
SIM cards are excluded from domestic travel.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
12
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
House price inflation shows early 
signs of easing, but residential 
construction is expected to remain 
strong
Strong house price inflation since 2020 has 
supported household spending, particularly 
on long-lasting goods. House prices have 
been expected to decline moderately 
towards more sustainable levels since 
the August 2021 Statement. However, the 
magnitude and timing of house price falls 
have always been uncertain. Nationwide 
house prices fell in December and January. 
Higher mortgage interest rates, policy 
changes related to investors and tighter 
credit lending standards are some of the key 
factors weighing on housing demand. 
Our central forecast is for annual house price 
inflation to slow over the coming year, before 
declining moderately (figure 2.5). This results 
in the level of house prices declining about 
9 percent from the end of 2021 to mid-2024 
(figure 2.6). The assumed slowdown in prices 
also reflects a significant increase in supply 
of new homes at a time when there is near-
zero net migration. Nationwide residential 
building consents are at record high levels, 
and residential construction is assumed to 
remain high for at least the next few years. 
Labour market tightness 
continues, despite COVID-19-
related disruption
Pressure on available labour and capital 
resources remains tight. Strong demand for 
labour has been partially unmet because 
of already low unemployment within 
New Zealand and ongoing international 
border restrictions, limiting the arrival of 
migrant workers. More firms are reporting 
labour as the factor most limiting production 
(figure 2.7), and the reported difficulty in 
finding both skilled and unskilled labour 
remains near record highs.
Despite recent volatility in economic activity 
due to COVID-19-related restrictions, the 
unemployment rate declined to 3.2 percent 
– its lowest-ever recorded level – in the 
December 2021 quarter (figure 2.8). Strong 
demand for labour has encouraged high 
levels of participation in the workforce. 
Labour shortages and fiscal support 
measures have seen businesses retain 
workers even through periods of lower than 
normal activity. The unemployment rate has 
fallen across most age and ethnic groups, 
including those most sensitive to economic 
changes. This points to the broad-based 
nature of labour demand. 
Figure 2.5
House price inflation
(annual)
Source: CoreLogic, RBNZ estimates. 
Figure 2.6
House prices
(nominal) 
Source: CoreLogic, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
13
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
Figure 2.7
QSBO factor most limiting production
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: NZIER, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.9
Distribution of annual wage increases
(labour cost index, all sectors combined, salary 
and ordinary time wage rates)
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 2.8
Unemployment rate
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Significant near-term disruption to the 
labour market is expected to result from 
COVID-19 becoming more widespread in 
the community. Absenteeism is expected to 
increase sharply due to illness, the need to 
self-isolate or the need to look after unwell 
family members. This will weigh on economic 
output. International experience indicates 
that this increase in absenteeism will be 
sharp but relatively short-lived. Given recent 
difficulties in finding labour, businesses are 
expected to smooth through any near-term 
weakness in demand by cutting hours rather 
than employment. However, there are risks to 
both sides of this assumption. 
Wage growth increasing, but 
lagging inflation
Consistent with the tightness in the labour 
market, wage growth has been rising 
steadily. Increases in wage growth have 
been relatively broad-based across the 
economy. However, agriculture and goods-
producing industries that are more heavily 
reliant on international labour or have the 
strongest ongoing demand are experiencing 
more sustained wage growth. Measures that 
intend to capture same-job wage growth 
are more muted than broader measures that 
also capture movement between jobs and 
changes in productivity. Tight labour market 
conditions have encouraged movements 
between jobs and promotions with the same 
employer in order to secure higher pay. While 
nominal wage growth has been increasing, it 
has been outstripped by higher CPI inflation 
to date. The share of workers receiving wage 
increases greater than five percent has been 
increasing in recent quarters, but the share 
of wages increasing between three and five 
percent remains relatively low (figure 2.9). 


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
14
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
Employment is above its
maximum sustainable level
Employment is currently assumed to be 
above its maximum sustainable level, as 
reflected in a wide range of indicators 
(figure 2.10). However, labour market 
tightness is assumed to peak in the first half 
of 2022. High frequency jobs data suggest 
that employment growth is starting to slow 
and higher interest rates are expected to 
reduce demand over the medium term. 
More international workers are expected 
to arrive during 2022 as border restrictions 
are gradually eased. Net inward migration 
is expected to increase gradually towards 
its 20-year average over coming years, 
depending on decisions related to any 
changes to immigration policy currently 
being reviewed. 
Inflation has increased further, 
reflecting global and domestic 
factors
Higher wage growth, pressure on available 
domestic resources, disruptions to global 
supply chains and increases in global prices 
for our imports have all contributed to annual 
consumer price inflation increasing to 5.9 
percent in the December 2021 quarter 
(figure 2.11). This was slightly more than the 
5.7 percent expected in the November 
Statement. 
Annual inflation for goods and services 
exposed to international competition – also 
known as tradables inflation – increased to 
6.9 percent in the December 2021 quarter. 
While shortages of imported consumer goods 
and shipping costs are pushing prices higher, 
petrol prices have been the largest contributor 
to tradables inflation. Prices for crude oil have 
increased at their fastest pace since the early 
2000s as the restart in global demand met 
constrained supply, especially from OPEC 
countries. Fuel prices accounted for almost 
45 percent of annual tradables inflation 
during 2021 (figure A1, Box A) and are likely to 
increase further in the short term (figure 2.12).
Figure 2.10
MSE indicator suite
Source: NZIER, Stats NZ, MBIE, ANZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The Reserve Bank uses a range of indicators when assessing MSE and regards 
the December 2019 quarter as a period when this selection of indicators pointed to 
employment being at MSE. However, current outturns should not be directly compared to 
2019Q4 as the level of MSE is likely lower (discussed further in the August 2021 Statement). 
The vertical lines on the left-hand and right-hand sides represent the lowest and highest 
data outcomes since 2000, respectively. For example, an orange dot to the right of a black 
dot means that the latest data outcome was stronger than in the December 2019 quarter.
Figure 2.12
Petrol and Dubai oil prices
Source: Datamine – Gaspy data, Stats NZ, Reuters, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Gaspy fuel prices are indexed to the petrol CPI level in the December 2019 quarter. 
Figure 2.11
Contributions to annual CPI inflation
Source: Stats NZ.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
15
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
Annual domestic or non-tradables inflation 
– which captures goods and services not 
exposed to international competition – has 
also been strong, increasing 5.3 percent 
in the December 2021 quarter. Continued 
acceleration in the prices of goods related to 
the housing sector has accounted for much 
of the recent increase (figure A2, Box A). 
Housing construction costs have increased 
at their fastest pace since the late 1980s, 
reflecting strong demand and labour and 
materials shortages. However, measures of 
core inflation have increased and inflationary 
pressures appear to be becoming more 
broad-based (discussed further in Box A).
The recent increase in consumer price 
inflation has also led to increases in inflation 
expectations, particularly at shorter-term 
horizons. Elevated near-term inflation 
expectations are expected to contribute to 
higher inflationary pressures in the short 
term. Expectations at longer horizons have 
remained anchored near the 2 percent 
midpoint of the target range. 
CPI inflation is assumed to stay elevated, 
peaking in annual terms in the March 2022 
quarter, due to ongoing capacity pressures 
and high global prices for our imports. The 
outlook for tighter monetary policy in some of 
our key trading partners is placing downward 
pressure on the New Zealand dollar exchange 
rate (see chapters 3 and 4.1). This will also 
place upward pressure on imported inflation. 
Annual CPI inflation is assumed to ease 
gradually towards the 2 percent target
midpoint over the medium term. This reflects 
tightening monetary policy reducing demand 
and leading to less pressure on available 
resources, recent spikes in petrol prices 
falling out of the annual calculation, and 
supply-chain pressures at least partially 
unwinding.
Figure 2.13
CPI inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 


16
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
Box A
How broad-
based is 
inflation?
Annual CPI inflation hit a three-
decade high at 5.9 percent in the 
December 2021 quarter, bringing 
it well above the MPC’s Remit 
target band of 1 to 3 percent. 
To some extent, the recent 
increase in inflation has been 
driven by global developments 
that have caused sharp price 
increases for some commodities 
and imported goods. In 
particular, fast-rising oil prices 
have caused petrol prices to 
increase significantly, pushing 
annual tradables inflation to a 
multi-decade high of 6.9 percent 
in the December 2021 quarter 
(figure A1). Annual petrol price 
inflation reached 30.5 percent 
in the last quarter. While strong 
price movements up and down in 
petrol prices are not unusual, this 
degree of inflation was last seen 
in 2008.
Tradables inflation has also 
become more broad-based, 
with prices for tradable food 
and other tradable components 
having steadily increased in the 
past year. Significant government 
and monetary support globally 
has helped to avoid prolonged 
negative impacts on demand 
from the COVID-19 pandemic. 
However, this robust demand 
has not been met with sufficient 
global supply due to continued 
COVID-19 outbreaks, related 
restrictions and shipping 
disruptions. These factors 
have created an inflationary 
environment globally (see 
chapter 4.1). As New Zealand 
is a small open economy, we 
are directly impacted by these 
developments.
While global factors account for 
much of the recent high inflation, 
domestic factors are also playing 
a large role. Economic activity 
in New Zealand has remained 
relatively robust since the outset 
of the COVID-19 pandemic, due 
to fiscal policy and monetary 
policy support, household 
and business adaptability, and 
prolonged periods of relatively 
low restrictions by global 
standards.
Demand for housing has been 
particularly robust, as seen in 
record high consent numbers. 
Strong housing demand has 
contributed to significantly higher 
inflation of construction prices 
and prices of other housing-
related components, contributing 
to an acceleration of annual non-
tradables inflation to 5.3 percent 
in the December 2021 quarter 
(figure A2).
Figure A1
Contribution to tradables inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


17
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
Annual inflation for the 
construction of new houses 
has increased to 15.7 percent. 
This increase reflects both 
strong housing demand and 
the higher costs of imported 
building materials. While smaller 
in contribution to non-tradables 
inflation, annual inflation for the 
price of renting a residential 
property has also increased 
materially, to 3.8 percent. 
Housing-related components 
make up almost 50 percent of 
non-tradables inflation. Higher 
inflation in these components 
in addition to stronger price 
increases for non-tradable food 
in recent quarters suggests that 
non-tradables inflation is also 
becoming more broad-based. 
More widespread inflation is 
also reflected in core inflation 
measures. Core inflation 
measures aim to capture 
underlying, more long-term 
inflationary pressures by 
removing price movements that 
fluctuate materially in the short 
term. All of the main core inflation 
measures that the Reserve Bank 
considers are now above the 
target band (figure A3).
Figure A3
Core inflation measures
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ.
Figure A2
Contribution to non-tradables inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


18
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
Another way of examining 
the extent to which inflation 
is becoming increasingly 
widespread is to look at how 
many of the different CPI classes 
have seen higher or lower annual 
changes than usual. There are 
more than 100 CPI classes, each 
capturing prices for a defined 
range of goods and services. 
The stronger inflation data in 
the December 2021 quarter has 
been accounted for by more CPI 
classes with positive and larger 
annual changes compared to 
pre-COVID-19 times (figure A4). 
This means that inflation has not 
just been driven by some one-off 
price increases for a few goods 
and services, but that inflation 
has become more broad-based. 
The distribution of the CPI classes 
is currently very similar to the 
average distribution in 2008, just 
prior to the Global Financial Crisis.
1	
The adjusted labour cost index (LCI) for the private sector (all salary and wage rates) is used as the main indicator for wage inflation. The adjusted LCI measures 
wage inflation for the same job and quantity of work.
While not directly captured in 
the CPI, annual wage inflation 
has also increased significantly 
to 2.8 percent in the December 
2021 quarter.1 Although this 
is below current CPI inflation, 
the increase is still reflective of 
high capacity pressures in the 
economy. Labour is scarce, so 
businesses have to offer higher 
wages to attract and retain staff. 
At the same time, employees may 
ask for higher wage increases 
to cover increased living costs. 
Consequently, businesses face 
higher labour costs and try to 
pass these on to consumers by 
increasing their selling prices. 
This process is a sign of CPI 
inflation becoming more
broad-based.
Overall, a mixture of strong 
domestic demand, scarce labour 
and high commodity and import 
prices has resulted in a more 
inflationary environment in 2021. 
Although some factors driving the 
current spike in inflation are likely 
to settle in the coming year (see 
chapter 5), the central projection 
still implies that the OCR will need 
to increase further to reduce 
inflationary pressures and return 
inflation to the 2 percent midpoint 
of the target band.
Figure A4
Distribution of annual inflation rate by class
Source: Stats NZ.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
19
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
Monetary policy outlook
While the OCR has been increased in recent 
quarters, it remains below the Reserve Bank’s 
estimate of a nominal neutral interest rate 
of about 2 percent. Given the current and 
expected strength in the labour market, and 
heightened inflationary pressure from global 
and domestic sources, our central projection 
implies that the OCR should be increased 
in order for the MPC to meet its economic 
objectives (figure 2.14). 
The peak of the OCR over the projection 
horizon is higher than assumed in the 
November Statement due to more persistent 
inflationary pressures, as seen in measures 
of core inflation and higher inflation 
expectations. These additional pressures are 
assumed to more than offset the risk posed 
by the spread of the Omicron variant, in part 
because the effects of COVID-19 becoming 
widespread – albeit not Omicron specifically 
– were already captured in the November 
Statement. This projection for the OCR is 
conditional on the economy evolving in line 
with the assumptions outlined in this chapter 
and chapter 5.
In November 2021, the MPC communicated 
that it intended to gradually manage down 
bond holdings from the Large Scale Asset 
Purchase (LSAP) programme introduced in 
2020. Box B presents an overview of the 
principles that will be used by the MPC when 
deciding how to reduce bond holdings. As 
the holdings are assessed as providing only 
a small amount of ongoing stimulus, their 
reduction is not assumed to have a material 
impact on the outlook for the OCR.  
Figure 2.14
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


20
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
Box B
The Monetary 
Policy 
Committee’s 
framework for 
the Large Scale 
Asset Purchase 
programme
The MPC sets monetary policy in 
pursuit of its economic objectives: 
to achieve and maintain stability 
in the general level of prices 
over the medium term; and to 
support maximum sustainable 
employment. Guided by its 
Risk Appetite Statement and 
Principles governing monetary 
policy tools, the MPC chooses 
the combination and settings of 
monetary policy tools necessary 
to achieve the amount of 
monetary stimulus required to 
achieve its objectives. 
In March 2020, the MPC launched 
a Large Scale Asset Purchase 
(LSAP) programme as part of its 
broad monetary policy response 
to the COVID-19 pandemic. The 
MPC stopped these purchases
in July 2021.
The MPC’s assessment of the 
LSAP tool against its principles is 
noted in table 2.1. When the MPC 
launched the LSAP programme, 
its principles led to the adoption 
of a front-loaded and dynamic 
approach to asset purchases. 
This approach helped deliver 
stimulus effectively and efficiently 
when needed, and stabilised 
important financial market 
channels of monetary policy by 
providing the financial system 
with additional liquidity.
When applying its principles in 
the current environment, the MPC 
has decided to adjust monetary 
stimulus primarily using the OCR. 
LSAP bond holdings will not 
be dynamically used to adjust 
monetary stimulus. Sales of bonds 
in addition to maturities will be 
done gradually and predictably 
to maintain market functioning 
and avoid unnecessary volatility 
in interest rates. The MPC 
acknowledges that bond yields 
may adjust as the bond holdings 
are reduced, and is comfortable 
that any changes will be orderly 
and not undermine the desired 
stance of monetary policy. A 
gradual and predictable reduction 
in bond holdings is also consistent 
with how other central banks 
intend to reduce their asset 
holdings. The expected path 
of the two LSAP portfolios are 
presented in figures B1 and B2.
Figure B1
Expected LSAP portfolio of New Zealand 
government bonds
(holdings as at calendar year end)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: Includes nominal and inflation-indexed New Zealand government bonds. Sales are in 
addition to bond maturities and are expected to begin in mid-2022.


21
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
Table 2.1
The MPC’s approach to LSAP against its principles for monetary policy tools 
Adding stimulus (buying bonds)
Removing stimulus (bonds 
maturing and selling bonds)
Effectiveness
Objective of purchases is to lower and flatten 
the yield curve; purchases front-loaded and 
adjusted dynamically
Objectives of maturities and sales are 
to have minimal impact on monetary 
stimulus; undertaken gradually and 
predictably
Efficiency
Purchases and sales to be undertaken while minimising unnecessary volatility and 
distortions in financial markets
Bonds purchased in the secondary market
Bonds sold to New Zealand Debt 
Management (NZDM) or allowed to 
mature with no reinvestments
Financial stability
Purchases help to restore market functioning 
and provide liquidity
Maturities and sales undertaken 
gradually and predictably to maintain 
market functioning
Public balance sheet risk
The MPC is guided by the Reserve Bank’s internal financial risk appetite, institutional 
arrangements and indemnities from the Crown. As required under the indemnity, 
throughout the programme the Reserve Bank has coordinated with NZDM to ensure 
that the objectives of both the MPC and NZDM can be achieved.
Operational readiness
The Reserve Bank is operationally ready to undertake both bond purchases and sales 
on behalf of the MPC, and undertake necessary market operations to manage liquidity 
in the financial system.
Figure B2
Expected LSAP portfolio of New Zealand 
Local Government Funding Agency bonds
(holdings as at calendar year end)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 3 Financial conditions
22
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
CHAPTER 
03
Financial
conditions
Dart River. Glenorchy, New Zealand


Chapter 3 Financial conditions
23
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
CHAPTER 3
Financial conditions
The Reserve Bank’s monetary policy tools affect economic 
activity by influencing conditions in financial markets, including 
the interest rates at which households and businesses save and 
borrow, plus the exchange rate. After providing strong monetary 
support as the pandemic broke out, financial conditions 
gradually tightened during the latter half of 2021. However, 
financial conditions are still relatively accommodative. 
Changes in financial conditions have been mixed 
since the November Statement
Financial conditions tightened materially in 
the lead-up to the November Statement. 
This was in response to improving economic 
data and a repricing of inflation risks, both 
in New Zealand and globally. Since then, 
movements in domestic financial conditions 
have been mixed, but conditions have 
remained broadly unchanged overall. 
Wholesale interest rates, term deposit rates 
and mortgage rates have increased slightly, 
but the New Zealand dollar has fallen against 
other currencies. 
New Zealand interest rate swap rates have 
risen slightly since the November Statement 
(figure 3.1). Domestic wholesale interest rates 
at terms most relevant to businesses and 
mortgage borrowers (2 to 10 years) increased 
substantially over the course of 2021, and are 
currently near five-year highs. 
Figure 3.1
Interest rate swap rates
Source: Bloomberg.


Chapter 3 Financial conditions
24
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
Financial market expectations for the OCR, as 
measured by overnight indexed swap (OIS) 
pricing, show a 25-basis-point increase in 
the OCR at each scheduled meeting in 2022 
(figure 3.2). These expectations are currently 
similar to what they were at the end of last 
year. However, the market now expects 
additional OCR increases to be necessary in 
2023 and beyond.
The New Zealand government bond (NZGB) 
market is functioning normally. The market 
has responded in an orderly way to the halt 
of the LSAP programme in July 2021 and 
the reduction in forecast bond issuance that 
NZDM announced in the Half-Year Economic 
and Fiscal Update 2021. Since November 
2021, usage of the Reserve Bank’s Bond 
Lending Facility (BLF), which provides market 
participants with access to NZGBs as a 
lender of last resort, has declined. Declining 
BLF usage implies NZGB supply is sufficient 
in the secondary market.
The New Zealand dollar has fallen 
as overseas central bank policy 
rate paths increase
Expectations for policy interest rates are 
increasing for New Zealand’s trading 
partners (figure 3.3). Interest rate differentials 
between New Zealand and the US have 
fallen for terms greater than one year, due 
to growing expectations that the US Federal 
Reserve will tighten monetary policy faster 
than was expected in November. 
Figure 3.2
Market expectations for the OCR
Source: Bloomberg.
Note: Each line represents the expectations of the level of the OCR at a given point in time 
in the future, as measured by overnight indexed swap pricing. For example, the Feb 2022 
line shows expectations over time for what the OCR decision would be at the February 
2022 Statement.
Figure 3.3
Market expectations for average 
central bank policy rates
Source: Bloomberg.
Note: Solid lines are the overnight indexed swap rate pricing at 17 February 2022, 
representing the average expected future policy rates across time for each country.  
For example, the rate at the end of 2023 represents the expectation of the average policy 
rate between 17 February 2022 and the end of 2023. Dotted lines represent the same 
expectations from the date of the November Statement.


Chapter 3 Financial conditions
25
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
The New Zealand dollar measured against 
a basket of trading partner currencies, the 
TWI, has depreciated around 4 percent 
since the November Statement (figure 3.4). 
Expectations of relatively higher interest 
rates abroad, alongside greater investor 
concern about risk, have seen the TWI fall 
in the past three months, outweighing the 
positive influence of rising commodity prices 
on the New Zealand dollar.
Uncertainty about when and how fast 
central banks will raise interest rates has 
contributed to increased volatility in global 
financial markets recently (see chapter 
4.1). New Zealand financial conditions as 
experienced by most households and 
businesses have been broadly unaffected by 
this volatility to date. However, the volatility 
is likely to have placed additional downward 
pressure on the New Zealand dollar TWI and 
New Zealand equity market prices.
Bank funding conditions are still 
accommodative
Measures of wholesale bank funding 
costs have increased since the November 
Statement, but remain accommodative from 
a historical perspective. Short-term bank 
funding remains very cheap, as evidenced 
by the three-month BKBM-OIS spread (which 
captures the difference between the Bank 
Bill Benchmark rate and the OIS rate) 
(figure 3.5). Longer-term bank funding costs 
have increased slightly but remain close to, 
or below, their 2019 levels. This implies that 
wholesale funding is still relatively cheap 
for banks. Recent volatility in overseas 
markets has not yet had a material impact 
on New Zealand banks’ ability to source 
wholesale funding. 
Figure 3.5
Bank funding costs
Source: Bloomberg, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Credit spreads are the differences between secondary market bond yields and the 
interest rate swap curve. The bond yields used for the five-year measure are the averages 
of bonds with a remaining maturity of five years issued in New Zealand dollars from ANZ, 
ASB, BNZ and Westpac. A lower spread represents a lower implied borrowing cost.
Figure 3.4
New Zealand dollar exchange rates
(3 January 2020 = 100)
Source: Reuters, RBNZ.


Chapter 3 Financial conditions
26
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
Mortgage rate increases
continue to be passed through
to consumers
Relatively small upward movements in 
mortgage rates since November 2021 
suggest most of the pass-through of higher 
wholesale rates happened before the 
November Statement. The two-year interest 
rate swap rate increased nearly 100 basis 
points between the October Review and 
the November Statement, and this move 
was reflected in mortgage rates before the 
November announcement.
Increases in the OCR will be passed through 
to the economy further as more fixed-term 
mortgages come due to reprice, and will 
do so at higher rates (figure 3.6). Over half 
of total mortgage debt is due for repricing 
during 2022. Additionally, in the past few 
months more borrowers have been fixing at 
terms longer than one year. This means they 
will face even higher interest rates than if 
they re-fixed at the same term, as the two-
year and three-year rates have increased 
by around 20-30 basis points more than 
other shorter-term rates since October 2021. 
Although mortgage rates are rising, they are 
still low relative to their longer-term history.
Mortgage credit growth remains high, 
but slowed slightly at the end of 2021
(figure 3.7). This slowing was due to rising 
mortgage rates, tighter loan-to-value 
ratio (LVR) requirements, and changes in 
responsible lending practices under the 
Credit Contracts and Consumer Finance 
Act 2003 (CCCFA).2 It is unclear at this 
stage whether the CCCFA changes will 
have persistent and widespread impacts 
on mortgage lending in light of other 
policies and factors (such as higher interest 
rates). Annual business lending growth has 
increased to around pre-pandemic levels 
(figure 3.8). The average interest rate on 
existing business lending is still low relative 
to before the pandemic, but is increasing 
as the recent monetary policy tightening 
passes through.
2	
Changes to the CCCFA came into force in December 2021 and require lenders to perform more extensive checks of borrowers’ incomes 
and expenses when assessing the ability of borrowers to service the loan.
Figure 3.8
Business lending growth
(annual)
Source: RBNZ.
Figure 3.7
Residential mortgage lending
(registered banks)
Source: RBNZ.
Figure 3.6
Mortgage rates and average interest 
rate on outstanding mortgages
Source: interest.co.nz, RBNZ.
Note: The rate shown for each term is the average of the latest ‘special’ fixed-term rates on 
offer from ANZ, ASB, BNZ and Westpac.


Chapter 3 Financial conditions
27
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
Term deposit volumes and rates 
are increasing 
Deposit growth remained strong in the 
last quarter of 2021. There had been more 
movements of deposits into term accounts 
after term deposit balances decreased 
over 2020, and were relatively flat through 
2021. Term deposit interest rates fell to 
historical lows in 2020 (figure 3.9), in part 
due to monetary policy actions including 
the Funding for Lending Programme. Term 
deposit rates have increased in the past 
few months as the MPC has tightened 
monetary policy.
Figure 3.9
Term deposit rates
Source: interest.co.nz.
Note: The rate shown for each term is the average of the latest term deposit rates on offer 
from ANZ, ASB, BNZ and Westpac.


Chapter 4 Special topics
28
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
CHAPTER 
04
Special topics
Coromandel Peninsula, New Zealand.


Chapter 4 Special topics
29
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
CHAPTER 4 
Special topics 
Before each Statement, the MPC is provided with analysis 
of some topical issues.
Topics for the February Statement included:
1.	 International developments and risks.
2.	 Inflation expectations.
International developments and risks
As New Zealand is a small open economy, 
global economic and financial market 
conditions can have a significant influence 
on domestic activity and inflation. Global 
inflationary pressures have increased since 
the November Statement. There is a risk 
that New Zealand will see stronger imported 
inflation if these pressures persist for longer 
than currently assumed. 
The global recovery continues, but 
the pace of growth is expected to 
moderate
The global recovery in 2021 was robust, 
with all New Zealand’s major trading 
partners now at or above pre-pandemic 
levels of GDP. However, the pace of trading 
partner growth is expected to moderate 
this year. This moderation reflects the 
spread of the Omicron variant and growth 
returning to a more sustainable pace after 
recovering sharply from the COVID-19-
related restrictions. It also reflects downward 
revisions for growth in the US and China for 
idiosyncratic reasons. 
In the US, the weaker growth outlook is 
being driven by expectations of tighter 
fiscal and monetary policies than previously 
anticipated, and ongoing supply shortages. 
In China, the continuation of strict COVID-
19-related policy, financial stress in the 
real estate sector, increasing regulation 
and slowing consumer demand are all 
contributing to a weaker outlook.
Since the November Statement, the 
emergence and spread of the highly 
transmissible Omicron variant has increased 
uncertainty around the global economic 
outlook. While Omicron appears to be 
more transmissible than previous variants, 
evidence suggests that the risk of severe 
disease is lower, limiting the impacts on 
health and the need for mobility restrictions. 
This suggests that the disruptive impacts on 
global economic activity may be relatively 
short-lived. However, the significant increase 
in case numbers will impact labour supply 
in the near term as people become unable 
to work due to illness or self-isolation. The 
spread of the Omicron variant will likely add 
further disruption to global supply chains. 
Both of these factors will add to near-term 
inflationary pressures. 
1


Chapter 4 Special topics
30
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
Inflationary pressures are 
broadening and labour markets 
continue to tighten
Global inflation continues to increase 
(figure 4.1). This reflects both increases in 
energy prices and the impacts of disruptions 
in global supply chains in light of strong 
goods demand. However, inflationary 
pressures vary between countries. Higher 
inflation in the US has reflected strong, 
broad-based demand. In the euro area, 
price pressures are showing less evidence 
of broadening and have been largely driven 
by higher energy prices. In Australia and 
China, consumer demand pressures have 
been weaker, which has translated into lower 
inflationary pressure than elsewhere. 
Global inflationary pressures are expected 
to ease over 2022. Fiscal and monetary 
policies, which have supported a recovery 
in demand since the beginning of the 
pandemic, are expected to be unwound this 
year. Fewer COVID-19-related restrictions 
means that consumer spending is expected 
to rebalance from goods to services, easing 
pressure on the goods market. Outlooks for 
supply-side disruptions being resolved range 
from a few months to several years. 
Labour markets continue to tighten globally 
and wage inflation is increasing in some 
countries. In the US, key labour market 
indicators suggest that conditions are now 
tighter than prior to the pandemic. This is 
feeding through to higher wage inflation. 
In both the euro area and Australia, labour 
market indicators are now broadly in line with 
pre-pandemic levels. However, this is not yet 
resulting in significantly higher wage inflation. 
Monetary policy has responded to 
global inflationary pressures
There have been varied policy responses 
from central banks to rising global inflationary 
pressures. This reflects differences in 
economic starting points and central banks’ 
inflation targets and policy strategies (table 4.1).
Figure 4.1
Headline CPI inflation
(annual)
Source: Haver Analytics.


Chapter 4 Special topics
31
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
Figure 4.2
One-year forward one-month 
overnight-indexed swap rates
Source: Bloomberg. 
Note: These rates represent where market participants expect central bank policy rates to 
be in one year.
Table 4.1
International snapshot
Central bank
Central bank 
inflation target
Unemployment 
rate (%)
2022 output gap 
as % of potential 
GDP
Targeted 
inflation 
measure
(% YoY)
US Federal Reserve
Inflation averages 
2% over time; 
employment 
objective
4.0
3.3
4.9
Bank of England
2% inflation target
4.1
-0.4
5.5
Reserve Bank of Australia
2–3% inflation 
target; 
employment 
objective
4.2
0.0
3.5
European Central Bank
Symmetric 2% 
inflation target
7.0
-0.6
5.1
Reserve Bank of New Zealand
1–3% inflation 
target; 
employment 
objective
3.2
1.3
5.9
Source: Respective central banks and official statistical agencies, International Monetary Fund (IMF), Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Output gap projections are based on IMF estimates, except for New Zealand’s, which is based on our current projection. All other data 
reflect the respective latest outturns.  
Central banks such as the Norges Bank 
and the Bank of Korea began the process 
of removing monetary stimulus early, citing 
strong economic recoveries and progress 
toward their mandates. In response to 
tightening labour markets and broadening 
global inflationary pressures over recent 
months, this type of policy response has 
become more internationally widespread. 
Most major central banks are now priced 
to increase their policy rates earlier, and 
by more than expected at the time of the 
November Statement (figure 4.2). In addition, 
a number of central banks have recently 
ceased their asset purchase programmes, 
with some contemplating balance sheet 
reductions.


Chapter 4 Special topics
32
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
While inflation has recently increased in 
many countries, price pressures are more 
muted in some of New Zealand’s key trading 
partners. For example, measures of headline 
and core CPI inflation in China remain low, 
and economic momentum has recently 
moderated. In response, the People’s Bank 
of China has mildly loosened monetary policy 
over the past few months. Likewise, although 
inflation has increased in Australia and the 
Reserve Bank of Australia has halted bond 
purchases, it has assessed that it is too early 
to conclude that inflation is sustainably in its 
target range.
However, expectations of earlier monetary 
policy tightening by many central banks, 
particularly the US Federal Reserve, 
have resulted in higher interest rates and 
increased volatility in global financial markets. 
The move higher in longer-term government 
bond yields has been driven by rising 
real long-term interest rates, with financial 
market measures of long-term inflation 
expectations broadly unchanged since the 
November Statement (figure 4.3). Relatively 
unchanged inflation expectations at very 
long horizons may reflect the expectations of 
higher interest rates to address inflationary 
pressures.
Figure 4.3
US 10-year sovereign yield decomposition
Source: Bloomberg.


Chapter 4 Special topics
33
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
Risks to the global 
outlook and implications 
for New Zealand 
Recently, New Zealand has benefited from 
a strong global recovery, elevated export 
commodity prices and accommodative global 
financial conditions. But economic, financial 
and geopolitical risks all have the potential to 
change the outlook. 
There are risks in either direction as the 
global monetary tightening cycle resumes. 
Tightening in monetary policy is expected 
to dampen risky asset prices and demand 
in the global economy. If this happens too 
quickly it could lead to a significant slowdown 
in economic activity or a large decline in the 
value of risky assets. Rising global interest 
rates also pose a risk for emerging market 
economies that have significantly increased 
public debt in recent years. On the other 
hand, tightening monetary policy too slowly 
would increase the risk that higher inflation 
will raise inflation expectations, which would 
place upward pressure on both prices and 
wages, internationally. 
Geopolitical tensions in Europe pose 
downside risks to global growth and upside 
risks to global inflation. An escalation of 
geopolitical tensions would likely lead to 
higher commodity prices, particularly for oil. 
Associated economic sanctions would likely 
dampen global economic activity and may 
lead to further disruptions to supply chains. 
This could further weigh on risk assets and 
tighten global financial conditions. 
New Zealand does not have significant direct 
trade or financial links with Russia or Ukraine. 
However, in the near term, an escalation in 
tensions would impact New Zealand primarily 
through increased risk aversion in financial 
markets and higher international commodity 
prices, boosting inflation for our imported 
goods. If tensions were resolved more 
quickly than currently expected, this would 
pose a downside risk to global inflation
given the recent moves in international 
energy prices.  
A continuation of supply-chain disruptions 
would pose upside risks to global inflation 
this year. These could persist for longer if the 
impacts of the Omicron variant were larger 
or more persistent than currently expected. 
This could also delay the anticipated shift in 
spending from goods to services, making 
supply-chain disruptions worse. Importantly, 
a widespread Omicron outbreak in China, 
where COVID-19 cases have remained low 
for some time, would have a significant 
impact on the demand for New Zealand’s 
goods exports, and on the global outlook 
more generally. 
Higher-than-expected global inflation, due 
to a strong recovery in global demand and 
supply-chain disruptions, has put upward 
pressure on global prices for New Zealand’s 
imports. As a result, tradables inflation 
has increased more than expected over 
recent quarters and is assumed to remain 
elevated before moderating as supply 
constraints ease. The recent depreciation 
of the TWI is assumed to contribute to the 
stronger outlook for tradables inflation, while 
also supporting export incomes. These 
assumptions have been incorporated into the 
central projection (see chapter 5). While there 
are risks in either direction, on balance there 
is currently a greater risk that higher global 
inflation will persist for longer. This increases 
the risk that high inflation will become 
embedded in New Zealand. 
 


Chapter 4 Special topics
34
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
Inflation expectations
3	
The Reserve Bank does not currently tend to place much weight on market-based measures of inflation expectations. This is because they 
are influenced by other factors, such as changes in appetite for liquidity and insurance against the risk of lower or higher inflation in the 
future, and therefore do not provide a pure read of market participants’ expectations. This is particularly the case in New Zealand, where the 
small size and depth of the inflation-indexed bond market has typically led to a higher liquidity premium than in other developed countries. 
That said, while the level of inflation implied by these measures may be difficult to interpret, changes in these measures can be informative.
Inflation expectations refer to what 
businesses, financial market participants 
and households expect inflation to be in the 
future. Inflation expectations are important for 
monetary policy as they impact household 
and firm behaviour, indicate the credibility 
of the MPC’s ability to meet its inflation 
objective, and influence the effective stance 
of monetary policy. 
Expectations of future inflation can have 
a significant influence on current inflation. 
If businesses expect their input costs to 
increase in the future, they often choose 
to increase the prices of their goods and 
services now. This results in higher costs 
to consumers, who may require wage 
increases to offset the increased cost of 
living. In turn, this further increases input 
costs for businesses, putting more pressure 
on general price levels today. This process 
can create an ongoing price-wage feedback 
loop. Therefore expectations must be 
carefully monitored by the Reserve Bank 
when assessing inflationary pressure.
Inflation expectations are an indicator of 
the credibility of the MPC’s policy strategy. If 
inflation expectations remain ‘anchored’ near 
the target midpoint of 2 percent, it indicates 
there is confidence that the communicated 
outlook for monetary policy will return inflation 
towards the target in the medium term. 
When expectations are anchored, it means 
that smaller changes in monetary policy are 
required to return inflation towards the target in 
the face of economic disruptions. This results 
in better economic outcomes through time. 
In addition, inflation expectations influence 
the stance of monetary policy; that is, the 
extent that interest rates are acting to boost 
or dampen economic activity. Increases 
in expected inflation can put downward 
pressure on the real interest rates that 
households, businesses and investors 
perceive they face, once they adjust for their 
own expectations for inflation. Lower real 
rates boost economic activity. For instance, 
if households expect real returns on their 
savings to be lower, they may be willing to 
spend more today rather than save. This 
means that, at the same level of interest 
rates, there is more monetary stimulus in the 
economy if expectations of inflation rise. The 
opposite is also true. Therefore, monetary 
policy must take inflation expectations into 
account when setting nominal interest rates 
so that the policy has the desired effect on 
the economy. 
To monitor inflation expectations the Reserve 
Bank undertakes a survey of expectations 
each quarter, in the week following each CPI 
inflation data release. The survey is aimed 
at large businesses from different industries 
and financial institutions. Respondents are 
asked to record their expectations for CPI 
inflation in one, two, five and 10 years’ time 
(figure 4.4). Additional sources, such as the 
ANZ Business Outlook survey and outlooks 
from Consensus Economics surveys of 
international economic forecasts, are used to 
provide insights on expectations of inflation.3
2


Chapter 4 Special topics
35
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
4	
A Nelson-Siegel model is used to fit a curve through the surveyed inflation expectations data at different horizons, an approach common in 
the yield curve modelling literature. Lewis, McDermott and Richardson (2016), ‘Inflation expectations and the conduct of monetary policy 
in New Zealand’, Reserve Bank Bulletin, Reserve Bank of New Zealand.
To understand and interpret inflation 
expectations at each time horizon, the 
Reserve Bank uses available data to form an 
inflation expectations curve (figure 4.5). The 
Reserve Bank uses a common method from 
financial market analysis to fit this curve to 
surveyed inflation expectations.4 This curve 
gives the structure of inflation expectations at 
various time horizons. 
Short-term inflation expectations – those 
at one- and two-year horizons – tend to 
move similarly to CPI inflation data outturns. 
Near-term expectations also have a greater 
impact on current wage- and price-setting 
behaviour. Longer-term expectations tend 
to move less and are reflective of whether 
respondents believe that the MPC will act 
against inflationary pressure. Therefore, it is 
these longer-term expectations that better 
indicate the credibility of the monetary policy 
strategy and outlook. 
In recent quarters the inflation expectations 
curve has risen, particularly at near-term 
horizons. To date, the movements in near-
term expectations have evolved as would be 
expected given the recent increases in actual 
CPI inflation. The much smaller movement in 
longer-term expectations is consistent with 
inflation expectations remaining anchored 
at the MPC’s target. That is, the perception 
that the Reserve Bank’s outlook for higher 
interest rates will see capacity pressures 
ease and inflation decline in the medium 
term. These movements in domestic inflation 
expectations are similar to those seen 
internationally.  
The increases in longer-term expectations in 
New Zealand since the November Statement 
remain within the range of changes in 
recent decades. However, there is a risk that 
persistently high inflation will lead to a change 
in wage- and price-setting behaviour and 
influence how prices are set. More persistent 
inflationary pressures would, all else equal, 
require tighter monetary policy to ensure the 
MPC meets its economic objectives. 
Source: ANZ, RBNZ, Consensus Economics, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: The November Statement curve has been revised due to the removal of one data 
source from the calculation. This data was not always available with sufficient timeliness, 
and the change will improve the responsiveness of the curve to changes in inflation 
expectations over time.
Figure 4.5
Inflation expectations curve 
(annual)
Figure 4.4
Reserve Bank survey of expectations, 
inflation expectations 
(annual)
Source: RBNZ.


Chapter 5 Economic projection
36
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
CHAPTER 
05
Economic 
projection
Musick Point. Auckland, New Zealand.


Chapter 5 Economic projection
37
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
CHAPTER 5
Economic projection
This chapter summarises the baseline economic projection 
that the MPC members considered when making their policy 
assessment. The projection was finalised on 17 February 2022. 
This projection relies on a set of key 
assumptions about the domestic and 
global responses to the ongoing COVID-19 
pandemic. These relate to: 
•	 the economic impacts of, and recovery 
following, the recent Government 
restrictions on economic activity;
•	 how the New Zealand health system 
fares with widespread COVID-19 in the 
community, and whether higher levels of 
restrictions are required; 
•	 how businesses, households and workers 
change behaviour with COVID-19 in the 
community; 
•	 the duration and pricing impacts of 
supply-chain bottlenecks and the extent 
they are eased; and
•	 the pace of global monetary policy 
normalisation and investors’ risk appetites.
There is significant uncertainty about these 
assumptions, and outcomes could be 
substantially different if they do not hold. 
The projection takes into account recent 
data, which show resilient economic 
activity during the latest lockdown, further 
inflationary pressure and continued tightness 
in the labour market. These are somewhat 
offset by a weaker housing market and the 
move to heightened restrictions due to the 
Omicron outbreak. The factors underpinning 
this starting point are discussed in chapter 2. 
The projection also accounts for the assumed 
impacts of the announced COVID-19 
Protection Framework, the five-step border 
reopening schedule, the tightening of LVR 
restrictions, and the announced policy 
changes aimed at increasing housing supply 
through new housing intensification rules. 
The projection assumes that heightened 
restrictions within the COVID-19 Protection 
Framework and self-isolation requirements 
persist for some time, with these restrictions 
assumed to hamper both demand and 
supply. While we had assumed COVID-19 
would become widespread in the November 
Statement, the higher transmissibility of the 
Omicron variant means it weighs more on our 
near-term outlook.
Annual inflation will remain elevated in 
the near term due to heightened capacity 
pressures, ongoing supply-chain bottlenecks 
and high oil prices. Over the medium term, 
we assume that tighter monetary policy 
will help to ease demand, supply-chain 
bottlenecks will be at least partially eased 
and global oil prices will gradually decline. 
These factors contribute to annual CPI 
inflation returning to the 2 percent target 
midpoint towards the end of the projection. 
Employment is expected to remain above its 
maximum sustainable level over much of the 
projection horizon, but to return towards MSE 
as capacity pressures ease.


Chapter 5 Economic projection
38
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
Table 5.1
Key projection assumptions
Key factors
House prices
•	 Annual house price inflation is assumed to slow sooner than expected, declining from 27.4 
percent in the December 2021 quarter to -5.1 percent in the December 2022 quarter. 
•	 A variety of factors, including higher interest rates, increased home building, low net migration, 
announced changes to tax policy and tightened lending standards, are expected to constrain 
house price growth over the projection horizon. House prices are assumed to decline by about 
9 percent from the end of 2021 to mid-2024, towards more sustainable levels. 
•	 Falling house prices reduce household wealth relative to the November Statement, and are 
expected to weigh on consumption over the projection. 
COVID-19 
and health 
restrictions
•	 We assume that COVID-19 becomes widespread in New Zealand, with heightened restrictions 
under the COVID-19 Protection Framework maintained during the early part of the projection. 
These restrictions are anticipated to further hamper demand, particularly as people self-isolate, 
beyond what we had included in our November Statement outlook. However, the reduction in 
demand is partially offset by a reduction in the supply of labour, as more workers fall ill or are 
required to isolate. 
•	 COVID-19 restrictions are expected to become less stringent over the projection horizon. 
•	 New Zealand’s border restrictions are expected to be lifted incrementally over the course of 
2022, in line with the recent Government announcement on reopening New Zealand. 
Global factors
•	 Annual average trading-partner GDP growth is expected to have recovered to 5.8 percent in 
2021 and then return to its long-term average growth rate from there. While the global recovery 
has been impeded recently by the Omicron outbreak, the ongoing COVID-19 vaccine rollout and 
further booster doses are assumed to help ease disruptions. 
•	 Recovering global demand and supply-chain impacts are supporting expectations of continued 
higher global inflation. Tighter monetary policy in some of our key trading partners is assumed to 
place continued downward pressure on the TWI, increasing domestic inflationary pressures. The 
New Zealand dollar is assumed to remain at its current level over the entire projection horizon.
•	 The Dubai oil price is assumed to ease gradually towards 80 USD per barrel in the medium term, 
in line with futures market pricing.


Chapter 5 Economic projection
39
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
Economic growth
Production
•	 Economic activity was less negatively impacted by the August 2021 lockdown than we 
expected in the November Statement. However, activity over the 2021/22 summer has still been 
constrained by periods of higher Government restrictions. Activity is expected to recover, with 
annual average GDP growth peaking at 3.0 percent in 2022. 
•	 New Zealand’s productive capacity (potential output) continues to be constrained by the 
domestic and international measures put in place to contain COVID-19. Mismatches in labour 
demand and supply have resulted in higher structural unemployment than prior to the pandemic, 
while supply-chain disruptions are reducing the availability of materials. These temporary 
disruptions are expected to dissipate as domestic border restrictions and bottlenecks ease. 
•	 The output gap is starting from a stronger point than assumed in the November Statement. This 
reflects stronger-than-expected economic growth, a tight labour market and indications that 
businesses were facing substantial capacity pressures during lockdown. 
•	 Capacity pressures are assumed to ease as the Omicron outbreak weighs on near-term 
economic activity, wealth effects from housing dampen consumption and increasing interest 
rates reduce demand over the projection horizon. 
Consumption
•	 Consumption is expected to rebound after declining in the August 2021 lockdown. However, 
consumption is assumed to remain relatively subdued in the near term due to heightened 
restrictions under the COVID-19 Protection Framework and some hesitancy by New Zealanders 
to go out and spend as COVID-19 becomes more widespread. 
•	 Consumption is projected to increase at a moderate pace over the medium term. Consumption 
is supported by a resilient labour market and accumulated savings, but dampened by rising 
interest rates and house price deflation. 
Investment
•	 Despite heightened capacity pressures, business investment is expected to be subdued in 
the near term. This reflects an initial period of heightened uncertainty as COVID-19 becomes 
widespread in New Zealand. Thereafter, business investment is expected to grow in line with 
capacity pressures. 
•	 Residential investment rebounds from the August 2021 lockdown, reflecting home-building 
consents. Government policies that permit more intensive residential builds are expected 
to provide further medium-term support. Despite the slowdown in house price inflation and 
increases in interest rates, residential investment is projected to remain elevated over the 
projection horizon. 
Exports and 
imports
•	 A stronger outlook for imports is assumed to weigh on the trade balance over the medium term. 
This is exacerbated in the near term by lower dairy and meat export volumes resulting from a 
less favourable pastural season. 
•	 Import prices are assumed to remain slightly higher than expected in the November Statement. 
This is due to higher oil prices and the pass-through of supply-chain disruptions to the cost of 
producing goods and transporting them to New Zealand. 
•	 Over the projection, recovering global growth is expected to underpin demand for 
New Zealand’s exports. Dairy prices are expected to moderate to $3,500 USD/MT by the end of 
the projection horizon, in line with current market pricing. 
•	 We continue to assume that New Zealand’s geographic remoteness will somewhat 
discourage international travellers from visiting once border restrictions are eased. However, 
New Zealanders are expected to be more comfortable with international travel after an initial 
period of adaptation to widespread COVID-19 in the community. This asymmetry weighs on net 
service exports over the projection horizon. 


Chapter 5 Economic projection
40
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
Labour market
Employment
and wages
•	 The New Zealand labour market remains very tight. The unemployment rate is assumed to 
remain at around 3.2 percent in the first half of 2022. This reflects ongoing demand and supply-
side constraints, particularly from closed borders. 
•	 We assume that the structural level of unemployment remains elevated compared to pre-
COVID-19 levels, largely reflecting a mismatch of skills in New Zealand’s labour market. This 
has lowered the level of maximum sustainable employment, particularly while New Zealand has 
border restrictions limiting new migrant workers from filling current labour shortages. 
•	 Employment is expected to remain above its maximum sustainable level over much of the 
projection horizon, but to return towards MSE as capacity pressures ease.
•	 Annual LCI private sector wage inflation is assumed to accelerate further, peaking at 3.7 percent 
at the beginning of 2023. This reflects increases in the minimum wage, the currently tight labour 
market, and rising living costs. 
•	 Net working-age migration is assumed to have remained mildly negative in 2021, as asymmetric 
border restrictions impeded arrivals but not departures. Net migration is projected to increase 
gradually as border restrictions ease over 2022, to a long-run average of about 24,000 people 
per year. 
Inflation
Tradables
•	 Annual tradables inflation is expected to reach 7.5 percent in early 2022, reflecting increases in 
oil prices, the ongoing impacts of supply-chain disruptions and a lower New Zealand dollar TWI. 
•	 Supply-chain disruptions are currently assumed to ease from around mid-2022, with ex-oil 
import prices normalising towards the end of 2022. 
Non-tradables
•	 Annual non-tradables inflation remains at or above 3 percent over the projection. 
•	 High starting-point momentum in construction costs supports housing-related components of 
non-tradables inflation, including rents, in the near and medium term. Capacity pressures and a 
tight labour market provide additional support, but are assumed to ease over the latter part of 
the projection as monetary policy tightens. 
Headline
•	 Annual CPI inflation is projected to peak at 6.6 percent in the March 2022 quarter, reflecting 
strength in both tradables and non-tradables inflation. 
•	 Headline inflation is expected to decline towards the 2 percent midpoint of the target band 
towards the end of the projection, reflecting both easing tradables and non-tradables inflation.


Chapter 5 Economic projection
41
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
Figure 5.3 
Unemployment rate 
(share of labour force, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Charts
Figure 5.1
Inflation breakdown
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Dotted lines show the projection from the November Statement.
Figure 5.2 
Private sector LCI wage inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 5.4 
Annual house price growth
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: CoreLogic, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 5.5
Quarterly production GDP
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 5.6
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 6 The MPC’s risk appetite statement
42
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
CHAPTER 
06
Appendices


Chapter 6 Appendices
43
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
CHAPTER 6
Appendices
Appendix 1:
Our recent research
This appendix summarises the Reserve Bank’s monetary policy-related 
research and speeches made by the Reserve Bank’s senior leaders at 
various forums over the past nine months. 
The MPC is responsible for achieving and maintaining 
price stability and supporting maximum sustainable 
employment. Since March 2021, the MPC’s Remit 
has also directed the MPC to assess the effects of its 
decisions on the Government’s policy of supporting 
sustainable house prices. The Reserve Bank’s 
assessment of the impacts of MPC decisions on the 
wider economy, including the Government’s housing 
objective, is underpinned by its research programme. 
Over the past nine months, Reserve Bank staff have 
assessed how interest rate movements influence 
household cash flows and the distribution of wealth, 
and how social welfare is affected by the monetary 
policy mandate. Staff have also published work 
outlining alternative monetary policy tools, as well as 
research that sets out the Reserve Bank’s conceptual 
framework to assess house price sustainability.
The Reserve Bank’s research is primarily 
disseminated through Analytical Notes, Bulletin 
articles and Discussion Papers. It is also published 
in external outlets such as academic journals and 
working paper series of other policy institutions and 
universities. In addition, the Reserve Bank produces 
a series of accompanying videos where staff present 
their research.
Analytical notes
Monetary policy pass-through
to mortgage rates
Severin Bernhard, James Graham and Shaun 
Markham find that the pass-through of changes in the 
OCR to retail mortgage rates is imperfect; a 1 percent 
change in the OCR moves mortgage rates by 0.34 
percent within a month’s time, while the peak impact 
on mortgage rates occurs about six months after 
the change in the OCR. Pass-through varies across 
banks – some of the differences between banks could 
be attributed to the share of retail funding or foreign 
funding on the balance sheet, and the size of the bank. 
The household cash flow effects
of low interest rates in New Zealand
Gulnara Nolan finds that cuts in interest rates 
between 2016 and 2020 increased the disposable 
incomes of people with home mortgages by about 
1 percent on average. In particular, low-income 
households with mortgages, and middle-aged 
mortgage holders were found to have more cash in 
hand as borrowing rates fell. However, the incomes 
of people without mortgages – that is, renters and 
those who had paid off their mortgages – were found 
to have fallen by 0.4 percent due to lower bank 
deposit rates. 


Chapter 6 Appendices
44
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
Monetary policy easing and the distribution 
of wealth in New Zealand
Karsten Chipeniuk and Gulnara Nolan investigate the 
effects of surprise movements in monetary policy on 
the distribution of wealth, using a theoretical model of 
the New Zealand economy. They find that a 50-basis-
point reduction in the OCR leads to a more equal 
distribution of wealth in the economy – with the Gini 
coefficient falling by approximately 0.5 percentage 
points. This drop occurs gradually and reaches its 
trough after five quarters, remaining persistently 
lower thereafter. 
Measures for assessing the sustainability of 
house prices in New Zealand
House prices are considered to be sustainable when 
they are aligned with the outlook for the fundamental 
drivers of the housing market, such as long-term 
interest rates, population growth and the supply 
response to demand. Matthew Brunton describes 
a range of metrics that can be used as indicators 
to determine whether current prices have deviated 
from sustainable levels. Using these metrics, he finds 
evidence suggesting house prices became more 
unsustainable over 2020 and 2021. Furthermore, 
these metrics point to tighter household balance 
sheets and income constraints as interest rates 
increase. 
Bulletin articles and external 
publications
RAMPed up: RBNZ’s additional monetary 
policy toolkit
The Reserve Bank’s policy response to the economic 
headwinds associated with the arrival of COVID-19 
included introducing monetary tools not previously 
used in New Zealand. These Additional Monetary 
Policy (AMP) tools were developed to provide further 
stimulus when the OCR is constrained. In this Bulletin 
article, Brandon Kengmana summarises the Reserve 
Bank’s current thinking around AMP tools in the 
context of the MPC’s AMP principles.
Welfare gains in a small open economy with 
a dual mandate for monetary policy
In a working paper published by the Centre for 
Macroeconomic Analysis at the Australian National 
University, Punnoose Jacob and Murat Özbilgin 
assess how household welfare is impacted when 
monetary policy is set a dual mandate, being directed 
to target both inflation and MSE. They find that in 
most circumstances household welfare outcomes 
can be improved by strengthening the stabilisation 
of employment around its maximum sustainable 
level. However, the size of the benefit of additionally 
responding to employment is smaller if a central bank 
already responds strongly to deviations of inflation 
from its target.


Chapter 6 Appendices
45
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
Speeches on monetary policy
Insights from staff research also inform the speeches 
made by the Reserve Bank’s senior leaders at various 
domestic and international forums. This section lists 
recent Reserve Bank speeches on monetary policy 
that have been made available on the Reserve Bank’s 
website. 
A strategic view of Te Pūtea Matua’s
balance sheet
2 June, 2021
Head of Financial Markets, Vanessa Rayner discusses 
the strategic use of the Reserve Bank’s balance 
sheet in light of the unprecedented economic crisis 
triggered by the COVID-19 pandemic. The Reserve 
Bank’s balance sheet has expanded rapidly in order to 
meet our policy objectives, and is expected to remain 
large for some time. Although domestic and global 
financial market conditions have improved, leading 
to the removal of some temporary liquidity facilities, 
we continue to monitor market conditions and are 
ready to respond in the future if needed. The Reserve 
Bank will continue to engage with financial market 
participants as it designs a balance sheet that best 
serves the needs of New Zealanders.
A least regrets approach to uncertainty: 
Hawks, Doves and the White Heron
(he Kōtuku)
21 September, 2021
Followers of monetary policy have typically 
categorised central banks as ‘hawks’ or ‘doves’, for 
signalling higher or lower interest rates. Departing from 
these conventional analogies, Christian Hawkesby, 
then Assistant Governor, uses the movements of the 
kōtuku (the white heron) as a metaphor to describe 
the MPC’s ‘least regrets’ approach to monetary policy. 
The extreme uncertainty around the economic outlook 
demands an approach that is adaptable, sometimes 
moving with caution in slow, small steps, and at other 
times moving with confidence, quickly in large steps to 
remain successful. Two proverbs that are associated 
with the kōtuku – ‘he kōtuku rerenga tahi’ (‘a white 
heron’s flight is seen but once’) and ‘tapuwae kōtuku’ 
(‘considered steps’) – capture the ideas of moving 
with purpose and confidence at the right moment, and 
carefully assessing your environment. This approach 
will help the MPC traverse uncharted waters to 
achieve its monetary policy mandate.
Housing matters
2 November, 2021
Governor Adrian Orr discusses the Reserve Bank’s 
approach to housing through the lenses of the 
financial stability and monetary policy mandates. 
Movements in interest rates do affect the demand for, 
and ultimately the price of, housing assets. However, 
the long-term declines in global interest rates, 
rather than the easing of short-term rates related to 
monetary policy, are likely to have supported the 
persistent increase in house prices. House prices and 
housing affordability are affected by both supply and 
demand factors. These range across immigration, 
tax policy, government benefits or transfers, land 
availability, building standards, infrastructure and 
apprenticeship programmes. Solutions to any 
identified problem in the housing market require 
collaboration between many government agencies, 
businesses, financial institutions and broader 
community groups. 


Chapter 6 Appendices
46
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
Appendix 2: 
Statistical tables
Table 6.1
Key forecast variables
GDP growth 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Annual
TWI
OCR
2020
Mar
-1.3
0.8
2.5
70.9
0.9
 
Jun
-10.3
-0.5
1.5
69.7
0.3
 
Sep
13.9
0.7
1.4
72.0
0.3
 
Dec
-0.4
0.5
1.4
72.9
0.3
2021
Mar
1.5
0.8
1.5
74.9
0.3
 
Jun
2.4
1.3
3.3
74.7
0.3
 
Sep
-3.7
2.2
4.9
74.4
0.3
 
Dec
2.3
1.4
5.9
74.3
0.6
2022
Mar
1.6
1.4
6.6
71.6
0.9
 
Jun
0.5
1.1
6.3
71.6
1.5
 
Sep
0.8
1.0
5.0
71.6
1.9
 
Dec
0.6
0.6
4.1
71.6
2.2
2023
Mar
0.5
0.5
3.2
71.6
2.6
Jun
0.5
0.5
2.6
71.6
2.8
Sep
0.6
0.8
2.5
71.6
3.1
Dec
0.5
0.5
2.4
71.6
3.3
2024
Mar
0.4
0.5
2.4
71.6
3.3
Jun
0.4
0.4
2.3
71.6
3.3
Sep
0.3
0.7
2.2
71.6
3.4
Dec
0.3
0.4
2.1
71.6
3.4
2025
Mar
0.3
0.4
2.0
71.6
3.4


Chapter 6 Appendices
47
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
Table 6.2
Measures of inflation, inflation expectations, and asset prices
2020
2021
2022
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Inflation (annual rates)
CPI
1.5
1.4
1.4
1.5
3.3
4.9
5.9
CPI non-tradables
3.1
2.6
2.8
2.1
3.3
4.5
5.3
CPI tradables
-0.6
-0.1
-0.3
0.5
3.4
5.7
6.9
Sectoral factor model
estimate of core inflation
1.9
1.9
2.1
2.3
2.7
3.0
3.2
CPI trimmed mean
(30 percent measure)
2.1
1.7
2.2
1.7
3.0
4.0
4.3
CPI weighted median
2.4
2.2
2.7
2.3
3.0
3.3
3.8
GDP deflator (expenditure)
2.4
1.8
0.8
0.4
2.3
3.7
Inflation expectations
ANZ Business Outlook – inflation one 
year ahead (quarterly average to date)
1.4
1.4
1.5
1.9
2.2
2.9
4.0
RBNZ Survey of Expectations – 
inflation 2 years ahead
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.9
2.0
2.3
3.0
3.3
RBNZ Survey of Expectations – 
inflation 5 years ahead
1.8
1.9
1.9
2.0
2.1
2.0
2.2
2.3
RBNZ Survey of Expectations – 
inflation 10 years ahead
2.0
2.0
2.1
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.1
Long-run inflation expectations*
1.8
2.0
2.0
2.1
2.1
2.0
2.1
2.1
Asset prices (annual percent 
changes)
Quarterly house price index 
(CoreLogic NZ)
7.1
10.8
16.9
24.1
29.7
REINZ Farm Price Index (quarterly 
average)
-8.0
-3.7
-0.5
6.9
6.3
15.1
20.5
NZX 50 (quarterly average)
6.4
8.6
13.2
14.4
17.1
10.3
3.0
-2.5
Source: ANZ, Aon-Hewitt Consulting, Consensus Economics, RBNZ estimates.
*Long-run expectations are extracted from a range of surveys using a Nelson-Siegel model.


Chapter 6 Appendices
48
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
Table 6.3
Measures of labour market conditions	
(seasonally adjusted, changes expressed in annual percent terms, unless specified otherwise)	
2020
2021
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Household Labour Force Survey
Unemployment rate
4.0
5.3
4.9
4.6
4.0
3.3
3.2
Underutilisation rate
12.0
13.2
11.9
12.1
10.5
9.2
9.2
Labour force participation rate
69.9
70.1
70.2
70.4
70.5
71.2
71.1
Employment rate (percentage of 
working-age population)
67.1
66.4
66.8
67.1
67.7
68.8
68.8
Employment growth
1.6
0.4
0.6
0.2
1.6
4.2
3.7
Average weekly hours worked
30.6
33.7
35.0
33.8
34.0
31.2
33.5
Number unemployed
(thousand people)
115
151
141
133
114
98
93
Number employed (million people)
2.73
2.71
2.73
2.75
2.78
2.83
2.83
Labour force (million people)
2.85
2.87
2.87
2.88
2.89
2.93
2.92
Extended labour force
(million people)
2.96
2.97
2.97
2.99
2.98
3.01
3.01
Working-age population
(million people)
4.07
4.09
4.09
4.09
4.10
4.11
4.11
Quarterly Employment Survey – 
QES
Filled jobs growth
0.3
-0.6
0.3
0.5
2.5
4.0
4.2
Average hourly earnings growth 
(private sector, ordinary time)
2.4
3.7
4.5
4.1
4.4
3.6
4.1
Other data sources
Labour cost index growth,
private sector
1.7
1.6
1.5
1.6
2.2
2.5
2.8
Labour cost index growth,
private sector, unadjusted
2.8
2.6
2.4
2.8
3.7
4.1
4.5
Estimated net migration
(published, thousands, quarterly)
0.4
0.4
-2.5
-1.7
Change in All Vacancies Index
-50.1
-19.1
-1.1
26.1
164.1
56.6
38.0
Note: The All Vacancies Index is produced by MBIE as part of the monthly Jobs Online report, which shows changes in job vacancies advertised 
by businesses on internet job boards. It is converted to quarterly and seasonally adjusted by the Reserve Bank. The unadjusted LCI is an 
analytical index that reflects quality change in addition to price change (whereas the official LCI measures price changes only). For definitions of 
underutilisation, the extended labour force, and related concepts, see Statistics New Zealand (2016), Introducing underutilisation in the labour 
market. Estimated net migration (published) is the Stats NZ outcomes-based measure.


Chapter 6 Appendices
49
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
Table 6.4
Composition of real GDP growth
(annual average percent change, seasonally adjusted, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Final consumption expenditure
Private
3.3
4.2
6.5
4.8
4.5
2.5
0.6
4.3
2.6
1.4
1.7
Public authority
2.9
2.2
1.9
3.7
3.3
5.5
7.5
7.8
1.6
0.9
0.8
Total
3.2
3.7
5.4
4.5
4.3
3.2
2.2
5.1
2.4
1.3
1.5
Gross fixed capital formation
Residential
8.3
7.1
8.8
-1.8
-0.1
2.8
1.8
9.9
9.2
1.4
0.8
Other
8.0
2.5
-0.1
10.3
7.0
2.4
-6.7
8.7
8.7
2.7
-1.3
Total
8.1
3.6
2.2
7.0
5.2
2.5
-4.7
9.0
8.8
2.4
-0.7
Final domestic 
expenditure
4.3
3.7
4.6
5.1
4.5
3.0
0.6
6.0
3.8
1.5
0.9
Stockbuilding*
0.5
-0.3
0.1
0.2
-0.2
-0.2
-0.3
1.3
-0.7
-0.2
0.0
Gross national 
expenditure
4.6
3.2
4.8
5.6
4.3
2.7
-0.7
7.9
3.2
1.5
1.0
Exports of goods and 
services
4.7
6.8
2.1
3.8
3.4
0.3
-17.7
4.4
6.3
8.6
4.7
Imports of goods and 
services
7.7
2.6
5.6
7.8
4.3
1.0
-15.9
17.9
7.4
4.8
2.2
Expenditure on GDP
3.6
4.4
3.7
4.3
4.0
2.6
-0.3
4.2
2.6
2.2
1.5
GDP (production)
3.8
3.8
3.8
3.6
3.4
2.2
-1.3
5.3
2.9
2.2
1.5
GDP (production, 
March qtr to March qtr)
3.8
4.1
3.3
3.6
3.2
0.6
3.3
2.5
2.4
2.0
1.2
*Percentage point contribution to the growth rate of GDP.


Chapter 6 Appendices
50
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
Table 6.5
Summary of economic projection
(annual percent change, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2015
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
Price measures
CPI 
0.3
0.4
2.2
1.1
1.5
2.5
1.5
6.6
3.2
2.4
2.0
Labour costs
1.8
1.8
1.5
1.9
2.0
2.4
1.6
3.1
3.7
3.4
3.1
Export prices
(in New Zealand dollars) 
-8.0
0.7
4.1
3.3
1.1
6.9
-6.4
16.7
-0.8
-0.3
1.2
Import prices
(in New Zealand dollars) 
-3.4
1.2
0.7
1.8
4.3
2.6
-2.6
11.6
-1.6
-0.2
0.3
Monetary conditions
OCR (year average)
3.4
2.9
2.0
1.8
1.8
1.2
0.3
0.5
2.0
3.1
3.4
TWI (year average)
79.3
72.6
76.5
75.6
73.4
71.7
72.4
73.8
71.6
71.6
71.6
Output
GDP (production, annual 
average % change)
3.8
3.8
3.8
3.6
3.4
2.2
-1.3
5.3
2.9
2.2
1.5
Potential output (annual 
average % change)
3.0
3.2
3.3
3.3
3.2
2.9
-1.1
3.1
4.0
2.7
2.3
Output gap (% of potential 
GDP, year average)
-0.6
0.0
0.5
0.8
0.9
0.2
-0.1
2.0
1.0
0.5
-0.3
Labour market
Total employment 
(seasonally adjusted)
3.6
2.2
5.9
2.9
1.5
2.5
0.2
3.3
0.5
0.9
1.0
Unemployment rate 
(March qtr, seasonally 
adjusted)
5.5
5.3
4.9
4.4
4.2
4.2
4.6
3.2
3.7
4.0
4.3
Trend labour productivity 
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.7
0.8
0.9
0.9
0.9
0.8
Key balances
Government operating 
balance (% of GDP, 
year to June)
0.2
0.7
1.5
1.9
2.4
-7.2
-1.2
-5.7
-0.7
-0.3
0.3
Current account balance 
(% of GDP)
-3.5
-2.4
-2.6
-3.0
-3.7
-2.3
-2.4
-5.8
-6.2
-6.1
-5.8
Terms of trade
(SNA measure, annual 
average % change)
0.1
-3.1
2.5
4.5
-2.5
1.9
-1.0
1.6
1.6
-0.4
0.5
Household saving rate 
(% of disposable income)
-0.8
-0.5
0.0
-0.2
0.7
2.9
5.8
3.7
2.6
1.6
1.1
World economy
Trading-partner GDP 
(annual average % change)
3.7
3.4
3.5
3.9
3.5
1.7
-0.8
5.6
4.4
3.4
3.4
Trading-partner CPI 
(TWI weighted)
1.0
1.2
1.9
1.8
1.4
2.4
0.8
3.0
2.2
2.2
2.1


Chapter 6 Appendices
51
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022


Chapter 6 Appendices
52
Monetary Policy Statement February 2022
Figure 6.7
Inflation expectations
(annual) 
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: Inflation expectations are estimates from the RBNZ inflation expectations 
curve, based on surveys of businesses and professional forecasters.
Figure 6.9
House price inflation
(annual) 
Source: REINZ.
Source: Stats NZ, Global Dairy Trade, Reuters, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.12
Terms of trade, dairy and oil price indices
Figure 6.10
Mortgage rates
Source: interest.co.nz, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The rates shown for each term are the average of the latest rates on 
offer from ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac.
Figure 6.8
Private sector wage growth
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Private sector wage growth is measured by the labour cost index, all 
salary and wage rates, private sector. Real labour cost index is deflated with 
headline CPI inflation.
Figure 6.11
New Zealand dollar exchange rates
(quarterly average) 
Source: Reuters, RBNZ.
