BANK: RBNZ
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: Monetary Policy Statement May 2024
DATE: 24/05/2022
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/monetary-policy-statements/2024/may-220524/mps_report_may2024.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Monetary Policy 
Statement. 
May 2024
B.33


ii
Policy assessment. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Policy assessment.
OCR 5.50% - Official Cash Rate to  
Remain Restrictive
The Monetary Policy  
Committee today agreed to 
keep the Official Cash Rate  
at 5.50 percent. 
Restrictive monetary policy has reduced capacity 
pressures in the New Zealand economy and 
lowered consumer price inflation. Annual 
consumer price inflation is expected to return to 
within the Committee’s 1 to 3 percent target range 
by the end of 2024.
The welcome decline in inflation in part reflects 
lower inflation for goods and services imported 
into New Zealand. Globally, consumer price 
inflation has declined from 30-year highs in many 
advanced economies. However, services inflation 
is receding slowly, and expected policy interest 
rate cuts continue to be delayed.   
In New Zealand, pressures in the labour market 
have eased.  Businesses are employing more 
cautiously in line with weak economic activity, 
while the number of people available to work 
has increased due to recent high net inward 
migration. Wage growth and domestic spending 
are easing to levels more consistent with the 
Committee’s inflation target. 
While weaker capacity pressures and an easing 
labour market are reducing domestic inflation, 
this decline is tempered by sectors of the 
economy that are less sensitive to interest rates.  
These near-term factors include, for example, 
higher dwelling rents, insurance costs, council 
rates, and other domestic services price inflation. 
A slow decline in domestic inflation poses a risk 
to inflation expectations. 
Our economic projections include only officially 
available information on the Government’s 
fiscal intentions to date, which includes the 
most recent fiscal update and ‘mini budget’.  
The signalled lower government spending is 
currently and expected to continue contributing 
to weaker aggregate demand. Any impact of 
potential changes in the forthcoming Budget to 
government spending, or private spending due 
to tax cuts, remain to be assessed. 
Annual consumer price inflation remains above 
the Committee’s 1 to 3 percent target band, 
and components of domestic services inflation 
persist.  The Committee agreed that monetary 
policy needs to remain restrictive to ensure 
inflation returns to target within a reasonable 
timeframe.  
Meitaki, thanks.
Adrian Orr 
Governor 
Figure i.1
Official Cash Rate (OCR)
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


iii
Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
REPORT AND SUPPORTING NOTES PUBLISHED AT:
www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/monetary-policy-statement
Subscribe online: www.rbnz.govt.nz/email-updates
Copyright © 2024 Reserve Bank of New Zealand
This report is published pursuant to section 129 
of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 2021. 
ISSN 1770-4829
rbnz.govt.nz
Thank you to RBNZ staff for photography in this report. 
Cover: Aurora Australis viewed from Christchurch. Photo: Rebecca Williams
Monetary Policy Framework
The Monetary Policy Committee operates and makes 
decisions under the monetary policy framework that 
comprises the following key components:
•	 the Remit;
•	 the Charter;
•	 the Code of Conduct; and
•	 the monetary policy strategy.
The corresponding documents to these components 
and additional information can be accessed on our 
website under the monetary policy framework.


1
Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
The projections were finalised on 16 May 2024. The Official Cash Rate (OCR) projection 
incorporates an outlook for monetary policy that is consistent with the MPC’s monetary 
policy assessment, which was finalised on 22 May 2024. 
Contents
Policy assessment	
ii
1.	
Summary record of meeting	
2
2.	 Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook	
6
	
Box A: Assessing capacity pressures in the New Zealand economy	
15
3.	 Global developments and outlook	
19
4.	 Special topics	
25
	
4.1	 	Non-tradables inflation in New Zealand	
27
	
Box B: Monetary policy responsiveness of non-tradables subgroups	
30
	
4.2		Recent trends in New Zealand’s exporting sector	
31
5.	 Domestic financial conditions	
35
6.	 Economic projections	
41
7.	
Appendices	
49
	
Appendix 1: Statistical tables 	
50
	
Appendix 2: Chart pack 	
55
Monetary Policy Statement.
May 2024


2
Chapter 1. Summary record of meeting. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Mokohinau Islands. Photo: John Knowles
Summary 
record of 
meeting
Chapter 
01


3
Chapter 1. Summary record of meeting. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Chapter 1. 
Summary record of meeting
The Monetary Policy Committee discussed recent developments in 
the domestic and global economies and the implications for monetary 
policy in New Zealand. Restrictive monetary policy is contributing to an 
easing in capacity pressures. Headline inflation, core inflation, and most 
measures of inflation expectations are continuing to decline. However, 
domestic inflation has fallen more slowly than expected and headline 
Consumers Price Index (CPI) inflation remains above the Committee’s 
target band. Members of the Committee agreed that monetary policy 
needs to remain restrictive to ensure inflation returns to target within the 
forecast timeframe. 
Aggregate global economic growth was below 
trend last year and is expected to slow further 
in 2024. However, the economic outlook varies 
among New Zealand’s trading partners.  In the 
United States, monetary policy has contributed 
to an easing in capacity pressures and inflation, 
but economic growth remains stronger than 
in many other developed economies. In 
most other advanced economies, domestic 
demand remains weak. In China, economic 
activity strengthened in early 2024, although 
continued weakness in the property sector 
remains a significant downside risk to growth. 
The Committee noted that headline and core 
inflation have continued to decline in many 
advanced economies. To date, the decline in 
headline inflation internationally has been due 
in large part to lower goods, energy, and food 
price inflation. Inflation in services has declined, 
but by less than anticipated at the start of the 
year. Nevertheless, inflation in New Zealand’s 
trading partners is expected to continue to 
decline. 
In discussing global financial conditions, the 
Committee noted that persistent inflation in 
some of New Zealand’s key trading partners 
has led to fewer policy interest rate cuts being 
priced in by financial markets. Higher long-
term wholesale interest rates globally have 
supported wholesale interest rates in  
New Zealand. Participants in global financial 
markets continue to exhibit confidence in the 
corporate earnings outlook, as reflected in 
equity prices and credit spreads.
The Committee discussed recent 
developments in financial conditions in  
New Zealand. Overall, credit growth remains 
weak. The average interest rate across the 
stock of mortgage borrowers continues to 
increase and is near its projected peak of 
6.5 percent. Bank funding costs are expected 
to increase over the forecast period as funding 
sources normalise, with a reversion to higher 
cost wholesale and term deposit funding. 
Higher funding costs in turn are expected to 
maintain upward pressure on lending rates 
over the medium term.
The Committee received an update on the 
continued sales of New Zealand Government 
Bonds held in the Large Scale Asset Purchase 
Programme portfolio. Despite the high level of 
bond issuance over recent years, measures 
of secondary market liquidity generally remain 
in line with historical averages and demand 
for New Zealand Government Bonds in the 
primary market remains strong.
The Committee discussed recent domestic 
economic developments. A prolonged 
period of restrictive interest rates is reducing 
household spending and residential and 
business investment. Capacity pressures 
in the New Zealand economy have eased 
significantly over the past year and aggregate 
demand is now broadly in line with the supply 
capacity of the economy. 


4
Chapter 1. Summary record of meeting. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Members noted that labour market pressures 
are easing and that businesses are reporting it 
is much easier to find workers. Labour supply 
has continued to increase, due to strong 
population growth, and wage growth has 
continued to decline but remains elevated. 
The Committee discussed New Zealand’s 
current low rate of productivity growth and its 
implications for lower potential output growth 
and higher capacity pressures. The Committee 
noted that the revised smaller negative output 
gap in the published projections is more 
consistent with recent persistence in domestic 
inflation pressure.  
The Committee discussed possible causes of 
the current low productivity rate and whether 
they were temporary or more persistent. For 
example, some labour hoarding by firms is 
likely to have occurred in response to the 
previous acute labour shortages once  
New Zealand’s borders were reopened. This 
could prove to be temporary.  
The Committee noted that the forecast for 
government expenditure in the projections 
is based on Treasury’s Half Year Economic 
and Fiscal Update (HYEFU) 2023, adjusted 
to reflect the December 2023 quarter GDP 
data. Based on this information, the share 
of government expenditure in the economy 
is projected to decline.  However, due to 
weaker potential output growth, government 
expenditure is higher as a proportion of 
potential output than projected in the February 
Statement and hence less disinflationary. 
The Committee also discussed the implications 
of the publicly announced aspects of 
Budget 2024 for the economic outlook. If the 
decline in government revenue due to tax cuts 
is fully offset by lower government expenditure, 
then the net impact on aggregate spending is 
broadly neutral over an extended horizon.  
However, the Committee discussed how 
differences in the timing between potential 
lower government spending and lower 
tax rates are relevant to monetary policy. 
The Committee noted that the signalled 
lower government spending is currently 
and expected to continue contributing to 
weaker aggregate demand. However, any 
likely changes to government spending or 
private spending due to proposed tax cuts 
are not in the May Monetary Policy Statement 
projections. This timing difference poses 
an upside risk to the forecast of aggregate 
demand, the relevance of which for monetary 
policy will be clearer over coming quarters. 
The Committee noted that the estimate of 
the long-run nominal neutral OCR used in the 
projections has been increased by 25 basis 
points to 2.75 percent, consistent with the 
Reserve Bank’s indicator suite. The long-
run nominal neutral rate affects the central 
economic projection but has a larger impact 
in the latter part of the forecast horizon and 
beyond. Members agreed that the current level 
of the OCR remains contractionary.
The Committee discussed recent inflation 
outturns. An easing in capacity pressures in 
the New Zealand economy and falling inflation 
expectations over the past 12 months are 
working to bring domestic inflation down. 
Annual CPI inflation fell to 4.0 percent in the 
March 2024 quarter but remains above the 
Committee’s 1 to 3 percent target band. 
Both tradable and non-tradables inflation 
contributed to the decline in headline CPI 
inflation. However, annual non-tradables 
inflation declined only slightly to 5.8 percent, 
which was higher than the 5.3 percent forecast. 
This upside surprise was broad-based across 
non-tradables inflation components. 
The Committee discussed the outlook for 
non-tradables inflation. So far, the decline in 
non-tradables inflation has primarily been due 
to housing and construction costs, which are 
typically more sensitive to monetary policy. 
Further near-term disinflation in non-tradables 
is likely to be due to falling inflation for some 
market services, as labour market conditions 
continue to soften. However, this is expected to 
be tempered by some relative prices increases, 
such as for insurance, local authority rates, and 
dwelling rents.
Members discussed risks to the inflation 
outlook. The Committee agreed that risks to 
tradable inflation were balanced but noted 
that price changes may continue to be volatile. 
Risks remain to near-term inflation outcomes 
given ongoing trade disruptions. To date, 
developments in the Middle East have not 
resulted in a large increase in oil prices, and 
goods inflation continues to decline across 
advanced economies.


5
Chapter 1. Summary record of meeting. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Members agreed that persistence in non-
tradable inflation remains a significant upside 
risk. The influence of recent inflation outcomes 
on setting future inflation expectations is critical 
to price setting, wage expectations, and the 
stance of monetary policy. In addition, slower 
potential output growth than currently assumed 
would reduce the pace at which spending 
can grow without putting upward pressure on 
inflation. Monetary policy may need to tighten 
and/or remain restrictive for longer if wage 
and price setters do not align with weaker 
productivity growth rates. 
Members discussed downside risks to 
the projections. In China, strengthening 
manufacturing capacity, alongside subdued 
domestic demand, could lead to a sharper 
decline in New Zealand import prices than 
currently assumed. Some members also 
noted the risk of a decline in global equity 
prices, particularly in the US.  This risk arises 
from elevated pricing based on expectations 
of a near-term easing in US monetary policy, 
ongoing strong earnings growth, and a low-risk 
premium.  Members noted that domestic labour 
market conditions could deteriorate more 
quickly than anticipated, particularly if firms 
reduce their labour force rapidly in response to 
weak demand. 
In the context of persistent domestic inflation, 
weaker productivity growth, and uncertainty 
regarding the pace of normalisation in wage 
and price-setting behaviour, the Committee 
discussed the possibility of increasing the OCR 
at this meeting. The Committee assessed that, 
while the near-term balance of risks around 
inflation are skewed to the upside, there is 
more confidence that inflation will decline 
to within the target range over the medium 
term.  However, the Committee also agreed 
that interest rates may have to remain at a 
restrictive level for longer than anticipated in 
the February Monetary Policy Statement to 
ensure the inflation target is met. 
The Committee discussed the reasons why 
inflation is outside of the target range and 
the expected time for inflation to return to 
target. The Committee noted that the high 
inflation experienced both domestically and 
internationally over recent years reflected 
the significant disruption to global supply, 
production, and potential output stemming 
from the pandemic; the impact on demand of 
the global easing in monetary policy and the 
rise in fiscal spending during the pandemic; 
an increase in commodity prices and shipping 
costs resulting from war and geopolitical 
tension; severe weather impacts on local 
food prices; and the persistence of domestic 
inflation in part reflecting low productivity. 
The Committee noted that annual headline 
CPI inflation was expected to return to the 
target band in the December quarter of this 
year.  The Committee agreed that in the current 
circumstances, there is no material trade-off 
between meeting their inflation objectives 
and maintaining the stability of the financial 
system. The Committee noted that borrowers 
have faced a significant increase in interest 
costs, but banks are well placed to support 
their customers through this difficult period.  
Restrictive monetary policy settings are 
necessary to reduce demand in the economy, 
while avoiding unnecessary instability in  
output, employment, interest rates and the 
exchange rate. 
In discussing the appropriate stance of 
monetary policy, members agreed they remain 
confident that monetary policy is restricting 
demand. A further decline in capacity pressure 
is expected, supporting a continued decline in 
inflation. The Committee agreed that interest 
rates need to remain at a restrictive level for 
a sustained period to ensure annual headline 
CPI inflation returns to the 1 to 3 percent target 
range. On Wednesday 22 May, the Committee 
reached a consensus to keep the Official Cash 
Rate at 5.50 percent.
Attendees:
Reserve Bank members  
of MPC: 
Adrian Orr, Christian Hawkesby,  
Karen Silk, Paul Conway
External MPC members: 
Bob Buckle, Carl Hansen, 
Caroline Saunders
Treasury Observer: 
Dominick Stephens
MPC Secretary: 
Elliot Jones


6
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Chapter 
02
Recent economic 
developments 
and monetary 
policy outlook
Diamond Lake. Photo: Hamish Fitchett


7
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Chapter 2.
Recent economic developments and 
monetary policy outlook
Summary
•	 High interest rates have continued to 
reduce demand in the New Zealand 
economy. Weaker demand has 
contributed to lower domestic inflation. 
Subdued global growth and lower prices 
for goods and services that tend to have 
more volatile prices have led to lower 
tradables inflation over recent quarters. 
Annual Consumers Price Index (CPI) 
inflation has declined, but at 4.0 percent 
in the March 2024 quarter remains above 
the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target band. 
•	 Gross domestic product (GDP) declined 
by 0.1 percent in the December 2023 
quarter. Economic growth has now 
been negative for four of the past five 
quarters. High interest rates have reduced 
household spending, as well as residential 
and business investment, despite 
very strong population growth. Recent 
indicators of economic activity have been 
weak, as expected.
•	 Weaker economic activity has meant that 
businesses are employing fewer workers. 
At the same time, high net immigration 
over the past 18 months has increased 
the number of people available to work. 
As a result labour market conditions have 
softened, with labour demand and supply 
now broadly in balance. Businesses are 
reporting that it is easier to find workers. 
The unemployment rate increased to 4.3 
percent in the March 2024 quarter. Other 
measures of capacity in the labour market, 
such as the underutilisation rate, have also 
increased. Labour Cost Index (LCI) wage 
inflation has declined, although it remains 
much higher than its pre-COVID-19 level.
•	 Global growth has been below trend 
and inflation has declined from 30-year 
highs in many advanced economies. 
However, there have been signs recently 
that global demand and inflation are 
somewhat stronger than anticipated. This 
is particularly the case in the US, where it 
has led to fewer policy interest rate cuts 
being expected and a higher US dollar 
exchange rate in recent months. A lower 
New Zealand dollar exchange rate than 
assumed at the time of the February 
Statement will lead to higher-than-
otherwise prices for our imported goods 
and services.
•	 Domestic inflation has declined more 
slowly than anticipated. Annual non-
tradables inflation – which measures 
price changes for goods and services 
less exposed to international competition 
– was 5.8 percent in the March 2024 
quarter. This was only a small decline 
from the 5.9 percent in the previous 
quarter, and higher than the 5.3 percent 
anticipated at the time of the February 
Statement. The relative strength in non-
tradables inflation was broad-based. Most 
measures of core inflation declined in the 
March 2024 quarter, but all remain above 
the MPC’s target band.    


8
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
•	 Higher than expected and broad-
based domestic inflation is consistent 
with the output gap – the difference 
between actual economic activity and 
the ‘potential’ level of activity that the 
economy can sustain without generating 
more inflation – being higher in recent 
quarters than assumed at the time of the 
February Statement. Although actual 
economic growth was slightly lower than 
assumed at the end of 2023, very weak 
productivity growth, even by New Zealand 
standards, is likely to have contributed to 
lower potential GDP. This means that the 
output gap is assumed to be slightly less 
negative over 2024. 
•	 A less negative output gap in 2024 and 
the higher starting point for non-tradables 
inflation imply that domestic inflationary 
pressures may be more persistent 
than previously assumed. The signs of 
lingering inflation in other parts of the 
world, higher expected global interest 
rates and the resulting depreciation of 
the New Zealand dollar exchange rate 
also imply that tradables inflation may 
be higher than previously assumed in 
the medium term. In addition, the neutral 
OCR has been revised higher, and this will 
create gradual upward pressure on the 
OCR over time. 
•	 These factors are partly offset by an 
updated assumption that businesses’ 
wage- and price-setting behaviour will 
normalise slightly more quickly once 
headline inflation is within the 1 to 3 
percent target band. Conditional on the 
central economic projection, the OCR is 
expected to remain restrictive for longer 
than assumed in the February Statement, 
in order for inflation to return sustainably 
to the 2 percent target midpoint over the 
medium term.   


9
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Current economic assessment
Restrictive interest rates have  
continued to reduce demand in 
the New Zealand economy
Economic activity in New Zealand, as 
measured by production GDP, declined by 
0.1 percent in the December 2023 quarter. 
This was slightly weaker than the 0.0 
percent assumed at the time of the February 
Statement (figure 2.1). 
The prolonged period of high interest 
rates is reducing household spending, 
and residential and business investment, 
despite very strong population growth over 
the past year. Subdued global growth has 
also reduced demand for New Zealand’s 
exports. The New Zealand economy has now 
experienced negative growth in four of the 
past five quarters, meaning that the level of 
real GDP is still below its September 2022 
quarter peak. While capacity pressures have 
declined, supply and demand are assumed 
to have been broadly in balance in the 
December 2023 quarter. 
While the overall level of household 
consumption declined only slightly during 
2023, it declined 3.3 percent in per capita 
terms (figure 2.2). Household consumption 
is assumed to decline further in per capita 
terms this year. High interest rates and a 
weakening labour market are expected to 
reduce income growth, while net immigration 
remains elevated relative to history. 
Residential investment is also expected to 
fall further, as a soft housing market and high 
interest rates more than offset additional 
demand from population growth. Below-
trend global growth and high interest rates 
are assumed to continue to reduce business 
investment in 2024. Household consumption, 
residential and business investment are 
assumed to recover in the latter half of 
the three-year projection as interest rates 
eventually ease.
Figure 2.1
Production GDP
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Per capita consumption is based on the working-age population.
Figure 2.2
Private consumption per capita
(seasonally adjusted)


10
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Recent economic activity 
indicators have been weak, as 
expected
Recent economic indicators have been 
weak, consistent with subdued economic 
growth as expected. Most survey measures 
of economic activity have declined. Firms’ 
own domestic trading activity in the March 
2024 Quarterly Survey of Business Opinion 
(QSBO) declined to a net 23 percent of 
firms reporting weaker activity, from a 
net 7 percent reporting an increase in 
the previous quarter. Around 60 percent 
of respondents in the QSBO claimed 
that orders are the factor most limiting 
production (figure 2.3). The Performance 
of Manufacturing and Services Indices are 
below their long-run averages. These more 
recent indicators have been broadly in line 
with our outlook in the February Statement. 
Overall, economic growth is still expected to 
remain subdued over 2024, partly accounted 
for by weakness in household consumption, 
residential and business investment. While 
recovering international visitor numbers are 
supporting growth in services exports, growth 
in goods exports is expected to be weaker 
over the medium term (see chapter 4.2). 
Government consumption and investment 
are assumed to evolve in line with the 
Half-Year Economic and Fiscal Update 
(HYEFU) 2023, adjusted for the December 
2023 quarter GDP data, while we await 
the publication of the Budget on 30 May 
2024. Based on HYEFU 2023, the share of 
government expenditure in the economy 
is projected to decline. However, due to 
weaker potential output growth, government 
consumption is higher as a proportion 
of potential output than projected in 
the February Statement and hence less 
disinflationary. Reductions in government 
spending to date have likely been captured 
in weaker high-frequency indicators for 
aggregate GDP in the March and June 2024 
quarters. Our near-term GDP forecasts are 
based on these indicators. 
Economic growth is assumed to recover from 
mid-2025, as the effects of high interest rates 
wane and global economic activity increases. 
However, the weaker outlook for potential 
GDP growth means that growth remains 
lower over the medium term than assumed at 
the time of the February Statement.
Immigration is adding to demand 
and supply
Economic activity has been supported to 
some extent by strong population growth, 
mainly from high net immigration. Net 
immigration has increased rapidly since 
the end of 2022, adding 2.2 percent to 
the working-age population in the year to 
March 2024 (figure 2.4). Migration is adding 
to demand in the economy, and increasing 
rents. Annual rent inflation is currently 
4.7 percent, well above its 20-year average 
of 2.6 percent. 
Figure 2.3
QSBO factor most limiting production
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: NZIER, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.4
Net immigration
(annual, share of working-age population)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 


11
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Apart from high rental inflation, demand 
in the housing market has remained 
subdued. Nationwide house prices have 
increased only modestly over the past year, 
after declining roughly 15 percent from 
their November 2021 peak. Listings have 
increased, but sales volumes have declined, 
resulting in a larger stock of houses on 
the market. Annual house price inflation is 
assumed to return gradually to its long-run 
average rate of around 5 percent (figure 2.5). 
However, the outlook for house prices is 
always highly uncertain.
While adding to demand, high immigration 
is also adding to the productive capacity 
of the economy by boosting the supply of 
labour. Businesses are reporting that it is 
much easier to find skilled and unskilled 
workers, as the acute labour shortages that 
emerged while the border was closed during 
the pandemic have subsided. The QSBO 
showed a sharp decline in respondents 
claiming labour is the factor most limiting 
production, after being reported as the 
factor most limiting output through 2022 
(figure 2.3).
Labour market conditions have 
softened
Declining worker shortages are due to both 
lower demand for labour and more workers 
being available. Various measures of labour 
market pressure eased further in the March 
2024 quarter, with labour demand and 
supply now broadly in balance (figure 2.6). 
Employment declined by 0.2 percent. The 
unemployment and underutilisation rates 
increased to 4.3 percent and 11.2 percent 
respectively. Increases in unemployment 
were seen across most demographic groups. 
For example, the rate of youth unemployment 
– which tends to be highly cyclical – 
increased from 11.8 percent to 13.8 percent 
over the quarter. 
Figure 2.6
Labour market indicator suite
Source: Stats NZ, NZIER, RBNZ estimates.
Note: See Ball (2024), ‘Assessing and communicating labour market indicators of inflationary pressure’.
Figure 2.5
House prices
(nominal, seasonally adjusted)
Source: CoreLogic, REINZ, RBNZ estimates.


12
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Participation in the labour force declined 
from 71.9 percent to 71.5 percent in the March 
2024 quarter. While this is still high relative 
to history and to the rates of many other 
countries, it is about 1 percentage point lower 
than its peak in the June 2023 quarter. The 
decline in participation suggests that some 
people have stopped looking for work as 
job opportunities have waned. However, the 
decline in the participation rate was more 
than offset by growth in the working-age 
population, meaning that the overall size of 
the labour force increased in the March  
2024 quarter. 
An easing labour market and declining 
headline inflation have contributed to 
declines in nominal wage growth. Annual 
same-job wage growth, as measured by the 
LCI (ordinary and overtime, private sector) 
declined from 3.9 percent to 3.8 percent 
in the March 2024 quarter, as assumed in 
the February Statement. Annual growth in 
average hourly private sector earnings in 
the Quarterly Employment Survey (QES) fell 
from 6.6 percent to 4.8 percent. Since the 
QES earnings are a broader measure than 
same-job wages, the steeper fall may reflect 
the fact that there are fewer opportunities 
for workers to get larger pay increases by 
moving jobs or being promoted. This would 
be consistent with feedback from businesses 
that worker turnover has fallen quickly in 
recent quarters, as labour market conditions 
have eased.
Overall, the labour market is expected to 
continue to soften as economic activity 
remains subdued. Lower labour demand is 
expected to result in fewer job vacancies 
being listed, lower wage growth and rising 
unemployment over the medium term.
Global growth is below trend, but 
there are signs of resilience 
Growth in our trading partners has been 
below trend, largely because central banks 
have raised interest rates in response to high 
inflation. Trading partner growth is expected 
to slow marginally on an annual basis in 
2024. 
However, activity and inflation data in recent 
months have led professional forecasters to 
increase their forecasts of growth, particularly 
in the US and China (see chapter 3). In the 
US, monetary policy has contributed to an 
easing in capacity pressures and inflation, but 
economic growth remains stronger than in 
many other developed economies. The US 
labour market has been robust, consumption 
growth has remained near its longer-term 
trend, and services inflation has stopped 
declining. Despite stress in the housing 
market, GDP growth in China was higher 
than expected in the March 2024 quarter, 
due to strong manufacturing investment and 
household spending. 
Services inflation has declined by less 
than expected in many countries and is 
largely unchanged from a year ago in the 
US. As services inflation is a good gauge 
of domestically-generated inflation, the 
persistence in services inflation globally has 
contributed to expectations of policy interest 
rate cuts being reduced.


13
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Global developments have led 
to a higher outlook for imported 
inflation
Higher interest rates globally, particularly 
in the US, have contributed to a slightly 
lower New Zealand dollar exchange rate 
than assumed at the time of the February 
Statement (figure 2.7). All else being equal, 
a lower New Zealand dollar exchange rate 
leads to higher import prices and increases 
in exporters’ returns in New Zealand dollars. 
Higher global inflation also directly increases 
the prices of our imported goods and 
services. World prices for our imports were 
higher in the December 2023 quarter than 
assumed in the February Statement, and this 
is assumed to persist into the medium term. 
These factors mean tradables inflation in 
New Zealand is now assumed to be higher 
over the medium term than assumed in the 
February Statement (figure 2.8). 
Global shipping costs increased sharply late 
last year in response to attacks on container 
ships in the Red Sea and disruptions in 
the Panama Canal. While they have since 
declined, they remain significantly higher 
than they were a year ago. The increases in 
shipping costs are assumed to pass through 
to New Zealand import prices with a lag (see 
chapter 4.1 of the February Statement).
Export prices have declined substantially 
over the past two years, but a recovery in 
global dairy prices in recent months has 
contributed to higher prices for our export 
basket as a whole. Increased demand 
from many of our export destinations has 
supported the improvement in dairy prices, 
and is also being reflected in higher prices 
for seafood, forestry and horticulture. These 
have been partly offset by low lamb prices. 
Export prices are assumed to be supported 
by improved trading partner income over the 
medium term. However, the slightly higher 
outlook for export prices is more than offset 
by higher import prices over the medium 
term, and this results in a weaker outlook for 
New Zealand’s terms of trade.
Figure 2.8
Tradables inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.7
New Zealand dollar TWI 
(nominal)
Source: RBNZ.


14
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Figure 2.9
Contributions to CPI inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for inflation over 
the medium term.
Headline inflation has declined, 
but domestic inflation has declined 
by less than expected
Annual CPI inflation declined to 4.0 percent 
in the March 2024 quarter. While this was 
much lower than the 4.7 percent in the 
previous quarter, it remained above the 
MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target band and slightly 
higher than expected at the time of the 
February Statement. Although both tradables 
and non-tradables inflation contributed to the 
decline in headline CPI inflation, the decline 
was primarily accounted for by tradables 
(figure 2.9). 
Annual tradables inflation declined to 
1.6 percent in the March 2024 quarter, 
slightly higher than the 1.5 percent expected. 
However, annual non-tradables inflation 
declined only slightly to 5.8 percent, which 
was higher than the 5.3 percent expected. 
While inflation has broadly declined as 
expected over the past year, non-tradables 
inflation has generally remained higher than 
expected while tradables inflation has been 
slightly lower than expected (figure 2.10).
Higher-than-assumed non-tradables inflation 
in the March 2024 quarter was accounted 
for by individually small – but collectively 
significant – upside surprises across many 
parts of the CPI basket. The broad-based 
nature of this inflation is consistent with the 
declines in most measures of core inflation 
slowing or stalling in the March 2024 quarter 
(figure 2.11). Higher-than-assumed non-
tradables inflation in an environment of weak 
economic activity, flat to falling productivity 
and declining inflation expectations has led 
us to review our assessment of capacity 
pressures in the economy, as discussed 
further in box A.
Figure 2.10
Contributions to annual CPI forecast error
(one quarter ahead)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.11
Headline and core inflation measures
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for inflation over 
the medium term.


15
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Box A: 
Assessing capacity 
pressures in the 
New Zealand 
economy
Non-tradables inflation captures changes 
in prices for goods and services that are 
less exposed to international competition, 
and more influenced by domestic factors. 
Although annual non-tradables inflation has 
declined over the past year, at 5.8 percent in 
the March 2024 quarter it remains elevated 
compared to history and higher than 
anticipated in previous Statements.
Stronger domestic inflation could 
mean that capacity pressures have 
been higher in recent quarters 
than previously assumed
In our core forecasting model, non-tradables 
inflation is driven by three broad factors:
•	 the degree to which demand in the 
economy is putting pressure on available 
resources (known as the ‘output gap’ – 
the difference between actual output and 
what the economy can supply sustainably);
•	 pricing behaviour1; and
•	 other developments affecting specific 
sectors, such as insurance premiums after 
Cyclone Gabrielle. 
Various measures of inflation expectations 
have declined in recent quarters as headline 
CPI inflation has eased (figure A.1). As 
discussed in more detail in chapter 4.1, some 
specific components, such as insurance and 
local authority rates, have contributed to 
elevated non-tradables inflation over the past 
year. However, the broad-based resilience 
in non-tradables inflation in conjunction 
with falling inflation expectations suggest 
that the output gap may have been higher 
than assumed at the time of the February 
1	
Pricing behaviour i.e. wage- and price-setting behaviour, which captures inflation expectations, wages and inflation persistence.
Statement. This is despite actual economic 
growth being slightly lower in the second half 
of 2023 than previously expected.
The output gap is unobservable, so we rely 
on a broad range of indicators to give us a 
steer on the degree of capacity pressures in 
the economy at any point in time (figure A.2). 
These indicators suggest that the output 
gap has declined from around 3 percent of 
potential output at the start of 2023 to around 
zero currently.
Figure A.1
Business inflation expectations
(annual, years ahead)
Source: RBNZ’s Survey of Expectations (Business).
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for inflation over the 
medium term.
Figure A.2
Output gap and indicator suite
(share of potential GDP, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, NZIER, MBIE, RBNZ estimates.


16
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Another way in which we can estimate 
the degree of capacity pressures in the 
economy is by using our core forecasting 
model, New Zealand Structural Inflation 
Model (NZSIM), to assess the extent that 
non-tradables inflation can be explained by 
macroeconomic forces. Figure A.3 shows 
the modelled explanation of non-tradables 
inflation in the February Statement. The red 
bars show how much cannot be explained by 
the other variables in the model. If these red 
bars are consistently positive or negative for 
a period, this may indicate that our assumed 
output gap is too high or too low. Over the past 
three years, these bars had been consistently 
positive. While some of this can be explained 
by known idiosyncratic factors – such as 
the extreme under-supply of some building 
materials in New Zealand during the pandemic 
– they had remained elevated, suggesting our 
assumed output gap may have been too low. 
Figure A.4 shows the same modelled 
explanation from the current central projection, 
where the output gap has been revised higher 
(from -0.9 percent to -0.3 percent of potential 
GDP in the March 2024 quarter). While a 
large part of the March 2024 non-tradables 
outturn remains unexplained by NZSIM, the 
‘unexplained’ bars have been much smaller 
over recent years. 
One reason that weak economic growth may 
not have translated into much lower capacity 
pressures is that declining productivity has 
reduced the speed at which the economy can 
grow without generating inflation (figure A.5). 
Very weak productivity growth in recent years 
likely reflects a range of factors, including 
the significant disruptions to the process of 
matching workers with jobs, and shifts in the 
composition of economic output experienced 
during the pandemic. While declining 
productivity has contributed to particularly 
subdued growth in potential output over the 
past year, productivity growth has been weak 
for many years.2 Sustained lower productivity 
growth, or further deterioration, would 
contribute to lower growth in potential output 
over time, resulting in lower real incomes and 
wellbeing, and imposing a lower ‘speed limit’ 
on the economy.
2	
See Treasury (2024), ‘The productivity slowdown: implications 
for the Treasury’s forecasts and projections’ for discussion of 
New Zealand’s poor productivity growth since the global financial crisis.
Figure A.4
Modelled explanation of non-tradables 
inflation in the central projection
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Figure A.3
Modelled explanation of non-tradables 
inflation in the February 2024 Statement
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Figure A.5
Productivity growth
(annual, March years)
Source: Stats NZ.


17
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Given that potential GDP and the output 
gap are unobservable, there is no single 
approach that can accurately estimate these 
variables at any given time. This is why 
we use a range of approaches, including 
models and our output gap indicator 
suite, to provide a steer on how capacity 
pressures have evolved. We also review our 
assumptions regularly. 
Overall, low growth in productivity and 
potential output mean greater capacity 
pressures in the economy and a slower 
decline in non-tradables inflation over 2024 
than assumed in the February Statement 
(figure 2.12). Non-tradables inflation is lower 
in the latter part of the projection. This 
is because of a lower output gap due to 
higher interest rates, and the expectation 
that price- and wage-setting behaviour 
becomes consistent with a low inflationary 
environment slightly more quickly than 
previously assumed once headline inflation 
is within the 1 to 3 percent target band. 
When combined with the outlook for slightly 
higher tradables inflation, this means that 
the outlook for annual CPI inflation is a more 
gradual decline towards the midpoint of the 
target band (figure 2.13). Annual headline 
CPI inflation is assumed to return to within 
the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target band by 
the December 2024 quarter, and to the 
2 percent target midpoint by the June 2026 
quarter. 
Figure 2.13
CPI inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for inflation over 
the medium term.
Figure 2.12
Non-tradables inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


18
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Monetary policy outlook
Conditional on the central economic outlook, 
we expect that the OCR will need to remain 
at a restrictive level for longer than assumed 
in the February Statement (figure 2.14), in 
order for inflation to return to the 2 percent 
target midpoint in a similar timeframe to what 
was assumed in the February Statement. 
The higher outlook for the OCR than in the 
February Statement reflects the higher 
starting point for non-tradables inflation 
and capacity pressures, as well as a higher 
medium-term outlook for tradables inflation 
based on higher import prices, higher global 
interest rates and the lower New Zealand 
dollar exchange rate. In addition, our 
assumption for the nominal long-run neutral 
interest rate has been revised from 2.50 
to 2.75 percent, based on increases in the 
Reserve Bank’s suite of neutral interest rate 
indicators. While the higher neutral rate 
is not assumed to require an immediate 
monetary policy response, it affects where 
the OCR is assumed to settle at the end of 
the projection. These factors are only partly 
offset by an assumption that businesses’ 
wage- and price-setting behaviour 
normalises slightly more quickly once 
headline inflation is within the 1 to 3 percent 
target band. 
Figure 2.14
Official Cash Rate
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


19
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Ōkārito, West Coast. Photo: Andre Castaing
Chapter 
03
Global 
developments 
and outlook


20
Chapter 3. Global developments and outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Chapter 3.
Global developments 
and outlook
This chapter outlines recent global developments as of 16 May 
2024. 
Growth across New Zealand’s key trading 
partners remains below trend and is 
expected to slow slightly further over 2024 
as restrictive monetary policy continues 
to moderate economic activity. However, 
economic activity in some economies, such 
as the US and China, has been stronger 
than expected so far this year. This has 
fed through to an increase in 2024 growth 
expectations. 
Global headline and core inflation have 
continued to decline over recent months, 
although headline inflation remains above 
central bank inflation targets in most 
advanced economies. Services inflation 
continues to decline slowly across major 
economies but is expected to ease further 
over the rest of 2024. Labour markets 
remain robust, with unemployment rates still 
low compared to pre-COVID-19 averages, 
although labour demand continues to ease. 
Major central banks have kept their policy 
rates unchanged in recent months. In 
response to some stronger-than-expected 
economic data, financial market participants 
now expect a more gradual pace in easing 
monetary policy settings. As a result, global 
sovereign yields have increased while global 
equity prices have changed little since the 
February Statement as global risk sentiment 
remains strong.  
Global economic activity is below 
trend but remains resilient to high 
interest rates 
Economic growth remains below trend for 
many of our trading partners (figure 3.1). 
However, some stronger-than-expected 
activity data since the beginning of the 
year have increased some near-term 
expectations for growth, particularly in the 
US and China. Growth in New Zealand’s 
key trading partners is expected to be 
2.8 percent in 2024, slightly below the 
3.0 percent growth of 2023. 
Figure 3.1
Key trading partner GDP forecasts
(index=100 in Q4 2022)
Source: Consensus Economics, Haver Analytics, RBNZ estimates.
Note: GDP forecasts are based on Consensus Economics estimates, except New Zealand’s 
which is based on our current projection.


21
Chapter 3. Global developments and outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Figure 3.2
Key trading partner unemployment rates
(unemployed people as a share of the labour force, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Haver Analytics, Stats NZ.
Economic growth in the US has remained 
strong, but is expected to moderate over 
the rest of this year. Real GDP increased by 
3.0 percent in the year to the March 2024 
quarter and is expected to increase by 
2.3 percent over 2024. Recent economic 
activity in the US has been supported in 
part by households saving less to support 
consumption. More broadly, the US economy 
has been resilient to high interest rates given 
a combination of factors such as stimulatory 
fiscal policy, a sharper drawdown of excess 
savings and stronger productivity growth 
compared to other advanced economies. 
Economic activity in China was stronger 
than expected at the start of this year. GDP 
increased by 5.3 percent in the year to the 
March 2024 quarter as robust investment 
growth in the manufacturing sector and 
improving household consumption offset 
continued weak activity in the property 
sector. The improvement in overall economic 
activity appears to have reduced the need 
for further material fiscal or monetary policy 
stimulus in the near term. However, a weak 
housing market, low levels of consumer 
confidence and elevated debt levels remain 
key challenges for China’s growth outlook. 
China’s economy is expected to expand 
4.8 percent over 2024, slightly less than the 
Government’s target of around 5.0 percent 
growth. 
In Australia, annual GDP growth slowed to 
2.1 percent in the December 2023 quarter, 
accounted for by slower growth in household 
consumption and government spending. 
The Australian economy is expected to grow 
1.4 percent over 2024 as high interest rates 
continue to weigh on economic activity. 
The euro area economy expanded 
0.4 percent in the year to the March 2024 
quarter. Although low, this was stronger than 
expected, suggesting that growth is starting 
to recover after contracting in the second 
half of 2023 in response to high inflation 
and tighter monetary policy. The euro area is 
expected to grow 0.5 percent in 2024.
Global labour markets continue to 
ease, but remain robust
Unemployment rates in advanced economies 
have increased from historical lows but 
are still below pre-COVID-19 averages 
(figure 3.2). Labour demand continues to 
decline, although the pace of this decline has 
slowed in some economies. Labour markets 
are expected to continue easing gradually 
over 2024. 
The unemployment rates in the US, euro 
area and Australia have remained stable 
over recent months. High immigration rates 
across several of New Zealand’s key trading 
partners have supported an increase in 
labour supply. As restrictive interest rates 
continue to feed through to a decline in 
aggregate demand, labour demand has also 
eased. Both factors have brought the labour 
market back to a better balance following 
labour shortages during the COVID-19 
period. Easing labour market conditions 
are feeding through to slower wage growth 
across most advanced economies, although 
this moderation appears to be occurring 
faster in the US than elsewhere.
 


22
Chapter 3. Global developments and outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Global inflation continues to 
decline
Headline inflation has continued to decline 
across advanced economies and is now 
between 2.0 and 4.0 percent in most of 
New Zealand’s key trading partners. In China, 
headline inflation remains low at 0.3 percent 
(figure 3.3). Core inflation – inflation excluding 
food and energy – has also continued to 
decline but remains higher than headline 
inflation in most major economies, due to 
high services inflation (figure 3.4). 
Disinflation to date has primarily been driven 
by lower goods, energy and food inflation. 
Services inflation, which tends to be a 
good gauge for domestically-generated 
inflation, has remained high across advanced 
economies. The slow disinflation of services 
has been driven by high wage growth and a 
shift in demand away from goods to services 
following the pandemic. In the US, annual 
services inflation has remained largely 
unchanged over 2024 at around 5.3 percent. 
Services inflation is declining slowly in 
New Zealand’s other key trading partners. 
Figure 3.3
Headline inflation for key trading partners 
(annual)
Source: Haver Analytics, Stats NZ.
Note: Data are monthly, except for Australia and New Zealand, which only publish official 
inflation data quarterly.
Figure 3.4
Inflation excluding food and energy 
for key trading partners 
(annual)
Source: Haver Analytics, Stats NZ.
Note: Data are monthly, except for Australia and New Zealand, which only publish official 
inflation data quarterly.


23
Chapter 3. Global developments and outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Figure 3.5
Market-implied path of policy rates
(annual)
Source: Bloomberg.
Figure 3.6
2-year sovereign yields
Source: Bloomberg.
Financial markets expect some 
central bank policy rates to decline 
more slowly
Most major central banks have left their 
policy rates unchanged since the February 
Statement. Many central banks continue to 
view their policy stances as restrictive and 
have communicated the importance of taking 
data-driven approaches to policy decisions. 
Some central banks have also said they will 
need to be confident that inflation is returning 
sustainably to target before easing policy 
rates. 
Overall, financial market participants are 
expecting central banks to ease monetary 
policy more gradually than previously 
anticipated. This largely reflects the 
resilience in global economic activity and 
inflation so far this year. However, the 
pace and extent of monetary policy easing 
currently implied by market pricing differ 
across regions (figure 3.5). Market pricing 
currently suggests that market participants 
expect the European Central Bank (ECB) 
to lower its policy rate by 70 basis points 
this year,  and a more moderate 45 basis 
point decline is expected from the Federal 
Reserve (Fed). This compares to the 90 and 
70 basis points of cuts expected in 2024 
from the ECB and the Fed, respectively, at 
the time of the February Statement. Further, 
in light of slower-than-expected disinflation 
in Australia in early 2024, market participants 
are no longer expecting the Reserve Bank 
of Australia (RBA) to ease its policy rates 
this year, compared to the 40 basis point 
reduction expected at the time of the 
February Statement. 
In March, the Bank of Japan (BoJ) increased 
its policy rate for the first time since 2007 
and announced an end to its Yield Curve 
Control Programme. The policy rate was 
increased by 10 basis points to a range of 
0.0 to 0.1 percent. The move came after the 
Japanese spring wage negotiations resulted 
in higher-than-expected pay increases, 
providing confidence that inflation is more 
likely to remain close to target after several 
decades of very low inflation. 
Global sovereign yields have 
increased
Expectations for fewer policy interest rate 
cuts have driven an increase in sovereign 
yields since the February Statement. Over 
this period, US 2-year and 10-year Treasury 
yields have increased by 20 and 30 basis 
points respectively (figure 3.6). This trend has 
been similar across advanced economies. 
Stronger-than-expected economic activity 
and inflation data have led to expectations 
that policy rates will decline more slowly 
over coming years, particularly in the 
US. The recent increase in US sovereign 
yields has fed through to higher yields in 
other advanced economies, despite some 
divergence in economic data and monetary 
policy expectations across regions. 


24
Chapter 3. Global developments and outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Global risk sentiment remains 
strong
Global equity prices have broadly remained 
the same since the February Statement but 
remain higher than they were at the start of 
the year (figure 3.7). Strong earnings results, 
particularly in the technology sector in the 
US, have continued to support equity prices. 
However, this has largely been offset by the 
effects of higher expectations for central 
bank policy rates over recent months, which 
have placed downward pressure on global 
equity prices. Despite some volatility in global 
equity markets, equity risk premia remain low 
across advanced economies.3 In addition, 
credit and funding market conditions remain 
favourable, particularly given the higher-
interest-rate environment. Market pricing 
across a range of asset classes currently 
indicates that investors remain optimistic 
about the global economic outlook. 
Oil prices increased in March in response 
to continued OPEC+ supply cuts and 
expectations of a tighter oil market in 2024 
(figure 3.8). Since then, prices have declined 
to levels similar to those of the February 
Statement, indicating the limited impact of 
the ongoing geopolitical tensions in the 
Middle East. Despite increases in the number 
of crossings through the Panama Canal 
following a period of drought, shipping costs 
are still elevated compared to historical 
levels, reflecting the ongoing disruptions to 
travel in the Red Sea.
3	
Equity risk premia is the compensation equity investors demand for risk compared to safer investments.
Figure 3.7
Global equity prices
(index=100 on 1 January 2020)
Source: Bloomberg.
Figure 3.8
Dubai oil price
Source: Bloomberg.


25
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Aoraki. Photo: Nele McHattie
Chapter 
04
Special 
topics


26
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Chapter 4. 
Special topics 
Before the publication of each Statement, the Monetary Policy 
Committee is provided with analyses of some topical issues. 
Topics for the May Statement included:
1.	 Non-tradables inflation in New Zealand
2.	 Recent trends in New Zealand’s exporting sector	  
Special topics in the past 12 months
Topic
Date/publication
The effect of higher shipping costs on inflation and  
the OCR
February 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)
The effect of the Government’s proposed policies on 
monetary policy
February 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)
Monetary policy transmission lags
November 2023 Statement (Chapter 4)
The inflationary impact of recent migration
August 2023 Statement (Chapter 4)
Factors contributing to New Zealand’s current account 
deficit and outlook
August 2023 Statement (Chapter 4)
The recovery in international tourism over the  
2022/23 summer
May 2023 Statement (Chapter 4)
Have inflation expectations become more sensitive  
to higher inflation?
May 2023 Statement (Chapter 4)


27
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Non-tradables inflation in New Zealand
4	
Core inflation represents pricing pressures that are likely to persist once temporary shocks have unwound (Orr, 2024).
Summary
•	 ‘Non-tradables’ goods and services 
are those that have low exposure to 
international competition. Non-tradables 
make up around 60 percent of the CPI 
basket. 
•	 Non-tradables inflation is influenced 
primarily by domestic factors and 
tends to move relatively closely to core 
inflation. This makes it an important 
metric to monitor regarding the speed 
and sustainability with which the MPC is 
meeting its medium-term inflation target.  
•	 Non-tradables inflation remained broad 
based in the March 2024 quarter and 
declines have slowed in recent quarters. 
Inflation remains high across all services 
subgroups.
•	 So far, monetary policy has reduced non-
tradables inflation primarily through areas 
most responsive to monetary policy, 
especially housing and construction 
costs. In the near term, the main 
contributor to further declines in non-
tradables inflation is expected to be a 
declining rate of market services inflation. 
This will likely be due to a weakening 
labour market and lower spending 
growth.
•	 The pace of disinflation will be tempered 
by some relative price increases in 
categories with slower responses to 
monetary policy. Subgroups with slower 
responses to monetary policy are now 
contributing more to inflation than other 
subgroups.    
Non-tradables inflation is mainly 
affected by domestic capacity 
pressures and pricing behaviour 
Headline inflation can be broken down into 
tradables and non-tradables inflation. While 
tradables inflation is often driven by changes 
in international prices and exchange rates, 
non-tradables inflation is mainly affected 
by domestic capacity pressure and price 
and wage setting behavior. As such, non-
tradables inflation is largely driven by 
domestic demand and supply rather than 
global developments.
Non-tradables inflation moves closely 
in line with core inflation4 (figure 4.1) and 
tends to be more persistent than tradables 
inflation. Moreover, non-tradables items 
account for around 60 percent of the CPI 
basket. Therefore, understanding the 
factors influencing non-tradables inflation is 
important for monetary policy decisions.
Figure 4.1 
Inflation subgroups vs core inflation
(annual, deviation from post-2000 average)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


28
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Non-tradables inflation has 
broadened
Sharp increases in non-tradables inflation 
over 2021 and early 2022 were largely due 
to housing-related price increases. Housing 
costs surged through this period as strong 
demand and constrained labour supply 
contributed to a rapid increase in home 
construction costs.
Excess demand and higher inflation 
expectations resulted in price increases 
broadening over 2022/23 to other non-
tradables. These included administered 
goods and services and market services 
prices (figure 4.2). 
The decline in housing-related 
inflation is slowing
Construction bottlenecks began unwinding in 
the latter part of 2022. Residential investment 
activity also began slowing in late 2022 
primarily in response to higher interest 
rates. As a result, slower price increases 
in construction accounted for much of the 
decline in the housing costs component 
of non-tradables inflation. Given the large 
weight for housing costs in the CPI basket 
(21 percent), this also accounted for most of 
the decline in overall non-tradables inflation. 
Even though housing-related inflation is 
getting closer to its pre-pandemic level, the 
rental component remained historically high 
in the March 2024 quarter (figure 4.3). Rent 
inflation is likely to remain high in the near 
term, as strong migration-led population 
growth adds to housing demand while new 
dwelling construction slows. However, over 
time, lower growth in nominal household 
incomes and slowing population growth are 
likely to contribute to slowing rental inflation.
Figure 4.2
Contributions to non-tradables inflation by category
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: We decompose non-tradables inflation into high-level groups. “Housing costs” 
includes actual rentals for housing, home ownership and property maintenance costs, 
“administered goods and services” includes property rates and related services, alcoholic 
beverages and tobacco, health services and other administered services, “market services” 
includes restaurant meals and ready-to-eat food, household energy, insurance and other 
market services, while “other non-tradables” include other subgroups that are not included 
in previous categories.
Figure 4.3
Contributions to housing costs inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


29
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Declines in market services 
inflation are likely to support a 
slowing in non-tradables inflation
Market services inflation is likely to slow 
over the coming year, with declines likely 
to be most material in subgroups that are 
relatively responsive to monetary policy 
tightening (box B). Broadly, these are areas 
more affected by cut-backs in discretionary 
spending as the labour market eases and 
income growth slows. However, the ongoing 
recovery in international tourism may prolong 
price growth in some categories related to 
hospitality. 
Dwelling, contents and vehicle insurance 
premiums have increased steeply in 
response to severe property damage from 
the Auckland anniversary floods and Cyclone 
Gabrielle in 2023 (figure 4.4). The cost of 
global reinsurance has also risen as the scale 
and frequency of severe weather events 
have increased. More frequent severe 
weather events due to climate change will 
present further upside risks to insurance 
costs in coming years.
Energy price increases are likely as 
electricity network revenue will be reset 
by the Commerce Commission in April 
2025.5 This will partly reflect the increased 
investment associated with a transition to 
more renewable power and a lower carbon 
economy, although this will be spread over 
some time.
5	
Commerce Commission - 2025 reset of the electricity default price-quality path (comcom.govt.nz)
 
Figure 4.4
Contributions to market services inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 4.5
Contributions to administered goods and services
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


30
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Administered goods and services 
inflation is likely to ease
Inflation rates for administered items are 
currently elevated (figure 4.5), but are 
expected to decline over the medium 
term. Tobacco and alcohol excise taxes are 
indexed to the CPI (excluding credit services), 
so inflation in these categories is likely to 
decline with a lag. 
Property rates and related services inflation is 
an exception. Specifically, council rates have 
increased steeply over the past year and 
are likely to rise significantly this year. Local 
governments have recently proposed large 
increases to make up for shortfalls in revenue 
and an underinvestment in infrastructure 
spending in the past. Inflation has also meant 
that rate increases in recent years have been 
lower than expected in real terms. While 
lower general inflationary pressures should 
feed through into rate rises over time (e.g. 
via labour and material costs), relatively high 
inflation in council rates may persist if council 
expenditure requirements continue to grow 
or implementation delays increase costs. 
The slow decline in administered goods 
and services inflation is consistent with 
our analysis that monetary policy has a 
relatively slow pass through to many of the 
components of this group (box B).
Conclusion
This analysis of non-tradables inflation 
suggests that while it will decrease, there 
are some factors that may slow the pace 
of decline. Relative price growth in some 
categories less responsive to monetary 
policy, in particular insurance, household 
energy and administered goods and 
services, is likely to temper the pace of 
overall non-tradables disinflation.  
Monetary policy must remain restrictive to 
ensure that capacity pressures ease and 
price and wage setting behaviour normalise, 
to return inflation to the target midpoint in a 
reasonable timeframe.
Box B: 
Monetary policy 
responsiveness of  
non-tradables subgroups
6	
It is challenging to isolate monetary policy’s impact on inflation, because monetary 
policy is set in response to changes in the inflation outlook. We controlled for 
this in our analysis by estimating the effects of monetary policy ‘shocks’. Shocks 
refer to changes in monetary policy that are independent of other changes to the 
inflation outlook (see chapter 4.1 in the November 2023 Statement).
We recently conducted an analysis to understand the 
effects of OCR changes on different non-tradables 
subgroups. For this, we estimated the response 
across these subgroups to an unanticipated change 
of 100 basis points in the OCR over 12 quarters.6 This 
exercise helped us to compare each subgroup by its 
responsiveness to OCR changes. Our sample consisted 
of 29 CPI non-tradables subgroups for the period 2006 
to 2023.
We ranked subgroups by their monetary policy 
responsiveness and sorted them into three main 
groups: highly, medium and less responsive groups. 
This grouping was based on how statistically significant 
the reaction to the OCR change was. Table B.1 indicates 
some of the CPI components in each responsiveness 
group. 
Table B.1
Non-tradables subgroups by their 
responsiveness to a monetary policy shock
Highly 
responsive
Medium 
responsive
Less responsive
Passenger 
transportation 
services
Restaurant meals 
and ready-to-eat 
food
Property rates 
and related 
services
Home ownership 
(home 
construction)
Actual rentals for 
housing
Recreational and 
cultural services
Other 
miscellaneous 
services
Insurance
Property 
maintenance
Household 
energy


31
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Recent trends in New Zealand’s exporting sector
 
Summary
7	
See Fabling and Sanderson (2013), Conway (2018) and the Productivity Hub (2018).
•	 Exports are a key driver of economic 
growth and account for about a quarter 
of economic activity in New Zealand. 
Assumptions around trend export 
volumes as a share of potential output 
therefore have an important influence 
on our forecasts.
•	 In our forecasts, export volumes are 
affected by a range of temporary and 
cyclical factors, before returning to 
an assumed long-run percentage of 
potential GDP. Goods exports as a 
share of potential GDP have steadily 
declined over the past decade and are 
now well below our previous long-
run trend assumption. In the following 
section, we focus on recent and future 
trends for goods exports only, while 
we assume trends for services exports 
are similar to those in the February 
Statement. 
•	 Recent trends in goods exports 
suggest that supply constraints, such 
as tighter environmental restrictions, 
and uncertainty around securing 
beneficial trade agreements make it 
unlikely that New Zealand’s goods 
exports will increase as much as 
previously assumed. 
•	 In our projections, the weaker outlook 
for goods exports over the longer 
term does not materially change the 
amount of inflationary pressure in the 
economy. Resources that will not be 
used to produce exports – including 
labour and capital – are assumed to be 
deployed elsewhere in the economy. 
To the extent that this reallocation 
results in lower productivity growth, 
this contributes to lower potential GDP 
growth, but little change to anticipated 
capacity pressure.7
•	 Slow growth in goods export volumes 
contributes to a wider current account 
deficit in these projections. A wider 
current account deficit increases 
the risk of a depreciation of the real 
New Zealand dollar exchange rate 
over the medium term, although our 
net foreign liabilities are projected 
to remain at a low level compared to 
recent decades.


32
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Our approach to forecasting 
goods exports
Goods and services exports comprise 
around 25 percent of New Zealand’s 
GDP with about 70 percent goods and 30 
percent services. Trends in exports influence 
aggregate demand, capacity pressures, 
external balances, incomes and employment. 
Consequently, exports are an important 
factor in our forecasts. 
In our forecasts, export volumes are 
influenced by a range of temporary and 
cyclical factors, but return to an assumed 
long-run trend as a percentage of potential 
GDP. The long-run assumption as a 
percentage of potential GDP reflects the 
fact that we see the economy returning to its 
steady state. However, over the past decade 
goods exports as a share of potential GDP 
have steadily declined, and they are now 
significantly below our previous long-run 
assumption. While services exports have 
increased slightly during the same time, they 
offset only a small portion of the decline in 
goods exports.  
We have assessed trends underpinning 
New Zealand’s goods export performance 
to help inform an appropriate level for our 
long-run export assumptions. While services 
exports, including international tourism to 
New Zealand, declined sharply following 
border closures during the COVID-19 
pandemic, they have recovered broadly in 
line with our expectations over the past year. 
In contrast, goods export volumes, on which 
we focus in this analysis, have been broadly 
unchanged since 2019, following several 
decades of relatively steady growth. 
Goods export trends appear to 
have changed  
New Zealand’s goods exports as a share of 
potential GDP have been on a consistent 
downward trend over the past decade, 
from their 2013 peak of 22 percent to about 
18 percent in the December 2023 quarter 
(figure 4.6). The average annual growth rate 
of New Zealand goods exports has fallen 
from 4 to 5 percent in the late 1990s and 
early 2000s, to 2.5 to 3.5 percent in the 
2010s.
Figure 4.6
Real goods exports
(share of potential GDP)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


33
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Growth of our trading partners is 
expected to slow 
There are several reasons to think that we 
may not expect a significant reversal of the 
growth in goods exports and reversal of 
of the declining ratio of goods exports to 
potential GDP. The projected annual GDP 
growth of our trading partners is expected 
to be lower than it was prior to the COVID-19 
pandemic. Most notably, China – our 
largest trading partner – has a lower growth 
outlook compared to recent decades. Lower 
projected growth is likely to reduce the 
growth in demand for New Zealand’s exports 
over time (figure 4.7). 
Outlook for free trade agreements 
and environmental protections 
weigh on goods exports
As New Zealand is a small open economy, 
the removal of trade barriers is important in 
making its exports competitive in the global 
market and supporting the growth of our 
exports. However, the global pace of trade 
liberalisation has slowed since the global 
financial crisis as some countries have 
sought to protect local industries, particularly 
manufacturing. The outlook for the further 
removal of trade barriers for New Zealand 
in other markets, such as through free trade 
agreements (FTAs), is also uncertain.  
The physical effects of climate change and 
our transition towards greater environmental 
protections to reduce them will likely 
continue to affect exporting industries. 
New Zealand’s key export industries include 
agricultural goods, such as dairy and meat, 
which will face strong headwinds from climate 
change and have had to comply with tighter 
environmental regulations in recent years. We 
assume environmental regulations will not 
ease in the medium term and will therefore 
provide some constraint on goods exports. 
The disruption caused by the physical effects 
of climate change on these industries is 
also expected to weigh on production over 
the medium term, although adaptation and 
innovation may mitigate some of these 
risks over the longer term. New Zealand 
goods export producers are also not alone 
in facing climate risks and environmental 
protection policies, with producers in most 
other countries facing similar constraints. 
This means that the overall impact of these 
factors on the global prices for these goods 
may mitigate some of the effects on overall 
exporter incomes over the longer term.
Overall, these trends suggest that medium-
term export growth will likely be lower than 
has been assumed previously. Our analysis 
suggests it is unlikely that goods exports 
will grow at a materially faster rate than the 
rest of the economy over the medium term 
(figure 4.8).
Figure 4.7
Projected average GDP growth
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, OECD, IMF World Economic Outlook.
Figure 4.8
Goods exports
(share of potential GDP)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


34
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Our findings support a lower 
goods export trend
The weaker outlook for goods exports over 
the longer term is not assumed to materially 
change the amount of inflationary pressure 
in the economy. This is because we have 
assumed that those resources that will not 
be used for goods export production will be 
largely reallocated elsewhere (for example, 
labour and capital could be moved into 
industries producing for domestic demand). 
To the extent that this reallocation results in 
lower productivity growth, it contributes to 
lower potential GDP growth.
Slow growth in export volumes contributes 
to a wider current account deficit in these 
projections. A wider current account deficit 
increases the risk of a depreciation of the 
real New Zealand dollar exchange rate over 
the medium term, although our net foreign 
liabilities are assumed to remain at a low 
level compared to recent decades in these 
projections.
Over longer-term horizons, we would expect 
economic adjustments to occur across a 
number of dimensions, including via the 
exchange rate and domestic relative price 
adjustments. These price adjustments will 
help with the reallocation of resources, 
such as a potential shift of resources to the 
provision of service exports. 


35
Chapter 5. Domestic financial conditions. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Domestic 
financial 
conditions
Chapter 
05
Smaills Beach. Photo: Rachael Grant


36
Chapter 5. Domestic financial conditions. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Chapter 5.
Domestic financial conditions
Monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation by 
influencing financial conditions in New Zealand. These financial 
conditions include the interest rates at which households and 
businesses save and borrow, the exchange rate, and other 
factors such as credit availability. This chapter outlines recent 
developments in financial conditions in New Zealand as at 
16 May 2024.
8	
When interest rate curves are inverted, this means that longer-term 
interest rates are lower than shorter-term interest rates.
Financial conditions have loosened slightly 
since the February Statement. Mortgage 
rates and term deposit rates have fallen at 
all horizons. Wholesale interest rates such 
as swap rates, which have been volatile 
over recent months, have decreased at all 
terms compared to immediately before the 
February Statement.
One reason for the slightly loosened financial 
conditions is that market participants’ 
expectations for upcoming OCR decisions 
are lower than they were immediately before 
the February Statement (figure 5.1). As of 
16 May 2024, market pricing indicates that 
market participants expect the first 25-basis-
point OCR cut to occur in November 2024 
and a further two 25-basis-point cuts to occur 
by April 2025. 
Domestic wholesale interest rates, such as 
those for interest rate swaps, have been 
volatile since the February Statement. They 
have decreased at all terms as market 
participants have reassessed the path of 
future OCR moves (figure 5.2). The 2-year 
swap rate has decreased by around 30 basis 
points, consistent with lower near-term 
OCR expectations, and the 10-year swap 
rate has decreased by around 20 basis 
points. Following these moves, the interest 
rate swap curve is less inverted than it was 
immediately before the February Statement.8 
Figure 5.1
Market expectations for the OCR 
Source: Bloomberg.
Note: The blue line shows market expectations for the OCR immediately before the February 
Statement. Each data point represents market expectations of the level of the OCR at a given 
point in the future, as measured by overnight indexed swap pricing.
Source: Bloomberg.
Note: Interest rate swap rates are wholesale interest rates often used as a benchmark 
by financial institutions in setting other interest rates in the economy. They represent the 
fixed interest rate that one party to the swap agreement receives in exchange for paying a 
floating rate to the other party for the duration of the agreement.  
Figure 5.2
New Zealand interest rate swap rates
(terms in years)


37
Chapter 5. Domestic financial conditions. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
The New Zealand dollar exchange rate has 
moved lower on a trade-weighted basis 
since the February Statement (figure 5.3). 
Expected interest rates in New Zealand 
remain higher than those of some of our key 
trading partners. However, the continued 
strength of the US economy relative to the 
New Zealand economy has meant that 
the differences in expected interest rates 
between the US and New Zealand have 
decreased. The differences in expected 
interest rates between Australia and 
New Zealand have also decreased. This has 
reduced the attractiveness of New Zealand 
for overseas investors looking for the 
highest relative returns, putting downward 
pressure on the New Zealand dollar. More 
generally, the US dollar has been strong 
against a range of major global currencies 
over recent months.
Mortgage rates have declined slightly 
since the February Statement (figure 5.4). 
Decreases in wholesale rates have been 
larger than the decreases in mortgage rates. 
This means that spreads between mortgage 
rates and wholesale rates have increased 
since the February Statement (figure 5.5).
Source: RBNZ.
Figure 5.3
New Zealand dollar TWI
(nominal)
Source: interest.co.nz.
Note: The mortgage rates shown are the average of the latest advertised fixed-term rates on 
offer from ANZ, ASB, BNZ and Westpac for mortgages with a loan-to-value ratio of less than 
80%. 
Figure 5.4
New Zealand mortgage rates
Figure 5.5
New Zealand 1- and 2-year mortgage rates 
as a spread to equivalent swap rates
Source: interest.co.nz, Bloomberg.


38
Chapter 5. Domestic financial conditions. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Interest rates on term deposits, which make 
up a large share of banks’ core funding, 
are slightly lower at all terms. The spread 
between the six-month term deposit rate 
and the equivalent wholesale rate is around 
the same level as at the start of 2024 
(figure 5.6). This spread, which has been 
on a broad upward trend since the start of 
2023, remains lower than its pre-pandemic 
average, holding down the cost of bank 
funding. Bank funding costs are likely to 
increase over the medium term, with banks 
expected to compete more aggressively for 
customer deposits as accommodative bank 
funding conditions continue to fade.
Source: interest.co.nz, Bloomberg.
Note: The term deposit rate shown is the average of the latest 6-month term rates on offer 
from ANZ, ASB, BNZ and Westpac. The 6-month Bank Bill rate represent the rates at which 
banks are willing to borrow from, or lend to, one another over a six month term.
Figure 5.6
Spread between the 6-month term deposit 
rate and the 6-month bank bill rate


39
Chapter 5. Domestic financial conditions. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Table 5.1 
Developments in domestic financial conditions as of 16 May 2024
Wholesale interest rates 
Market pricing 
for the OCR
•	 The February Statement contributed to a downward shift in market participants’ expectations for 
the OCR over 2024. This was influenced by the Reserve Bank’s reduction in its near-term inflation 
forecast and a slight reduction in the OCR forecast, with the peak coming down to 5.6 percent 
from 5.7 percent in the November Statement. 
•	 Market pricing for the OCR is currently lower than at the time of the February Statement. In the 
weeks before the February Statement, market pricing indicated a moderate chance of a further 
OCR increase by May 2024. Immediately after the Statement, markets no longer priced further 
increases to the OCR. Markets are now pricing in around 45 basis points of cuts by November, 
which is around 20 basis points of additional easing compared to what was priced in at the time 
of the February Statement. 
•	 The current and expected OCR settings are contractionary, sitting above our estimates for the 
neutral OCR (see figure 7.4).
Interest rate 
swaps
•	 New Zealand swap rates have been volatile since the February Statement. Overall, swap rates 
are lower than they were just before the February Statement. The 2-year swap rate is around 
30 basis points lower over this period and the 10-year swap rate is around 20 basis points lower. 
Consequently, the degree of swap curve inversion (when shorter-term rates are higher than longer-
term rates) has decreased, with the difference between the 2- and 10-year swap rates narrowing 
from around minus 55 basis points at the time of the February Statement to around minus 40 basis 
points.
•	 Domestic developments, including a reassessment of OCR expectations in response to the 
February Statement and slightly weaker-than-expected GDP data, led to declines in swap rates 
between the February Statement and the end of March. Subsequently, global factors, in particular 
expectations of future changes to US interest rates, were a key driver of swap rates as they 
gradually moved higher.
•	 More recently, swap rates have declined as the US Federal Reserve signalled that US interest rates 
are unlikely to move higher during this cycle and after some weaker-than-expected US labour 
market data. 
New Zealand 
government 
bonds (NZGB)
•	 NZGB yields are lower since the February Statement, influenced by similar factors to interest rate 
swaps (discussed above).
•	 Bid-ask spreads, which measure how far apart buyers and sellers are from reaching an agreed price 
to trade, are broadly unchanged since the February Statement. Demand for NZGBs at New Zealand 
Debt Management tenders, as measured by bid-cover ratios, has improved at auctions since the 
February Statement, following a period of relatively weak demand at the start of 2024. 
•	 The difference between NZGB yields and swap rates is little changed from the February Statement. 
These spreads remain at high levels compared to historical values, reflecting an increased supply of 
NZGBs.
New Zealand dollar
Interest rate 
differentials
•	 Interest rate differentials between New Zealand and both the US and Australia, our largest 
trading partners with floating exchange rates, have decreased since the February Statement. This 
has contributed to a depreciation in the New Zealand dollar against the US dollar and Australian 
dollar. 
Risk sentiment
•	 Market risk sentiment has improved slightly since the February Statement. US equities are higher 
and equity market volatility (as measured by the VIX Index) is slightly lower. US bond market volatility 
is also slightly lower, than at the time of the February Statement. Overall, risk sentiment has likely 
had a slightly positive impact on New Zealand dollar movements since the February Statement. 


40
Chapter 5. Domestic financial conditions. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Commodity 
prices
•	 Decreases in New Zealand’s key export commodity prices tend to be detrimental for the 
New Zealand dollar, while increases tend to be positive. 
•	 Prices of key export commodities in New Zealand have been broadly flat since the February 
Statement, and are likely to have had limited effects on New Zealand dollar movements. 
Retail interest rates
Mortgage rates
•	 Mortgage rates have decreased since the February Statement, following swap rates lower.
•	 Mortgage rates at shorter terms have decreased by more than longer-term mortgage rates since 
the February Statement. Mortgages at terms of 1 and 2 years have decreased by around 10 to 20 
basis points and 5-year mortgage rates have decreased around 5 basis points. 
•	 The spreads between mortgage rates and swap rates (mortgage-swap spreads) have been 
volatile since the February Statement. Overall, mortgage-swap spreads at 1- and 2-year terms are 
higher than they were just before the February Statement.
Deposit rates
•	 Term deposit rates have decreased at all terms since the February Statement. 
•	 Spreads between term deposits and swap rates (term deposit spreads) have been broadly 
unchanged since the start of 2024, having increased significantly during 2023.
•	 Term deposit spreads are likely to increase towards pre-COVID-19 levels in coming years, as 
banks compete more aggressively for deposit funding.
•	 Rates on other types of deposits, including bonus saver and transaction accounts, remain low 
compared to wholesale interest rates. This continues to hold down the overall cost of bank 
funding.
Bank funding conditions
Funding 
composition
•	 Term deposit volumes have continued to increase over recent months, while on-call transaction 
and savings deposit volumes have fallen. Term deposit volumes grew by around $3 billion 
between January and March 2024, while on-call account volumes fell by around $4 billion. 
•	 Banks remain well funded and have strong liquidity buffers. Lower-cost deposit types, in 
particular transaction accounts, remain a larger share of bank funding compared to pre-COVID-19 
averages. This has contributed to lower average bank funding costs. Bank core funding ratios 
remain high, sitting at around 90 percent in March.
•	 Banks have paid back around 15 percent of loans that were taken out as part of the Funding for 
Lending Programme (FLP). The speed at which banks repay the remainder of the FLP borrowings 
will pick up during the second half of 2024 and 2025, with the final repayments made at the end 
of 2025. 
•	 As these loans are repaid, bank competition for other sources of funding, such as deposits, is 
expected to increase. 
Credit spreads
•	 The cost of raising long-term wholesale bank funding relative to benchmark wholesale rates has 
decreased slightly since the February Statement. 
•	 Domestic bank credit spreads are lower than at the time of the February Statement. Broad 
wholesale funding conditions remain relatively favourable, particularly in the context of a higher 
interest rate environment.


41
Chapter 6. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Chapter 5. Domestic financial conditions. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Chapter 
06
McKinnon Pass. Photo: Tyler Smith
Economic 
projections


42
Chapter 6. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Chapter 6.
Economic projections
This chapter summarises the baseline economic projections that 
MPC members considered when making their policy assessment. 
The projections were finalised on 16 May 2024.
These projections rely on a set of key 
assumptions about the global and domestic 
factors influencing the New Zealand 
economy. These include:
•	 the level of potential GDP and the extent 
to which the output gap has declined in 
recent history;
•	 the degree of persistence in inflation 
expectations and price-setting behaviour 
following the recent high inflation period;
•	 the speed at which labour market and 
wage pressures ease, and the effects of 
these factors on household spending and 
core inflation;
•	 the extent to which high interest rates and 
house price declines from their peak in 
late 2021 contribute to lower residential 
construction activity and household 
spending;
•	 the extent to which business investment 
weakens as a result of declining capacity 
pressures in the economy;
•	 the outlook for net immigration, and the 
extent to which high net immigration 
contributes relatively more to aggregate 
demand or labour supply;
•	 the extent to which stronger activity and 
inflation in our key trading partners affects 
domestic financial conditions, demand 
for New Zealand’s goods and services 
exports, and prices for imports;
•	 that government consumption and 
investment evolve in line with the 
macroeconomic and fiscal forecasts 
in the Half Year Economic and Fiscal 
Update (HYEFU) 2023. Reductions in 
government spending to date have 
likely been captured in weaker high-
frequency indicators for aggregate GDP 
in the March and June 2024 quarters. 
Our near-term GDP forecasts are 
based on these indicators. The central 
projection does not include the effects 
of changes in fiscal policy related to the 
forthcoming Budget 2024. Any changes 
to real government consumption, or 
private consumption due to proposed tax 
cuts, are not captured in this projection. 
However, the projection does account for 
the direct effects of confirmed regulatory 
changes such as the annual minimum 
wage adjustment and the removal of the 
Auckland regional fuel tax.
There is significant uncertainty about these 
assumptions.


43
Chapter 6. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
The projections take account of recent 
data, which show that domestic economic 
activity continued to decline slightly in the 
December 2023 quarter. The labour market 
has also eased further, with employment 
decreasing in the March 2024 quarter and 
unemployment rising. 
However, CPI inflation in the March 2024 
quarter was stronger than anticipated in 
the February Statement. In particular, non-
tradables inflation was stronger than would 
have been explained by our February 
Statement assumptions for the output gap, 
and pricing behaviour.
Continued strong non-tradables inflation 
has supported a reassessment of the level 
of capacity pressure in the New Zealand 
economy over recent history (see box A, 
chapter 2). We have revised our estimate of 
the output gap higher and it now sits closer 
to the middle of our suite of output gap 
indicators (figure 6.1). This higher estimate 
of the output gap is better able to explain 
the inflation New Zealand has experienced 
in recent history, and lower potential GDP 
growth is more consistent with weak 
estimates of New Zealand’s productivity 
growth over the past two years.
The higher starting point for the output gap 
means there has been more inflationary 
pressure in the domestic economy than 
previously assumed. As a result, interest 
rates will need to remain contractionary for 
longer than previously assumed, to reduce 
this inflationary pressure.
Given recent substantial declines in 
surveyed inflation expectations, we have 
revised our medium-term assumption for 
wage- and price-setting behaviour down 
slightly. This assumes that wage- and price-
setting behavior by firms will normalise 
slightly more quickly once headline inflation 
has returned to within the 1 to 3 percent 
target range. However, we continue to 
assume that wage- and price-setting 
behaviour remains elevated relative to 
history by the end of the forecast period. 
This reflects our expectation that wage- and 
price-setting behaviour adjusts slowly toward 
headline inflation. In addition, some lagging 
relative price adjustments have yet to occur 
following the recent inflationary period, and 
this source of inflationary pressure will take 
some time to normalise.
Over the medium term, we assume that 
restrictive interest rates in New Zealand will 
keep domestic demand growth subdued. 
Our outlook for economic activity is for a 
low rate of GDP growth over the next year. 
Non-tradables inflation is assumed to decline 
only slowly as aggregate demand slows and 
the labour market eases, reducing capacity 
pressure.
Annual tradables inflation is expected to 
continue to decline but remain slightly 
positive over the projection horizon. 
The delayed effects of recent shipping 
disruptions and higher freight costs, lingering 
inflationary pressure in our trading partners, 
and continued domestic cost pressures limit 
declines in tradables inflation.
Annual consumer price inflation is expected 
to return to its 2 percent target midpoint in 
the June 2026 quarter.
Source: Stats NZ, NZIER, MBIE, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: The shaded area shows the range of the indicators in the suite. The vertical line 
shows the final quarter of published GDP data.
Figure 6.1
Output gap and indicator suite
(share of potential GDP, seasonally adjusted)


44
Chapter 6. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Table 6.1 
Key projection assumptions
Key factors
Global factors
•	 Inflation has been more persistent than expected in the US and Australia, supported by resilient 
labour markets. 
•	 This has caused expectations for world interest rates to rise, which all else being equal puts 
downward pressure on the New Zealand dollar and increases imported inflation in New Zealand.
•	 The New Zealand dollar trade weighted index (TWI) is assumed to remain at 71.0 over the 
projection.
Domestic 
capacity 
pressures
•	 Persistent non-tradables inflation at the beginning of 2024 has added to the weight of evidence 
that capacity pressures have been higher than previously assumed in the domestic economy.
Although our suite of output gap indicators continues to ease, this has occurred at a slightly 
slower pace than we had assumed the output gap would ease.
•	 Output gap indicators based on labour market data have eased to a lesser extent than other 
indicators and indicate more capacity pressures in the economy than other indicators. This may 
be partly accounted for by a lag between the labour market and broader economic conditions.
•	 Our updated output gap assumption sits closer to the mean of our indicator suite. It is better able 
to explain the non-tradables inflation experience in New Zealand over the past year, given our 
other assumptions for the drivers of non-tradables including inflation expectations, wages and 
persistence in price-setting.
Inflation 
expectations
•	 Inflation expectations are assumed to be adaptive and slow moving, because this approach has 
been able to better explain wage- and price-setting behaviour over history than survey-based 
measures of inflation expectations. However, we have revised our medium-term assumption 
for wage- and price-setting behaviour down slightly following recent substantial declines in 
surveyed inflation expectations. This assumes that wage- and price-setting behaviour by firms 
will normalise slightly more quickly once headline inflation has returned to within the 1 to 3 
percent target range. 
•	 We continue to assume that wage- and price-setting behaviour remains elevated relative to 
history by the end of the forecast period. This reflects our expectation that wage- and price-
setting behaviour adjusts slowly toward headline inflation. In addition, some lagging relative 
price adjustments have yet to occur following the recent inflationary period, and this source of 
inflationary pressure will take some time to normalise.
Economic growth
Production
•	 We assume that the economy expanded by 0.2 percent in the March 2024 quarter, and will 
grow gradually over the following year. Growth is assumed to increase to be broadly in line with 
potential over the medium term.
•	 Capacity pressures are assumed to be approximately neutral in the December 2023 quarter and 
spare capacity is expected to open up across the projection horizon. The supply potential of the 
economy is expected to continue to improve, supported by strong population growth through 
immigration that expands the productive capacity of the economy.
Consumption
•	 Consumption growth has been subdued over the past year, and is projected to remain subdued 
in the coming year. Given strong population growth, per-capita consumption is in the process of 
falling sharply. Per-capita consumption has fallen by 3.6 percent since its 2022 average, and this 
is about two thirds of the way through our projected decline. At the projected trough, per-capita 
consumption is similar to that at the end of 2019.
•	 We project that per-capita consumption growth will start to recover in 2025 as the lagged impact 
of previous tightening fades, interest rates begin to fall, and house prices recover.
•	 This projection makes no assumption about the effects of tax and transfer changes that may be 
contained in Budget 2024.


45
Chapter 6. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Investment
•	 Business investment has fallen over the past year and is projected to continue to decline in 
2024 as previous falls in export prices and weaker demand reduce business profitability. Starting 
at the end of 2024, business investment is projected to increase as export prices recover slowly 
and interest rates eventually ease towards the end of the projection.
•	 A substantial decline in residential investment is underway and is expected to continue until the 
beginning of 2025. High interest rates and subdued house price growth are causing a decline in 
residential construction activity, consistent with the decline in dwelling consents since mid-2022. 
In the second half of the projection, ongoing high net immigration and easing interest rates 
support a recovery in house prices and building activity. 
•	 The scale and speed of the residential investment slowdown are slightly more than in the 
February Statement, given higher interest rates in this forecast and the continued weakness 
seen in indicators like consents and ready-mix concrete.
Government
•	 Government spending forecasts are consistent with those in HYEFU 2023, but have been adjusted 
for the latest real government consumption and investment starting points in the December 2023 
GDP data. The starting point for government consumption was higher and government investment 
was lower. On net, the starting point adjustment means real government spending is lower over 
the projection.
•	 Real government consumption is projected to decline over the projection. However, due to weaker 
potential output growth, government expenditure is higher as a proportion of potential output than 
projected in the February Statement and hence less disinflationary.
Exports and 
imports
•	 We assume a steady recovery in export and import volumes in the medium term. The increase 
in import volumes in the medium term is consistent with the recovery in private consumption and 
business investment.
•	 Total export volumes are expected to continue to increase their share of GDP in the medium term 
due to the continued recovery in international tourism. We have revised our projection for goods 
exports lower in the medium term following an in-depth look at the outlook for growth in our major 
goods export sectors (see chapter 4.2).
Labour market
Employment and 
wages 
•	 The New Zealand labour market has continued to ease. The unemployment rate increased 
further to 4.3 percent in the March 2024 quarter, while the number of people employed fell.
•	 Same-job wage growth was close to expectations in the March 2024 quarter, and is expected to 
continue to ease. Over the past 18 months, we have consistently observed downside surprises 
to our wages forecasts. Our forecasts have previously assumed a rapid recovery in same-job 
wages relative to the CPI following declines in recent years. Our updated projections now 
assume that wage growth evolves more in line with historical relationships with labour market 
slack and recent inflation. These historical relationships imply considerably weaker wage growth 
over the forecast.
•	 In addition, our near-term forecast has taken account of the increase in the minimum wage being 
smaller in 2024 than in recent years.
•	 A range of indicators of pressure in the labour market show it has continued to ease from tight 
levels and suggests the labour market is broadly in balance. The labour market is expected to 
ease further over this year as economic growth remains below potential.
•	 Employment fell in the March 2024 quarter, and employment growth is expected to remain 
subdued over the next year.
•	 The unemployment rate is expected to continue to rise to a peak of 5.1 percent in mid-2025, in 
line with a declining output gap.


46
Chapter 6. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Immigration
•	 Net immigration has evolved similarly to our assumption in the February Statement. Net 
immigration has continued to decline from historically high levels. We assume net immigration 
will continue to decline from its current level, but will remain high relative to history during the 
forecast period.
Inflation
Headline
•	 Annual headline CPI inflation is expected to continue to decline to within the 1 to 3 percent target 
band by the end of 2024, reaching the 2 percent target midpoint by the June 2026 quarter. 
Tradables
•	 Annual tradables inflation is expected to decline slightly further, but remain above its pre-
COVID-19 levels over the projection horizon. Stronger economic growth in our trading partners 
and the delayed effects of recent shipping disruptions are assumed to place upward pressure 
on import prices, while lingering domestic cost pressures also support tradables inflation. 
Non-tradables
•	 Annual non-tradables inflation is expected to continue to decline, but to stay elevated for longer 
than previously assumed due to a higher starting point and our revised assumption for the 
output gap.
•	 Falling capacity pressures are expected to continue to put downward pressure on non-tradables 
inflation, but this is expected to take some time in the context of elevated wage- and price-
setting behaviour and other specific factors (see chapter 4.1).


47
Chapter 6. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Figure 6.4
Unemployment rate
(unemployed people as a share of the labour force, 
seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Charts
Figure 6.2
Inflation components
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Dotted lines show the projections from the February Statement. The 
shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI 
inflation over the medium term.
Figure 6.3
Private sector LCI wage inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.5
House price growth
(annual)
Source: CoreLogic, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.6
Production GDP
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.7
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


48
Chapter 6. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Figure 6.10
Business investment
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.8
Private consumption
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.9
Residential investment
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.11
Government consumption
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.12
Total exports
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.13
Total imports
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


49
Chapter 6. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Chapter 
07
Lake Wānaka. Photo: India Power
Appendices


50
Chapter 7. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Chapter 7.
Appendices
Appendix 1: Statistical tables
Table 7.1
Key forecast variables
GDP growth 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Annual
Unemployment 
rate
TWI
OCR
2022
Mar
-0.1
1.8
6.9
3.2
72.6
0.9
 
Jun
1.0
1.7
7.3
3.3
72.1
1.6
 
Sep
1.8
2.2
7.2
3.3
70.6
2.7
 
Dec
-0.4
1.4
7.2
3.4
70.8
3.8
2023
Mar
-0.3
1.2
6.7
3.4
71.3
4.5
Jun
0.5
1.1
6.0
3.6
71.0
5.3
Sep
-0.3
1.8
5.6
3.9
70.6
5.5
Dec
-0.1
0.5
4.7
4.0
70.8
5.5
2024
Mar
0.2
0.6
4.0
4.3
71.6
5.5
Jun
0.1
0.6
3.6
4.6
70.8
5.6
Sep
0.3
1.3
3.0
4.8
71.0
5.6
Dec
0.4
0.4
2.9
5.0
71.0
5.7
2025
Mar
0.4
0.5
2.8
5.0
71.0
5.6
Jun
0.6
0.5
2.6
5.1
71.0
5.5
Sep
0.7
0.9
2.2
5.1
71.0
5.4
Dec
0.8
0.3
2.2
5.1
71.0
5.1
2026
Mar
0.7
0.4
2.1
5.0
71.0
4.8
Jun
0.7
0.4
2.0
5.0
71.0
4.4
Sep
0.7
0.9
2.0
4.9
71.0
4.1
Dec
0.8
0.3
2.0
4.9
71.0
3.7
2027
Mar
0.8
0.4
2.0
4.8
71.0
3.4
Jun
0.8
0.4
2.0
4.7
71.0
3.0


51
Chapter 7. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Table 7.2
Measures of inflation, inflation expectations, and asset prices
2022
2023
2024
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Inflation (annual rates)
CPI
7.2
7.2
6.7
6.0
5.6
4.7
4.0
CPI non-tradables
6.6
6.6
6.8
6.6
6.3
5.9
5.8
CPI tradables
8.1
8.2
6.4
5.2
4.7
3.0
1.6
Sectoral factor model 
estimate of core inflation
5.4
5.7
5.8
5.8
5.3
4.7
4.3
CPI trimmed mean (30% measure)
6.4
6.1
6.1
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
CPI weighted median
5.0
5.0
5.6
6.6
5.0
4.4
4.4
GDP deflator (expenditure)
4.5
5.2
5.5
6.0
7.0
4.3
Inflation expectations
RBNZ Survey of Expectations 
– inflation 1 year ahead
4.9
5.1
5.1
4.3
4.2
3.6
3.2
2.7
RBNZ Survey of Expectations  
– inflation 2 years ahead
3.1
3.6
3.3
2.8
2.8
2.8
2.5
2.3
RBNZ Survey of Expectations  
– inflation 5 years ahead
2.3
2.4
2.4
2.4
2.3
2.4
2.3
2.3
RBNZ Survey of Expectations  
– inflation 10 years ahead
2.1
2.2
2.2
2.3
2.2
2.3
2.2
2.2
Asset prices (annual percent changes)
Quarterly house price index (CoreLogic 
NZ)
-4.2
-11.2
-12.0
-9.0
-4.0
-0.8
REINZ Farm Price Index  
(quarterly average to date)
12.2
5.0
-3.2
-5.7
-11.8
-10.9
-9.8
NZX 50 (quarterly average to date)
-11.3
-12.8
-3.3
4.0
1.7
-0.4
-0.6
-0.1


52
Chapter 7. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Table 7.3
Measures of labour market conditions	
(seasonally adjusted, changes expressed in annual percent terms, unless specified otherwise)	
2022
2023
2024
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Household Labour Force Survey
Unemployment rate
3.3
3.4
3.4
3.6
3.9
4.0
4.3
Underutilisation rate
9.0
9.4
9.1
9.9
10.4
10.7
11.2
Labour force participation rate
71.6
71.8
72.1
72.4
72.0
71.9
71.5
Employment rate  
(% of working-age population)
69.3
69.4
69.6
69.8
69.2
69.0
68.4
Employment growth
1.1
1.7
3.0
4.3
2.9
2.7
1.3
Average weekly hours worked
33.9
34.0
33.6
33.4
33.6
33.7
33.9
Number unemployed 
(thousand people)
96
100
103
110
120
123
134
Number employed  
(million people)
2.85
2.87
2.90
2.93
2.93
2.95
2.94
Labour force (million people)
2.95
2.97
3.01
3.04
3.05
3.07
3.07
Extended labour force 
(million people)
3.02
3.05
3.09
3.14
3.14
3.16
3.18
Working-age population 
(million people, age 15 years+)
4.11
4.13
4.17
4.20
4.24
4.27
4.30
Quarterly Employment Survey – QES
Filled jobs growth
1.3
1.5
2.3
6.4
6.0
4.3
3.6
Average hourly earnings growth 
(private sector, ordinary time)
8.6
8.1
8.3
7.7
7.0
6.6
4.8
Other data sources
Labour Cost Index growth, 
private sector, adjusted
3.9
4.3
4.5
4.3
4.1
3.9
3.8
Labour Cost Index growth, 
private sector, unadjusted
5.6
6.1
6.1
6.1
5.7
5.7
5.2
Estimated net working-age 
immigration (thousands, quarterly)
7.8
20.3
29.3
40.1
24.3
16.3
Change in All Vacancies Index
7.1
-4.1
-14.7
-21.9
-27.2
-27.2
-26.7
Note: The All Vacancies Index is produced by MBIE as part of the monthly Jobs Online report, which shows changes in job 
vacancies advertised by businesses on internet job boards. The unadjusted labour cost index (LCI) is an analytical index that 
reflects quality change in addition to price change (whereas the official LCI measures price changes only). For definitions of 
underutilisation, the extended labour force, and related concepts, see Stats NZ (2016) ‘Introducing underutilisation in the labour 
market’. Estimated net working-age immigration is the Stats NZ outcomes-based measure.


53
Chapter 7. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Table 7.4
Composition of real GDP growth
(annual average percent change, seasonally adjusted, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
Final consumption expenditure
Private
6.4
4.8
4.5
2.4
0.2
6.0
2.7
0.2
0.5
1.9
3.4
Public authority
1.9
3.8
3.3
5.8
6.9
7.9
2.0
0.0
-2.4
-0.2
0.7
Total
5.4
4.6
4.3
3.2
1.8
6.4
2.5
0.1
-0.2
1.4
2.8
Gross fixed capital formation
Residential
8.8
-1.8
-0.1
2.7
2.2
3.2
-0.6
-4.2
-8.5
2.9
8.2
Other
0.1
10.0
7.1
2.7
-2.9
12.6
2.9
-1.3
-2.6
3.3
4.9
Total
2.3
6.7
5.2
2.7
-1.7
10.2
2.1
-2.0
-3.9
3.2
5.6
Final domestic 
expenditure
4.6
5.1
4.5
3.0
1.0
7.3
2.4
-0.4
-1.1
1.8
3.4
Stockbuilding*
0.1
0.2
-0.2
-0.2
-0.3
0.6
0.0
-1.4
1.0
0.3
0.0
Gross national 
expenditure
4.8
5.6
4.3
2.7
-0.3
8.5
2.6
-2.0
0.1
2.1
3.5
Exports of goods  
and services
2.0
3.8
3.3
0.2
-17.9
2.4
6.1
6.5
3.3
5.0
3.6
Imports of goods  
and services
5.1
7.8
4.8
1.3
-15.9
17.1
4.4
-2.2
1.3
4.8
5.5
Expenditure on GDP
3.9
4.3
3.9
2.5
0.0
4.7
2.8
0.1
0.5
2.0
2.8
GDP (production)
3.8
3.4
3.5
2.4
-0.5
4.6
2.7
0.2
0.7
2.2
2.9
GDP (production, 
March qtr to March qtr)
3.3
3.5
3.5
0.7
4.5
0.6
2.0
0.3
1.2
2.8
3.0
* Percentage point contribution to the growth rate of GDP.


54
Chapter 7. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Table 7.5
Summary of economic projections
(annual percent change, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
Price measures
CPI 
2.2
1.1
1.5
2.5
1.5
6.9
6.7
4.0
2.8
2.1
2.0
Labour costs
1.5
1.9
2.0
2.4
1.6
3.1
4.5
3.8
3.0
2.6
2.4
Export prices 
(in New Zealand dollars) 
4.1
3.2
1.1
6.7
-6.2
20.6
0.9
-1.8
3.5
2.4
2.4
Import prices 
(in New Zealand dollars) 
1.2
1.6
4.0
2.4
-2.5
18.8
8.1
-3.2
0.3
-0.4
0.0
Monetary conditions
OCR (year average)
2.0
1.8
1.8
1.2
0.3
0.5
3.1
5.5
5.6
5.2
3.9
TWI (year average)
76.5
75.6
73.4
71.7
72.4
74.0
71.2
71.0
71.0
71.0
71.0
Output
GDP (production, annual 
average % change)
3.8
3.4
3.5
2.4
-0.5
4.6
2.7
0.2
0.7
2.2
2.9
Potential output (annual 
average % change)
3.2
3.2
3.1
2.7
-0.6
2.5
2.2
2.8
2.6
2.4
2.4
Output gap (% of potential 
GDP, year average)
0.3
0.4
0.8
0.5
0.5
2.6
3.2
0.6
-1.2
-1.5
-1.0
Labour market
Total employment 
(seasonally adjusted)
5.9
2.9
1.5
2.6
0.2
2.5
3.0
1.3
0.7
1.8
2.7
Unemployment rate (March 
qtr, seasonally adjusted)
4.9
4.4
4.2
4.2
4.6
3.2
3.4
4.3
5.0
5.0
4.8
Trend labour productivity 
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.5
0.2
-0.2
-0.3
-0.1
0.2
0.6
Key balances
Government operating 
balance* (% of GDP,  
year to June)
1.5
1.9
2.4
-7.3
-1.3
-2.7
-2.5
-2.6
-1.9
-1.1
-0.2
Current account balance  
(% of GDP)
-2.5
-3.1
-3.8
-2.3
-2.5
-6.5
-8.2
-6.5
-6.1
-5.2
-4.6
Terms of trade 
(SNA measure, annual 
average % change)
2.1
4.5
-2.1
2.0
-1.0
0.4
-5.1
-1.4
0.7
4.0
2.5
Household saving rate  
(% of disposable income)
-1.8
-2.0
-1.3
1.4
7.6
2.7
2.0
0.7
-1.3
-1.1
-1.0
World economy
Trading-partner GDP 
(annual average % change)
3.5
4.0
3.5
1.7
-0.5
6.2
2.7
3.1
2.6
3.0
2.8
Trading-partner CPI  
(TWI-weighted)
1.9
1.8
1.4
2.4
0.8
4.1
4.8
2.2
2.4
2.1
2.2
* Government operating balance is a model-based estimate of OBEGAL divided by nominal GDP in the projection. The estimate is partial 
because it relies on projections for some components from the Half Year Economic and Fiscal Update 2023.


55
Chapter 7. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Appendix 2: Chart pack
Figure 7.1
Composition of CPI inflation
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 7.2
Output gap and output gap indicators
(share of potential GDP)
Source: NZIER, MBIE, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The output gap indicators based on information from labour market surveys 
are shown separately from the other indicators. For each group of indicators, the 
shaded area shows the range of values and the line shows the mean value.
Figure 7.3
Unemployment and underutilisation rates
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 7.4
OCR and nominal neutral OCR indicator suite
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area indicates the range between the maximum and minimum 
values from our suite of long-run nominal neutral OCR indicators. See Castaing et al. 
(2024) ‘Estimates of New Zealand’s nominal neutral interest rate’.
Figure 7.5
GDP and potential GDP
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 7.6
Measures of core inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Core inflation measures exclude the GST increase in 2010. The shaded 
area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI inflation 
over the medium term.


56
Chapter 7. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2024
Figure 7.7
Inflation expectations
(annual, years ahead) 
Source: RBNZ Survey of Expectations (Business).
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for 
annual CPI inflation over the medium term.
Figure 7.9
House price inflation
(annual, nominal) 
Source: REINZ.
Source: Stats NZ, Global Dairy Trade, Refinitiv, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 7.12
Terms of trade, dairy and oil price indices
(index=100 in Q3 2008, quarterly average)
Figure 7.10
Mortgage interest rates
Source: interest.co.nz, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The rates shown for the fixed terms are the average of the advertised 
rates from ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac, shown as weekly data. The floating 
rate represents the monthly yield on floating housing debt from the RBNZ 
Income Statement survey.
Figure 7.8
Private sector wage growth
(annual, nominal) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 7.11
New Zealand dollar exchange rates
(quarterly average) 
Source: NZFMA, RBNZ.
