BANK: RBNZ
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: Monetary Policy Statement February 2023
DATE: 21/02/2023
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/monetary-policy-statements/2023/feb/mpsfeb23.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

02/2023
Monetary Policy
STATEMENT


ii
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
STATEMENT
of the MPC’s monetary policy strategy
The Monetary Policy Committee’s (MPC’s) monetary policy strategy is its 
overarching plan for how it will formulate monetary policy under different 
circumstances to achieve its objectives.1 It outlines a consistent approach 
to how the MPC intends to achieve its objectives across time, accounting 
for trade-offs and uncertainty. Agreeing on and publishing a strategy 
promotes transparency, public understanding, and accountability.
1	
For a more in-depth discussion of monetary policy strategy in New Zealand, see J. Ratcliffe and R. Kendall (2019), ‘Monetary policy strategy in New Zealand’, 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Bulletin, Vol. 82, No. 3, April.
2	
These economic objectives contribute to the overall purpose of the Act, which is to promote the prosperity and well-being of New Zealanders, and contribute to 
a sustainable and productive economy. See monetary policy framework for more information on New Zealand’s monetary policy framework, including the full 
text of the Remit.
Monetary policy 
framework and objectives
Under the Reserve Bank of 
New Zealand Act 2021 (the 
Act), the MPC is responsible for 
formulating monetary policy to 
maintain a stable general level of 
prices over the medium term and 
to support maximum sustainable 
employment.2 Operational 
objectives for monetary policy are 
set out in the Remit. The current 
Remit sets out a flexible inflation 
targeting regime, under which the 
MPC must set policy to: 
•	 keep future annual inflation 
between 1 and 3 percent over 
the medium term, with a focus 
on keeping future inflation 
near the 2 percent mid-point; 
and
•	 support maximum sustainable 
employment, considering 
a broad range of labour 
market indicators and taking 
into account that maximum 
sustainable employment is 
largely determined by non-
monetary factors.
In pursuing these objectives, 
the Remit requires the MPC to 
have regard to the efficiency 
and soundness of the 
financial system, seek to avoid 
unnecessary instability in the 
economy and financial markets, 
and discount events that have 
only transitory effects on inflation. 
The MPC must also assess the 
effects of its monetary policy 
decisions on the Government’s 
policy to support more 
sustainable house prices.
The Reserve Bank’s flexible 
inflation targeting framework 
and the MPC’s monetary policy 
strategy reflect the fact that: 
•	 low and stable inflation is 
monetary policy’s best long-
run contribution to the well-
being of New Zealanders;
•	 in the short to medium term, 
monetary policy can influence 
real variables such as 
employment, and hence policy 
trade-offs can arise; and
•	 monetary policy is more 
effective if the Bank’s policy 
targets are credible, so policy 
should be formulated in a 
way that ensures credibility is 
maintained.
Key aspects of monetary 
policy strategy
The MPC practises forecast 
targeting, which means that it 
sets monetary policy such that 
it expects to achieve its inflation 
and employment goals in the 
medium term. In most instances 
the MPC aims to return inflation 
to the target mid-point within a 
one- to three-year horizon. The 
appropriate horizon at each 
policy decision will vary based 
on how different policy paths 
will contribute to maximum 
sustainable employment, whether 
price-setters’ expectations are 
consistent with the inflation 
target, and other considerations 
such as the balance of risks to the 
MPC’s central economic outlook.


iii
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
The MPC does not attempt to 
return inflation and employment 
to target immediately, because 
monetary policy actions take time 
to transmit through the economy. 
Attempting to return inflation to 
target too quickly would result 
in unnecessary instability in the 
economy and financial markets. 
The 1 to 3 percent target range for 
inflation provides the MPC with 
flexibility to ensure that managing 
inflation variability does not come 
at the cost of excessive variability 
in the real economy. For similar 
reasons, the MPC does not 
attempt to offset events that are 
expected to have only transitory 
effects on inflation. 
The MPC takes into account both 
its inflation and employment 
objectives when setting policy. In 
the long run, no trade-off exists 
between the MPC’s objectives. 
In the short to medium term, 
there may be situations where 
monetary policy can move one 
objective closer to target only 
at the cost of the other, resulting 
in a trade-off. When a trade-off 
does arise, the MPC will consider 
outcomes for both objectives 
in setting policy. In general, if 
employment is projected to be 
below its long-run sustainable 
level, the MPC would let inflation 
overshoot the target mid-point 
for a time, and vice versa (while 
staying within the 1 to 3 percent 
target range). 
The MPC responds to both 
deviations above target and 
deviations below target. The 
MPC sets policy to stabilise 
employment near its maximum 
sustainable level, and to return 
inflation near to the target mid-
point, regardless of whether 
inflation is currently below or 
above 2 percent. This approach 
helps to anchor inflation 
expectations at the target mid-
point and promotes sustainable 
growth and employment by 
dampening fluctuations in the 
business cycle.
The MPC considers the balance 
of risks to its objectives that 
arise from uncertainty about 
the economic outlook and 
the transmission of its policy 
decisions. In general, the MPC 
will incorporate likely future 
developments into its central 
economic projections and set 
monetary policy in response. 
However, the MPC will also take 
into account risks to its central 
projections when setting policy. 
Under extreme uncertainty, the 
MPC may choose to publish 
scenarios instead of central 
projections to illustrate the 
range of possible situations and 
economic outcomes that could 
occur when circumstances are 
highly unpredictable.
The MPC has regard to the 
efficiency and soundness of 
the financial system, while 
recognising that in most 
instances prudential policy is 
better suited to leaning against 
risks to financial stability. The 
Reserve Bank takes prudential 
policy settings into account when 
setting monetary policy, and 
vice versa.
Implementation of strategy
The MPC applies the following 
process when formulating a 
policy decision:
1.	 Firstly, it assesses the outlook 
for the economy and the 
implications for its policy 
objectives. It then discusses 
risks to achieving its policy 
objectives.
2.	 Next, it considers which stance 
of monetary policy is most 
consistent with its monetary 
policy strategy given the 
current economic outlook, 
risks, and trade-offs.
3.	 Finally, the MPC decides how 
it will achieve the desired 
stance of monetary policy, 
including whether or not 
to adjust its policy settings 
at the current meeting and 
how it will communicate the 
policy outlook. The MPC has 
a suite of monetary tools to 
achieve its goals, and uses its 
Principles for Monetary Tools 
to make decisions on which 
tools to deploy.


REPORT AND SUPPORTING NOTES PUBLISHED AT:
www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/monetary-policy-statement
Subscribe online: www.rbnz.govt.nz/email-updates
Copyright © 2023 Reserve Bank of New Zealand
This report is published pursuant to section 129
of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 2021. 
ISSN 1770-4829
rbnz.govt.nz
Cover image: Milford Track. Photo: Nele McHattie.
Thank you to RBNZ staff for photography in this report.


The projections were finalised on 16 February 2023. The Official Cash Rate (OCR) 
projection incorporates an outlook for monetary policy that is consistent with the 
MPC’s monetary policy assessment, which was finalised on 22 February 2023. 
02/2023
Monetary Policy
STATEMENT
Contents
Statement of the MPC’s monetary policy strategy	
ii
1.	 Policy assessment	
2
	
Summary Record of meeting	
4
2.	 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook	
8
	
Box A – The economic impacts of recent severe storms 
	
in the North Island	
19
3.	 Global developments and outlook	
23
4.	 Special topics	
28
	
4.1	 The international dimension of non-tradables inflation	
30
	
4.2	 Monitoring the labour market for inflationary  
	
	
pressures with high-frequency microdata	
34
5.	 Financial conditions	
38
6.	 Economic projections	
44
7.	 Appendices	
51
	
Appendix 1: Our recent research	
52
	
Appendix 2: Statistical tables 	
57
	
Appendix 3: Chart pack	
62


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
2
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
CHAPTER 
01
Policy 
assessment
Houghton Bay. Photo: Andrew Besuyen


Chapter 1 Policy assessment
3
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
CHAPTER 1
Policy assessment
Tēnā koutou katoa, welcome all.
The Monetary Policy Committee today increased 
the Official Cash Rate (OCR) from 4.25 percent to 
4.75 percent.
The Committee agreed that the OCR still needs to 
increase, as indicated in the November Statement, 
to ensure inflation returns to within its target range 
over the medium term. While there are early signs of 
price pressure easing, core consumer price inflation 
remains too high, employment is still beyond its 
maximum sustainable level, and near-term inflation 
expectations remain elevated. 
Cyclone Gabrielle and other recent severe weather 
events have had a devastating effect on the lives of 
many New Zealanders. It is too early to accurately 
assess the monetary policy implications of these 
weather events, given that the scale of destruction 
and economic disruption are only now becoming 
evident. The timing, size, and the nature of funding 
the Government’s fiscal response are also yet to be 
determined. 
The Committee’s current assessment is that over 
coming weeks, prices for some goods are likely to 
spike and activity will be weaker than previously 
expected. Export revenues will be negatively 
impacted. Monetary policy is set with a medium-term 
focus, and the Committee will look through these 
short-term output variations and direct price effects. 
In time, the infrastructure and community rebuild will 
add to activity and inflationary pressures, especially 
given existing capacity constraints in the economy. 
Internationally, core inflation remains high and 
inflationary pressures remain broad based. 
However, the outlook for global economic activity 
in 2023 remains subdued, which is acting to lower 
global consumer pricing pressures, as well as 
demand for New Zealand’s key commodity exports. 
Continued growth in services exports will provide 
some export revenue offset. 
Domestically, demand remained robust through 
2022 underpinned by resilient household spending, 
construction activity, government spending, and a 
swift recovery in international tourism as the border 
reopened. Labour shortages remain a significant 
constraint on economic activity, contributing to 
heightened wage inflation. People are moving 
jobs at an elevated pace, consistent with labour 
shortages and strong demand. 
While there are early signs of demand easing it 
continues to outpace supply, as reflected in strong 
domestic inflation. The Committee agreed that 
monetary conditions need to tighten further, as 
indicated in the November Statement, so as to be 
confident there is sufficient restraint on spending to 
bring inflation back within its 1-3 percent per annum 
target range. The Committee remains determined to 
achieve its Monetary Policy Remit.
Meitaki, thanks.
Adrian Orr
Governor 


4
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
SUMMARY 
Record of meeting 
The Monetary Policy 
Committee discussed 
developments 
affecting the outlook 
for inflation and 
employment in
New Zealand. Overall, 
the economy has 
developed broadly in 
line with expectations 
at the time of the 
November Statement. 
Inflation is currently too 
high and employment 
is beyond its maximum 
sustainable level. The 
Committee agreed 
it must continue to 
increase the Official 
Cash Rate (OCR) to 
return inflation to 
target and to fulfil
its Remit.
The Committee discussed 
recent international economic 
developments and their 
implications for New Zealand. 
In many countries, core inflation 
remains high, reflecting significant 
broad-based inflationary 
pressures. The outlook for 
global economic activity in 2023 
remains relatively subdued. A 
weakening global economy 
is contributing to weaker 
demand for New Zealand’s key 
commodity exports, such as dairy 
and meat, leading to a lower 
outlook for New Zealand’s terms 
of trade. Continued growth in 
New Zealand’s service exports, in 
particular tourism, is assumed to 
provide some offset to this drop 
in export revenue in the near 
term, as is an easing of travel and 
activity restrictions in China over 
the medium term.
Committee members discussed 
the effects of Cyclone Gabrielle 
and other recent severe weather 
events. These events have 
had a devastating effect on the 
lives of many New Zealanders. 
Economically, they represent a 
disruption to employment, trade 
and production, and damage to 
property. The economic impacts 
discussed by the Committee 
included the immediate upward 
pressure on some prices, the 
effect that higher CPI inflation 
could have on longer-term 
inflation expectations, the 
ability to resource and supply 
any increase in demand and 
investment in affected regions, 
and the longer-term impact these 
severe weather events will have 
on the productive capacity of 
New Zealand. 
While it is too early to estimate the 
full economic impacts, near-term 
rebuilding and restocking are 
likely to lift the level of economic 
activity, and consumer prices for 
some goods and services will 
come under upward pressure 
given supply-chain disruption and 
product scarcity. Weaker export 
volumes will impact negatively 
on export earnings as a result of 
these extreme weather events. 
It remains unclear how significant 
the impact of these events will be 
on New Zealand’s longer-term 
productive capacity.
Monetary policy is set with a 
medium-term focus. Given this, 
the Committee decided to look 
through the short-term direct 
price pressures stemming from 
these extreme weather events, 
and focus on the medium-term 
impacts on inflation and maximum 
sustainable employment. 


5
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
At this stage, the Committee 
agreed that the medium-term 
impacts of the severe weather 
events do not materially alter 
the outlook for monetary policy. 
However, significant uncertainty 
remains, and more accurate 
information on the scale of the 
events is becoming available 
by the day. Inflation remains 
high, employment is above its 
maximum sustainable level, and 
ongoing restrictive monetary 
policy settings are necessary. 
However, the Committee 
acknowledged the significant 
regional impacts that the severe 
weather events will have across 
New Zealand, and agreed 
that the Government’s fiscal 
policy response would be more 
effective at addressing these, 
rather than any monetary 
policy activity. 
The Committee noted that 
demand in the New Zealand 
economy remained robust 
through 2022, despite 
significant global and domestic 
challenges. Economic growth 
has been underpinned by 
resilient household spending, 
construction activity, government 
spending, and a swift recovery 
in international tourism as the 
border reopened. High frequency 
surveys of economic activity 
suggest domestic demand 
may be starting to ease. This 
moderation is in line with 
expectations outlined at the 
November Statement. However, 
demand continues to outpace 
supply, and this continues to 
be reflected in high domestic 
inflation. 
The Committee observed that 
consumer price inflation in 
New Zealand in the December 
quarter remained high. 
Encouragingly, there was a 
slightly larger-than-forecast 
slowing in non-tradable inflation. 
However, CPI inflation, at 7.2 
percent in the year to the 
December 2022 quarter, remains 
well above the 1 to 3 percent 
target range set out in the 
Remit. Measures of persistent or 
‘core’ inflation have remained 
very high, indicating that high 
inflation remains broad based. 
Medium- and longer-term inflation 
expectations have stabilised 
recently, but remain elevated. 
The potential for a persistent 
continuation of global and 
domestic supply constraints, 
greater persistence in core 
inflation and elevated inflation 
expectations were seen as 
upside risks to the economic 
projections. 
The Committee noted that a 
range of measures indicated 
that labour shortages continue 
to be a significant constraint on 
economic activity, contributing to 
strong wage inflation. Measures 
of labour force utilisation are near 
record levels and firms continue 
to report severe difficulties finding 
labour. Private sector employees 
are also transitioning between 
jobs at an elevated pace, 
consistent with significant labour 
shortages and strong demand in 
the economy. 
The Committee discussed 
financial conditions noting that 
increases in both shorter-term 
wholesale and mortgage rates 
have exceeded longer-term 
maturities. It was also noted that 
deposit rate increases continue 
to lag the increases in wholesale 
and mortgage rates resulting in a 
further widening of bank margins 
between lending and deposit 
rates. The Committee expect 
deposit rates to increase over the 
coming year incentivising savings, 
further dampening inflation and 
supporting the maintenance 
of current mortgage rates for a 
longer period.
The Committee also discussed 
the functioning of the New Zealand 
Government bond market, in 
the context of sales of bonds in 
the Large Scale Asset Purchase 
Programme portfolio. Measures 
of secondary market liquidity 
were generally in line with historic 
norms and observed volatility was 
consistent with trends seen in 
international interest rate markets. 


6
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
The Committee considered the 
economic projections. As in the 
November Statement, the central 
projections show a decline in 
GDP this year. Members noted 
that this reduction in aggregate 
demand was necessary to 
return inflation to target over the 
forecast period. Members agreed 
that the exact timing and extent of 
negative GDP growth was difficult 
to predict, but historical evidence 
suggests risks are skewed toward 
a more concentrated period 
of contraction. Members also 
agreed that the sooner supply 
and demand were better matched 
in the economy, the lower the 
overall cost of reducing inflation. 
The Committee discussed the 
resilience of household balance 
sheets in the context of rising 
interest rates and the outlook for 
reduced labour demand. This 
was seen as a downside risk – 
with the potential for monetary 
policy to have larger effects on 
the economy in an environment 
of elevated debt levels. However, 
it was noted that while measures 
of financial stress have increased 
marginally, they remain low. The 
Committee agreed that as debt 
servicing costs rise, spending 
decisions for many households 
will become increasingly 
constrained. These constraints 
would be felt most by recent 
home buyers with a high debt 
servicing commitment relative 
to their income. 
The Committee agreed that the 
impact of rising interest rates 
on households’ spending and 
saving decisions is an important 
channel for monetary policy. 
The Committee also agreed that 
housing market related activity 
was a downside risk. Projections 
incorporate a substantial decline 
in construction. However, there 
are significant uncertainties. 
Feedback from the construction 
industry points to a significant 
lack of forward activity. In contrast, 
rebuilding in the wake of Cyclone 
Gabrielle will support construction 
activity. 
The Committee agreed that fiscal 
policy can also act to reduce 
demand in the economy. The 
current projection assumes 
government consumption and 
investment will fall as a share of 
the economy in coming years. 
However, members viewed the 
risks to inflation pressure from 
fiscal policy as skewed to the 
upside, particularly given the 
ongoing demand for government 
services in an environment 
of rising costs of provision. In 
addition, the economic impact 
of the Government response to 
recent severe weather events will 
depend on the scale of damage, 
fiscal reprioritisation decisions, 
timing of activity and how the 
fiscal costs are funded.
The Committee discussed the 
extent of additional monetary 
tightening required to achieve its 
Remit. Members noted the rapid 
pace and extent of tightening 
to date implies monetary policy 
is now contractionary. The 
Committee noted the long lags 
of monetary transmission to the 
economy means the impact of this 
tightening is still to be fully seen. 
Committee members agreed 
that the OCR needed to reach a 
level where the Committee could 
be confident it would reduce 
actual inflation to within the target 
range over the forecast horizon. 
Members agreed that this level of 
the OCR was broadly consistent 
with expectations at the time of 
the November Statement. 
The Committee discussed the 
size of the OCR increase to 
be delivered at this meeting. 
Increases of 50 and 75 basis 
points were considered. The 
Committee assessed that, while 
the balance of risks around 
inflation remain skewed to the 
upside, the extent of this risk 
had moderated somewhat since 
the November Statement. As 
a result, a 50 basis point move 
balanced the need to ensure core 
inflation and inflation expectations 
fall, against the early signs 
that demand was beginning to 
moderate towards the economy’s 
productive capacity.
On Wednesday 22 February, the 
Committee reached a consensus 
to raise the OCR by 50 basis 
points from 4.25 percent to 
4.75 percent. 


7
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Attendees:
Reserve Bank members 
of MPC: 
Adrian Orr, Karen Silk,
Christian Hawkesby,
Paul Conway
External MPC members: 
Bob Buckle, Peter Harris,
Caroline Saunders
Treasury Observer: 
Dominick Stephens
MPC Secretary: 
Adam Richardson


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
8
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Castlepoint. Photo: Nele McHattie
CHAPTER 
02
Current
economic 
assessment
and monetary 
policy outlook


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
9
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
CHAPTER 2
Current economic assessment 
and monetary policy outlook
Key points
•	 Demand in the New Zealand economy 
remained robust in 2022, despite 
significant global and domestic 
challenges. Economic growth has been 
underpinned by resilient household 
spending and construction activity, 
high government spending and a swift 
recovery in international tourism as the 
border reopened.
•	 Demand in the economy has not 
been matched with enough supply. 
While supply-chain bottlenecks are 
easing globally, they continue to delay 
the production of some goods in 
New Zealand and are adding to high 
overall cost pressures. Business activity 
throughout New Zealand continues to be 
held back by worker shortages, despite 
a record share of the population being 
employed. The unemployment rate 
has remained low, at 3.4 percent in the 
December 2022 quarter. Employment is 
above its maximum sustainable level. 
•	 An extremely tight labour market has 
been contributing to high consumers price 
index (CPI) inflation. Wage growth remains 
elevated. This is supporting household 
incomes while adding to business costs, 
creating upwards pressure on firms’ 
selling prices. The recovery in tourism has 
also boosted airfares, accommodation 
and other tourism-sensitive prices. Annual 
food price inflation is near its 30-year 
high, reflecting domestic factors – such 
as worker shortages – and global factors 
partly stemming from the war in Ukraine. 
Very high inflation globally has also led 
to large increases in the prices of other 
imported goods and services.
•	 While the domestic economy remained 
strong through 2022, there have been 
some signs that domestic demand is 
starting to ease as expected at the time of 
the November Statement. House prices 
continued to fall through 2022. Lower 
house prices and higher interest rates 
and living costs are weighing on some 
parts of household consumption, such 
as durable goods. Some labour market 
indicators have eased from very high 
levels, although remain strong. 
•	 Annual CPI inflation was 7.2 percent in 
the December 2022 quarter, well above 
the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range. 
Measures of persistent or ‘core’ inflation 
have remained very high, indicating that 
strong inflation continues to be broad-
based. Inflation expectations have also 
remained elevated at all horizons.
•	 The MPC has been increasing interest 
rates since the latter half of 2021. Higher 
interest rates lower domestic demand 
relative to the economy’s ability to 
sustainably supply goods and services. 
This reduces inflationary pressure over 
the medium term. 


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
10
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
•	 Moderating global growth and temporary 
COVID-19-related disruption in China have 
led to less demand for New Zealand’s 
key commodity exports, such as dairy. 
The reopening of China has yet to 
translate into sustained higher demand 
for New Zealand’s goods and services 
exports. Improved financial market 
sentiment following lower global inflation 
outturns and the reopening of China 
has contributed to an increase in the 
New Zealand dollar Trade-Weighted 
Index (TWI) exchange rate relative to 
what had been assumed at the time 
of the November Statement. All else 
being equal, a higher exchange rate will 
dampen exporters’ incomes and reduce 
the costs of our imported goods and 
services, reducing inflationary pressure in 
New Zealand. 
•	 The recent severe storms over much of the 
North Island have had a devastating impact 
on the lives of many New Zealanders, 
and led to considerable economic losses. 
While it is too early to confidently estimate 
the likely impacts of these events on 
economic activity, the recovery will be 
taking place at a time when labour and 
materials are already scarce. As a result, 
the recovery from these events is expected 
to lead to an increase in inflation over the 
next few months. This is expected to occur 
via higher fruit, vegetable, construction and 
used car prices in particular. 
•	 Conditional on our central economic 
outlook, it is expected that the OCR will 
need to increase to a similar extent as 
assumed in the November Statement 
in order for the MPC to meet its inflation 
and employment objectives. CPI inflation 
was slightly lower than expected in the 
December 2022 quarter. Export prices 
have also fallen more quickly than 
assumed. However, capacity pressures 
have been stronger than expected at the 
time of the November Statement and core 
inflation remains too high. 
•	 Because the New Zealand economy is 
starting from a position of high inflation 
and ongoing labour shortages, a period 
of economic contraction remains likely. 
Overall, the peak-to-trough decline in the 
level of GDP is assumed to be about 1 
percent over 2023. Employment 
may also fall below its maximum 
sustainable level.  


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
11
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Current economic assessment
Demand in the New Zealand 
economy remained robust in 2022
The New Zealand economy expanded by 
2.0 percent in the September 2022 quarter. 
This was much higher than expected at 
the time of the November Statement, and 
was above market expectations. In addition 
to stronger quarterly growth, upwards 
revisions by Stats NZ to the level of GDP in 
recent years suggest that the starting point 
for economic activity is much higher than 
previously assumed (figure 2.1).
Most sectors of the economy expanded in 
the September 2022 quarter. However, there 
was particularly strong growth in services 
industries that had previously been most 
affected by the COVID-19 activity restrictions. 
In addition, the construction sector more than 
reversed its recent decline by expanding 5.1 
percent in the quarter. This likely reflected the 
easing of some constraints on building activity, 
such as materials shortages, and the large 
pipeline of consented work yet to occur.
Despite significant falls in house prices, 
increases in interest rates and high inflation, 
real household spending has remained 
stronger than anticipated (figure 2.2). 
Quarterly growth in consumption has been 
volatile due to changing seasonal patterns 
since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, but 
remains elevated. Household consumption 
has been supported by high employment 
and income growth, government support 
measures and savings built up by the 
household sector in recent years. 
Since the border was reopened over 
the latter half of 2022, the recovery in 
international tourism has been swift. This 
is consistent with the experience of other 
countries that unwound their pandemic 
restrictions earlier. While still below their pre-
COVID-19 levels, the number of international 
visitors has increased rapidly (figure 2.3). 
Figure 2.2
Private consumption expenditure 
per working-age person
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.3
Air passenger arrivals and departures
(7-day moving average)
Source: New Zealand Customs Service.
Figure 2.1
Production GDP
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
12
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Demand has not been met
with enough supply
Although demand has been robust, the 
availability of labour has continued to fall 
short throughout New Zealand. Worker 
shortages have held back business activity 
across most industries, regions and skill 
levels. As reported in the Quarterly Survey 
of Business Opinion (QSBO), labour remains 
the factor most limiting production overall 
for businesses (figure 2.4). New Zealand’s 
tourism industry has found it challenging to 
meet higher demand as international visitor 
numbers have increased. Many businesses in 
this industry are unable to find sufficient staff 
to provide their usual levels of service. 
Employment remains above its 
maximum sustainable level
Employment as a share of the working-age 
population reached record levels in the 
second half of 2022. The unemployment 
rate remained very low at 3.4 percent in 
the December 2022 quarter (figure 2.5), 
and is one of many indicators that suggest 
employment remains above its maximum 
sustainable level. However, most of our 
labour market indicators show that pressures 
eased marginally over 2022, while still 
remaining strong (figure 2.6). 
While businesses report labour as being 
the most significant factor holding back 
production, delays in shipping and 
production continue to act as constraints on 
economic activity. Supply-chain bottlenecks 
are easing globally, but this has yet to 
translate meaningfully into improved supply 
conditions and lower costs for New Zealand 
firms (figure 2.7). Discussions with businesses 
suggest that these pressures are likely to 
persist in New Zealand for some time.
Figure 2.6
Maximum sustainable employment 
(MSE) indicator suite
Source: NZIER, Stats NZ, MBIE, ANZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The Reserve Bank uses a range of indicators when assessing MSE, consistent with 
clause 2.1b of the Remit. The vertical lines on the left-hand and right-hand sides represent 
the weakest and strongest data outcomes since 2000, respectively. For example, a lower 
unemployment rate is considered to be stronger. An orange dot to the left of a black dot 
means that the latest data outcome was weaker than in the March 2022 quarter, when the 
labour market was particularly tight.
Figure 2.4
QSBO factor most limiting production
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: NZIER, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.5
Unemployment rate
(unemployed people as a share of the labour force, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
13
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Figure 2.7
Shipping costs for consumer goods
(share of import value for duty)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: These series are estimated by taking the value of consumer merchandise imports 
including freight and insurance costs (CIF) and subtracting the reported value for duty 
(VFD), which excludes these costs. They are expressed as a percentage of the VFD figure. 
Figure 2.8
Real wage and income growth
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Deflated by headline CPI.
The tight labour market has 
contributed to high CPI inflation
Although same-job wage inflation has not 
kept pace with higher CPI inflation, broader 
measures of average earnings and incomes 
have been more resilient (figure 2.8). As 
discussed further in chapter 4.2, other ways 
in which workers have obtained higher 
wages in an environment of labour shortages 
have been through increased movement 
between employers and potentially asking 
for more frequent wage increases. If these 
behaviours continue, they will increase 
the risk of more persistent wage and CPI 
inflation.
High wage inflation has contributed to broad-
based strength in domestic inflation. Annual 
non-tradables inflation – which measures 
price changes for goods and services that 
are less exposed to international competition 
– was 6.6 percent in the December 2022 
quarter. Housing construction costs, rent, 
and domestic airfares and accommodation 
have been significant contributors to non-
tradables inflation (figure 2.9). The lag 
between changes in house prices and 
construction costs has been longer than 
usual in recent years. This may be due to 
unusual supply-chain bottlenecks and a long 
pipeline of residential development work. 
However, construction cost inflation eased 
in the December quarter to its lowest rate 
in nearly two years. As discussed in Box 
A, repairs and rebuilding activity following 
the severe storms over much of the North 
Island will likely lead to upward pressure on 
construction cost inflation, particularly in the 
near term.
Figure 2.9
Contributions to non-tradables inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
14
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
High inflation has also 
reflected global factors
The lagged impacts of high global 
commodity prices, in addition to worker 
shortages and difficult growing conditions 
in New Zealand, have translated into very 
high food price inflation (figure 2.10). The 
recent increase in international visitors has 
also boosted inflation in tourism-related 
sectors. For example, international airfares 
have increased nearly 20 percent in each of 
the past two quarters. Petrol prices, which 
accounted for some of the increase in 
inflation through 2022, have since declined 
from their peak as global oil prices have 
eased (figure 2.11). Overall, annual tradables 
inflation was 8.2 percent in the December 
quarter.
Inflation is too high
As discussed further in chapter 4.1, the 
correlation between global and domestic 
inflation appears to have been increasing 
gradually throughout time, and more sharply 
since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Global and domestic factors have both 
contributed significantly to high CPI inflation 
since 2021 (figure 2.12). While inflation is 
broad-based, services sector prices have 
accounted for an increasing share of price 
growth in recent quarters (figure 2.13). This 
reflects the shift in household spending from 
goods towards services in New Zealand and 
overseas over the past year, as COVID-19 
restrictions have been unwound. 
Figure 2.11
Petrol and Dubai oil prices
Source: Datamine – Gaspy data, Stats NZ, Reuters, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: Gaspy fuel prices are indexed to the petrol CPI level in the December 2019 
quarter. 
Figure 2.10
Contributions to tradables inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 2.12
Contributions to CPI inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
15
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
At 7.2 percent, annual CPI inflation is too high. 
Measures of core inflation, which attempt to 
remove one-off or particularly volatile price 
movements, also remain elevated (figure 2.14). 
High core inflation is particularly concerning 
for central banks because it tends to be 
persistent. It is also the aspect of inflation 
on which monetary policy has the greatest 
influence, albeit with significant lags. 
Inflation expectations across all time horizons 
have also increased since 2021. These 
expectations remained at elevated levels 
following the release of the latest CPI data 
(figure 2.15). As discussed in the November 
Statement, elevated inflation expectations 
imply that the short-term nominal neutral 
interest rate has increased recently, meaning 
that interest rates need to increase by more 
to exert the same influence on the economy.
There are signs that domestic 
demand is starting to ease 
as expected
The MPC has been increasing interest rates 
since the latter half of 2021. Higher interest 
rates lower domestic demand relative to 
the economy’s ability to sustainably supply 
goods and services. This reduces inflationary 
pressure over the medium term. 
Actual and expected OCR increases have 
seen the interest rates faced by households 
and businesses increase quickly over the 
past 18 months. Although the New Zealand 
economy remained strong in 2022, there are 
signs that domestic demand may be slowing 
as expected at the time of the November 
Statement. In particular, areas of the economy 
more directly affected by changes in interest 
rates – such as household spending and 
construction – showed some early signs of 
easing in late 2022:  
•	 While only a partial measure of household 
spending, the value of electronic card 
transactions declined in nominal terms in 
November and December, particularly for 
durable goods (figure 2.16). 
Figure 2.14
Headline and core inflation measures
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The light brown shaded area represents the MPC’s 1-3 percent target range 
for inflation over the medium term.
Figure 2.13
CPI inflation for goods and services components
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.15
Inflation expectations
(annual, years ahead)
Source: RBNZ Survey of Expectations (Business).


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
16
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
•	 New building consent numbers are also 
declining as the outlook for the residential 
construction sector has deteriorated.
•	 Although the labour market remains very 
tight, most indicators marginally eased 
over 2022 (figure 2.6). In particular, job 
vacancy numbers have started to decline 
across most regions and industries 
(figure 2.17).  
High-frequency activity indicators over the 
start of 2023 have been mixed, and may be 
subject to higher volatility in coming months 
due to the effects of recent severe storms in 
the North Island. 
Many mortgage borrowers are re-pricing to 
new interest rates that are higher than the 
‘stress’ test rates used by banks in recent 
years to assess loan affordability. To date, 
the share of mortgages for which scheduled 
payments have fallen behind remains very 
low, likely reflecting that household incomes 
have also increased during this time. 
However, this share is expected to increase 
as the economy contracts and employment 
declines from very high levels.
Higher interest rates, lower house prices 
and a weaker labour market are expected to 
lower household consumption over coming 
years, with per-person consumption assumed 
to return to around its pre-pandemic level 
over the projection (figure 2.2). Residential 
investment is also assumed to start to decline 
from high levels around the middle of this 
year, and fall to a much lower share of the 
economy over the forecast horizon. As 
discussed in Box A, this underlying decline 
may be masked by repair work following the 
severe storms over much of the North Island. 
Figure 2.16
Electronic card transactions
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ.
Note: Core retail excludes fuel, vehicles, non-retail and services. Durables are included in 
core retail.
Figure 2.17
Job vacancies
(3-month moving average, seasonally adjusted)
Source: MBIE, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
17
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Average house prices across New Zealand 
have continued to fall from their November 
2021 peak, in response to higher interest 
rates, low population growth and increased 
housing supply. House prices have declined 
by around 15 percent to date, and are 
assumed to fall by about 23 percent in total 
from their peak by 2024 (figure 2.18). This 
decline is larger than that assumed in the 
November Statement, in part due to our 
continually evolving understanding of house 
price sustainability. The extent of the house 
price decline is highly uncertain. 
High levels of government spending, 
including activities related to the COVID-19 
pandemic response and ongoing cost-of-
living support measures, have contributed to 
strong domestic demand. Over the medium 
term, real government spending is assumed 
to decline in line with the Half Year Economic 
and Fiscal Update 2022 projections.
Global factors are contributing
to softening demand
While there are signs that the more 
domestically driven areas of demand in 
New Zealand may be easing as expected, 
the weaker global environment appears to 
be having a faster impact than assumed. 
Central banks responded to high inflationary 
pressures in their own economies by 
increasing interest rates, rapidly in some 
cases. The resulting declines in economic 
growth in some of our key trading partners 
and the temporary disruption caused by 
the spread of COVID-19 in China have 
contributed to recent weaker demand for 
New Zealand’s key commodity exports, 
such as dairy and meat. While these prices 
were expected to decline at the time of 
the November Statement, the decline has 
occurred more quickly than assumed, and led 
to a lower outlook for New Zealand’s terms of 
trade (figure 2.19). 
The medium-term outlook for our goods and 
services export volumes has improved slightly 
since the November Statement, due to the 
earlier reopening of China than expected. 
Overall, global developments are assumed 
to have a similar effect on the New Zealand 
economy as in the November Statement, 
although the timing and channels differ.
As discussed in chapter 3, improved financial 
market sentiment following lower global 
inflation outturns and the reopening of China 
has contributed to an appreciation of the 
New Zealand dollar relative to that which 
was assumed at the time of the November 
Statement. All else being equal, a higher 
New Zealand dollar exchange rate reduces 
demand for our goods and services exports, 
dampening exporters’ incomes. A higher 
exchange rate also lowers the costs of the 
goods and services we import, reducing 
inflationary pressure in New Zealand.
Figure 2.18
House prices
(nominal)
Source: CoreLogic, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.19
Terms of trade
(goods and services, seasonally adjusted, System of National Accounts)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
18
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
The continued weakening in global 
economic growth is assumed to further 
reduce demand growth for New Zealand’s 
exports over the medium term. Businesses 
are also expected to delay or cancel 
investment plans in the face of heightened 
global uncertainty, lower export revenue and 
higher domestic interest rates. However, 
continued growth in New Zealand’s services 
exports is assumed to provide some 
offset, and the easing of travel and activity 
restrictions in China may also support global 
demand over the medium term.
Annual inflation will return to 2 
percent over the medium term
An easing in overall demand due to higher 
interest rates here and abroad is expected 
to reduce inflationary pressure over coming 
years. Lower demand will result in less 
pressure on the available supply of labour 
and goods, resulting in less pressure on 
prices and lower domestic inflation. Slow 
growth in our trading partner economies will 
lead to easing imported inflation and demand 
for New Zealand’s goods exports. With 
both non-tradables and tradables inflation 
expected to decline over the medium term, 
annual CPI inflation is assumed to return to 
within the 1 to 3 percent target band in the 
second half of 2024, and to 2 percent by the 
end of 2025 (figure 2.20).
Because the New Zealand economy is 
starting from a position of very high inflation 
and a tight labour market, an economic 
contraction is likely. The peak-to-trough 
decline in the level of GDP over 2023 is 
expected to be about 1 percent in the central 
projection. While this recession is assumed 
to be spread over several quarters from the 
middle of this year, there is considerable 
uncertainty about the timing. The extent 
of the underlying contraction may also be 
masked by volatility in activity due to the 
recovery from the severe storms throughout 
the North Island.
A consequence of slowing economic 
growth is that the unemployment rate is 
likely to increase from current low levels. 
Net immigration is also assumed to return 
towards long-run average levels, which will 
increase labour supply while also adding to 
overall demand. Keeping the unemployment 
rate near current levels without experiencing 
unsustainably high wage and inflation 
pressures would require structural changes 
in the labour market that are beyond the 
control of the Reserve Bank.
Figure 2.20
CPI inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


19
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Box A
The economic impacts of recent
severe storms in the North Island
Over the past few weeks, 
severe storms –  including 
Cyclone Gabrielle – have 
occurred throughout the North 
Island, particularly in Northland, 
Auckland, Coromandel, Waikato, 
Bay of Plenty, Gisborne and 
Hawke’s Bay. Some people have 
lost their lives. Many people have 
lost their homes, vehicles and 
possessions. Others have had 
their businesses disrupted. There 
has been significant damage 
to crops, land, inventories and 
equipment. Apart from these 
financial and material losses, the 
emotional stress continues to be 
immense and our thoughts are 
with those affected. 
These storms have occurred at 
a time when labour and other 
resources in the economy are 
already scarce. Existing capacity 
constraints may mean these 
storms are more inflationary than 
previous natural disasters and 
it may take longer for recovery 
work to take place. The best 
contribution monetary policy can 
make is to free up resources by 
slowing demand elsewhere in 
the economy with higher interest 
rates. This will also limit further 
increases in the cost of living over 
the medium term. 
It is still early in the recovery 
process and estimates of the 
wider economic impacts are 
highly uncertain. However, 
these events will likely result in 
somewhat higher-than-otherwise 
inflation in the near term. They 
have destroyed capital stock, 
thereby reducing supply, and will 
increase demand over coming 
years (table A1).
Table A1
Summary of economic impacts of the North Island storms
Near-term effects
Beyond
Inflation
•	 Increased prices for cars, food, 
accommodation and
construction work
•	 Higher-than-otherwise prices for 
construction work
•	 Possibility of inflation expectations 
remaining high
Economic activity 
•	 Decreased consumption and imports due 
to business and transport disruptions
•	 Increased consumption and imports 
of replacement goods such as carpets, 
furniture, appliances and vehicles
•	 Decreased goods exports, including 
fruit, vegetables, logs, meat and dairy
•	 Increased private construction activity 
and investment to repair houses and 
businesses 
•	 Increased government funded 
construction activity to repair roads, 
bridges, schools and other affected 
infrastructure
Capital stock
•	 Reduced productive capacity due to 
damaged infrastructure, buildings 
and land 
•	 Rebuilding of the capital stock, including 
making it more resilient to future severe 
weather events


20
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Acute shortages from the 
storms will contribute to 
near-term inflation
Shortages of goods and services 
arising as a consequence of 
these storms are likely to put 
upwards pressure on already 
elevated prices. In particular, 
fruit, vegetables, cars and 
appliances are all likely to see 
price increases. Likewise, the 
acute need for building and land 
repair work will contribute to price 
pressures in the construction 
sector. As a consequence, 
headline inflation is likely to 
remain elevated in the near term, 
even as inflationary pressure 
in other parts of the economy 
eases. While estimates are highly 
uncertain, our central projection 
assumes the storms result in an 
additional 0.3 percentage points 
on CPI inflation in each of the 
March and June 2023 quarters.
Widespread damage has 
occurred to fruit and vegetable 
crops throughout the North 
Island. For example, apples, 
avocados, kiwifruit, kumara, 
maize, onions, potatoes and wine 
grapes have all been affected 
to varying degrees and may see 
reduced availability and higher 
prices. Poor growing conditions 
had already reduced fruit and 
vegetable quality this season, and 
these effects will be compounded 
by the severe storms. 
Vehicle flooding is likely to create 
significant shortages in the used 
and new car markets. The near-
term supply of vehicles has been 
reduced by floods in some car 
yards. High inflation in car prices 
is likely to persist in the first half of 
this year.
Many homes have had flooding 
that damaged appliances and 
furnishings. Appliances with 
electrical components that 
have flooded will need to be 
replaced. Although inventories 
are reportedly relatively high 
at present, the volume of 
replacements required at the 
same time may exceed capacity. 
As a result, already elevated 
inflation in this CPI subcomponent 
is likely to persist. Repairing 
homes will require materials and 
construction workers, which may 
keep construction cost inflation 
higher for longer than assumed in 
the November Statement.
All else being equal, these severe 
storms will keep CPI inflation 
high for longer and may lead to a 
longer period with inflation above 
7 percent. Monetary policy will 
look through the direct effects 
of these events on near-term 
inflation, as they are likely to 
be temporary. The largest risk 
of higher near-term inflation to 
the medium-term outlook – and 
therefore to monetary policy – 
comes from inflation expectations 
remaining elevated for longer 
than otherwise.
Storm damage may 
reduce GDP growth
in the near term
Storms throughout the North 
Island have temporarily closed 
many businesses, caused power 
outages and blocked transport 
routes for customers and 
suppliers. These disruptions have 
been extensive in some regions 
and will reduce consumption 
and imports over the first half of 
this year. However, purchases of 
replacement goods, including 
appliances, carpets, clothing and 
vehicles, will at least partially 
provide offsets to any fall in 
consumption and imports. At this 
stage, the net near-term effects 
on consumption and imports are 
uncertain.
Exports are likely to be weaker 
in the near term. The storms will 
reduce horticultural exports this 
season and may affect future 
seasons depending on the extent 
of damage to trees, vines, land 
and equipment. Slips on roads 
and closures of processing 
facilities mean some exports will 
be delayed and some production 
will be wasted. Harvesting of 
forests and transporting and 
processing of logs have been 
disrupted, decreasing near-term 
exports. Long-term supply may be 
affected by damages to forests. 
Losses of livestock may also 
reduce the exports of meat and 
dairy. Travel disruptions, especially 
at Auckland Airport, may lower 
services exports. In our central 
projection we have assumed 
some near-term reduction in 
exports, although the magnitude 
is highly uncertain given limited 
information at this time.


21
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Rebuilding New Zealand’s 
productive capacity will 
take time and resources
Slips, flooding and strong winds 
have damaged land, buildings 
and infrastructure. This has 
reduced the productive capacity 
of New Zealand and may worsen 
pre-existing capacity constraints. 
It is also likely that these storms 
will encourage further activity 
to increase the resilience of 
households and businesses to 
such weather events, although 
this is likely to take at least 
several years.
Damage to property will require 
resources from the construction 
sector to repair and rebuild, 
adding to the existing pipeline of 
construction work. Any payouts 
from insurers will likely take some 
time to be made and it will take 
even longer for construction 
work to start. Insurance costs 
will provide an initial indication 
of the extent of the impacts 
on medium-term economic 
activity. However, the effects on 
economic activity will likely be 
larger than the insurance costs 
due to the damage to uninsured 
or underinsured assets. 
While estimates are highly 
uncertain, our central projection 
incorporates an assumption that 
the recovery from these storms 
will add about 1 percent to annual 
GDP, spread over coming years. 
It is possible that the recovery 
will evolve in such a way that the 
expected contraction in GDP 
through 2023 will be delayed 
or reduced, at the margin. Our 
central projection also assumes 
a reduction in the productive 
capacity of the economy.
Our early assumption is based 
on recoveries from other natural 
disasters, including the 2021 
Queensland floods, the 2016 
Kaikōura earthquake and the 
1968 Cyclone Giselle. We have 
assumed that the repair and 
rebuild from the storms will crowd 
out or delay activities that would 
otherwise have occurred. For 
example, some building work is 
likely to be delayed as repairs 
are undertaken. Any additional 
capacity pressure over the 
medium term may need to be 
offset through monetary policy, to 
ensure that inflation sustainably 
returns to the target band.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
22
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Monetary policy outlook
Overall, the New Zealand economy has 
evolved largely as expected at the time of 
the November Statement. CPI inflation in 
the December 2022 quarter was lower than 
expected. However, the downside surprise 
was mainly accounted for by declines in 
petrol prices in December 2022 and lower-
than-expected construction cost inflation. 
Inflation in other non-tradable components 
was broadly as assumed. Measures of core 
inflation and inflation expectations remain 
elevated. The starting point for capacity 
pressure in the economy is also stronger than 
was assumed. Employment remains above its 
maximum sustainable level.
Conditional on our central economic outlook, 
it is expected that the OCR will need to 
increase to a similar extent as assumed in the 
November Statement, in order for the MPC to 
meet its inflation and employment objectives 
(figure 2.21).
Figure 2.21
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
23
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
CHAPTER 
03
Global 
developments 
and outlook
Mount Taranaki. Photo: Nele McHattie


Chapter 3 Global developments and outlook
24
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
CHAPTER 3
Global developments
and outlook
Global economic growth is 
expected to slow in 2023
Global growth is expected to moderate in 
2023, following a strong recovery after the 
COVID-19 pandemic. This easing in growth 
reflects the effects of the ongoing war in 
Ukraine, high inflation and higher global 
interest rates on economic activity. However, 
forecasts for global growth have increased 
slightly since the November Statement. 
The International Monetary Fund (IMF) has 
increased its forecast for global annual 
average growth over 2023 by 0.2 percentage 
points to 2.9 percent since October, although 
this remains lower than the estimated growth 
of 3.4 percent in 2022. 
A key change in the outlook has been the 
removal of many COVID-19 restrictions in 
China. This has increased expectations for 
near-term economic growth in China, as 
most forecasters did not expect restrictions 
to change much until later in 2023. Firmer 
Chinese demand may also spill over into 
stronger demand for many of China’s trading 
partners, including New Zealand.
Continued strength in the US labour market 
and lower energy prices than expected in 
Europe, due to a mild winter, have also led 
to an improved global growth outlook at the 
margin. However, global economic growth 
is still expected to slow and be well below 
historical average rates (figure 3.1). Despite 
the weak growth outlook, unemployment is 
expected to increase only slightly back to 
around pre-COVID-19 levels (figure 3.2).
Figure 3.1
Annual GDP growth forecasts 
for key trading partners
Source: Haver Analytics, Consensus Economics, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Growth rate forecasts are based on Consensus Economics estimates, except for 
New Zealand’s, which is based on our current projection.


Chapter 3 Global developments and outlook
25
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
In the US, GDP grew by 0.7 percent in 
the December 2022 quarter. Domestic 
consumption rose by 0.5 percent, supported 
by the rundown of savings and a higher 
usage of credit. However, consumer 
confidence remains low and the household 
savings rate is now below pre-COVID-19 
levels. The US unemployment rate has fallen 
to its lowest rate in more than 50 years. 
Wage growth remains strong, although has 
eased slightly over recent quarters.
Economic growth in the euro area remains 
low, but has been better than expected, 
with GDP increasing by 0.1 percent in the 
December 2022 quarter. A mild winter, falling 
energy prices and fiscal support contributed 
to this resilience. Household consumption 
in the euro area has continued to increase, 
driven by spending on services rather than 
goods. Unemployment in the euro area 
remains historically low at 6.6 percent, 
although there has been some decline in the 
number of job vacancies.
In Australia the labour market remains strong, 
with unemployment at 3.7 percent. The 
IMF expects annual average GDP growth 
in Australia to slow to 1.6 percent in 2023, 
compared to 3.6 percent in 2022.
Inflation has eased in some 
economies in recent months
Commodity prices remain high, in part 
because of the war in Ukraine, but have 
eased from their peaks. This decrease has 
contributed to declines in headline inflation 
(figure 3.3). However, inflation remains well 
above historical averages, and measures of 
core inflation remain high (figure 3.4). 
•	 In the US, annual headline inflation eased 
to 6.4 percent in January 2023.  Falling 
prices for fuel and a range of other goods 
contributed to the decline. Annual core 
inflation (excluding food and energy) was 
5.6 percent in January 2023, down slightly 
from recent peaks. 
Figure 3.3
Annual headline inflation for key trading partners
Source: Haver Analytics.
Figure 3.4
Annual inflation excluding food and 
energy for key trading partners
Source: Haver Analytics.
Figure 3.2
Unemployment rates for key trading partners
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Bloomberg, Consensus Economics, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Unemployment rate forecasts are an average for 2023 based on Consensus 
Economics estimates, except for New Zealand’s, which is based on our current projection.


Chapter 3 Global developments and outlook
26
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
•	 Also due to lower energy prices, annual 
headline inflation in the euro area declined 
to 8.5 percent in January 2023, down from 
a peak of 10.6 percent in October 2022. 
Annual core inflation in the euro area has 
continued to increase, to 5.2 percent, but is 
much lower than for most other key trading 
partners.
•	 In Australia, annual headline inflation rose 
to 7.8 percent in the December 2022 
quarter, and core inflation measures 
have also increased. Inflation remains 
widespread, with a notable increase in 
holiday and accommodation costs as 
Australia’s tourism sector recovers.
COVID-19 restrictions in China 
have eased
In December 2022, Chinese authorities 
announced the country would remove 
COVID-19 restrictions following years of 
mobility restrictions and rigorous testing. 
Recent data suggest activity has rebounded 
quickly after an initial spike in COVID-19 
cases. Because COVID-19 restrictions 
have eased much faster and sooner than 
forecasters anticipated, an earlier rebound 
in economic activity has been incorporated 
into projections for Chinese growth. For 
instance, in January 2023 the IMF increased 
its forecast for GDP growth in China for 2023 
to 5.2 percent, compared to 4.4 percent in 
October 2022.
The reopening of China is likely to add 
to global demand over 2023. Chinese 
consumption is expected to increase, in 
particular for labour-intensive service sectors 
such as dining and entertainment. Increased 
activity and economic confidence are likely 
to increase demand for global commodities, 
including for meat and dairy – important 
goods exports for New Zealand. Fewer 
border restrictions mean the number of 
Chinese travelling overseas is likely to rapidly 
increase. This fast demand recovery may 
cause a lift in inflationary pressure in China.
Central banks are slowing the 
pace of tightening
Many central banks have slowed the pace 
of policy rate increases over recent months 
(table 3.1). In some countries this reflects 
central bank assessments that inflation has 
peaked. Consistent with this, market pricing 
for the peak in central bank policy rates 
has decreased slightly since the November 
Statement. Central banks are slowing the 
pace of monetary policy tightening to assess 
the lagged impacts of recent rapid policy 
tightening on economic growth, the labour 
market and inflation (figure 3.5). Overall, 
further declines in inflation are expected 
through 2023. 
Figure 3.5
Central bank policy interest rates and market 
pricing for future policy rate levels
(as at 16 February 2023)
Source: Bloomberg.


Chapter 3 Global developments and outlook
27
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Figure 3.6
Equity market indices 
(index=100 on 1 January 2020)
Source: Bloomberg.
Table 3.1
Selected central bank policy rate changes
Fed
ECB
BoE
RBA
RBNZ
Current policy rate (%)
4.50-4.75
2.50
4.00
3.35
4.25
Expected peak rate (%)
5.2
3.5
4.5
4.1
5.5
Previous policy move (bps)
+25
+50
+50
+25
+75
Expected next move (bps)
+25
+50
+25
+25
+50
Next meeting date
23 March
17 March
23 March
7 March
22 February
Source: Bloomberg.
Note: The ‘expected peak rate’ and ‘expected next move’ are implied by overnight indexed swaps as of 16 February 2023.
Financial market risk sentiment 
has improved
Risk sentiment in global financial markets 
has improved recently. Global equity 
indices have increased, and the US dollar 
has depreciated. This reflects increasing 
confidence among investors that headline 
inflation has peaked across most economies, 
together with a slight improvement in the 
global economic growth outlook, particularly 
for China and the euro area. 
Since the November Statement, the US dollar 
index has depreciated by 2 percent. The 
US S&P 500 equity index has increased by 
3 percent since the November Statement 
(figure 3.6), supported by a rise in interest-
rate-sensitive sectors such as technology 
and real estate. European equity market 
returns have increased as economic activity 
has proven more resilient than expected.
A number of commodity prices have 
increased on expectations of stronger 
Chinese demand, although levels remain 
below recent peaks. They include rises in 
industrial metals prices, with iron ore prices 
having increased by 21 percent and copper 
prices by 9 percent since the November 
Statement. Soft commodity prices such 
as those for dairy and meat – particularly 
relevant for New Zealand exporters – have 
not recovered as much. 


Chapter 4 Special topics
28
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Crown Range, Queenstown. Photo: Rebecca Williams
CHAPTER 
04
Special topics


Chapter 4 Special topics
29
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
CHAPTER 4 
Special topics 
Before the publication of each Statement, the MPC is provided 
with analyses of some topical issues. 
Topics for the February Statement included: 
1.	 The international dimension of non-tradables inflation 
2.	 Monitoring the labour market for inflationary pressures with high-frequency microdata
Special topics in the past 12 months
Topic
Date/publication
The neutral interest rate
MPS November 2022 (Chapter 4)
Developments in real wages
MPS November 2022 (Chapter 4)
Global inflation developments 
MPS August 2022 (Chapter 3)
Assessing recent inflation surprises
MPS August 2022 (Chapter 3)
Business conditions
MPS August 2022 (Chapter 3)
Global inflation developments
MPS May 2022 (Chapter 4)
The outlook for household spending, house prices, 
and construction
MPS May 2022 (Chapter 4)
International developments and risks
MPS February 2022 (Chapter 4)
Inflation expectations
MPS February 2022 (Chapter 4)


Chapter 4 Special topics
30
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
The international dimension
of non-tradables inflation
1	
A good or service is categorised as being ‘tradable’ if they are imported or are in competition with foreign goods, either in domestic or 
foreign markets. Using this definition, tradables tend to be dominated by goods, such as clothing, household contents, transport vehicles, 
recreational equipment and supplies. The non-tradables class tends to be more dominated by services such as housing, utilities, education, 
insurance, and transport services. Some groups can have both tradable and non-tradable constituents, as the distinctions are made at the 
subgroup and in some cases at the item level. For example, the food category was 62 percent tradables and 38 percent non-tradables in the 
2020 CPI weightings.
Summary
•	 In a globalised world with interdependent 
supply chains, few prices are completely 
immune to international influences.
•	 In principle, non-tradables inflation has 
a low direct exposure to international 
competition. This should ensure that non-
tradables prices are more determined 
by domestic demand and supply. In 
contrast, tradables inflation largely reflects 
international factors. 
•	 However, the correlation between non-
tradables inflation and global inflation 
has steadily increased since the Global 
Financial Crisis (GFC). Two key drivers 
may be at play:
	◦
There may be global factors that are 
influencing New Zealand inflation 
more, either directly or indirectly.
	◦
Advanced economies have 
seen similar macroeconomic 
developments and responses from 
policymakers over this period, 
causing inflation in these economies 
to co-move more.
•	 When global factors have a stronger 
influence on New Zealand, monetary 
policy may face larger trade-offs between 
reducing high inflation and higher 
economic costs through lost output and 
lower employment.
Central banks in open economies have 
more influence on the prices of goods and 
services that are less exposed to fluctuations 
in exchange rates and international prices. 
In the New Zealand CPI, a good or service is 
categorised as being ‘non-tradable’ if it faces 
little foreign competition.1
More than 60 percent of the CPI basket is 
attributed to the prices of non-tradable goods 
and services. In principle, low exposure 
to international trade should ensure that 
non-tradables prices are more determined 
by domestic demand and supply than 
international factors. 
However, in recent years the COVID-19 
pandemic and the war in Ukraine have 
disrupted global supply chains. This has 
contributed to high and broad-based inflation 
in New Zealand and globally. During this 
extreme period, global factors may have 
had a greater influence on domestic inflation 
than usual. Examining correlations in inflation 
data across countries is a first step towards 
understanding the influence of international 
factors on non-tradables inflation in 
New Zealand.
1


Chapter 4 Special topics
31
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Figure 4.1
Correlations of New Zealand inflation 
with global headline inflation
Source: OECD, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: The chart shows how the correlations have evolved based on a sample range 
starting from Q1 1999 and ending between Q4 2008 and Q4 2022 (the sample range 
sequentially expanding from Q4 2008). The correlation coefficient is the simple 
contemporaneous correlation, and not the dynamic correlations between leads and lags  
of the data series.
Non-tradables inflation and
global inflation have become 
increasingly correlated
The correlation between non-tradables 
inflation and global inflation has increased 
since the GFC (figure 4.1). In this analysis, 
global inflation is measured using headline 
CPIs of 24 countries2 between the March 
1994 quarter and the December 2022 
quarter. The common movements in global 
inflation or the ‘global CPI component’ are 
calculated using the first principal component 
for the annual percentage changes of the 24 
CPI series.3 
The correlation between annual non-
tradables inflation and the global CPI 
component is calculated through an 
expanding range that starts in the March 
1999 quarter, with the end point progressively 
extending from the December 2008 to the 
December 2022 quarter. The correlation 
between non-tradables inflation and the 
global CPI component has risen from weakly 
positive levels after the GFC to about 0.68 
by the end of 2022 (figure 4.1). A peak level 
of 0.68 suggests that non-tradables inflation 
in New Zealand is at least in part related to 
movements in global prices.
As expected, the prices of tradable 
New Zealand goods and services are highly 
correlated with global inflation, and this 
relationship appears relatively stable 
through time. 
2	
The international dataset excludes New Zealand. The countries we include are: Australia, Austria, Belgium, Canada, Denmark, Finland, 
France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Israel, Italy, Japan, Korea, Luxembourg, Mexico, the Netherlands, Norway, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, 
Switzerland, the UK and the USA. 
3	
Principal component analysis is a statistical technique that reduces the number of data series dealt with, while still preserving much of the 
variation in the original dataset.


Chapter 4 Special topics
32
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Is this because the New Zealand 
economy has become more 
similar to other economies in 
general? 
A possible explanation for the higher 
correlation between global inflation and 
New Zealand non-tradables inflation is that 
economies have become more aligned 
and prices are merely one aspect of 
those relationships. The correlation of the 
New Zealand output gap – how much the 
economy is producing relative to its potential 
– with the first principal component of output 
gaps across the same 24 countries can be 
considered to explore this. However, the 
correlation has not significantly increased 
over the last 15 years (figure 4.2).4 This 
suggests that the increased correlation of 
global inflation with New Zealand inflation 
is unlikely to be associated with greater 
synchronisation of business cycles.
4	
This finding does differ from the academic literature that has found that the co-movement between economic activity across countries has 
increased over the period from 1985 to 2008. For example, see Kose, Otrok and Prasad (2012), ‘Global Business Cycles: Convergence or 
Decoupling’, International Economic Review, Vol 53, No 2.
5	
The items included in our analysis cover 96 percent of New Zealand’s non-tradables CPI, which comprise 58 percent of the total CPI 
basket.
Are there specific non-tradable 
goods or services driving the 
relationship?
Certain non-tradable goods and services 
may have become more related globally, 
explaining the stronger correlation between 
global inflation and New Zealand non-
tradables inflation overall. The New Zealand 
and Australian CPIs provide similar groupings 
that allow for a more disaggregated analysis 
to investigate this potential driver.5 This 
analysis finds that no common pattern 
emerges across the CPI basket items 
considered. The price inflation in some 
New Zealand non-tradables shows a 
decreasing correlation with the Australian 
equivalents over time, while some others stay 
stable. Several correlations remain extremely 
low over history. 
However, two items in the non-tradables 
grouping that show strengthening 
correlations over time are the purchase of 
new housing, and domestic air travel and 
accommodation services (figure 4.3). This 
may in part reflect the worldwide impact 
of sharply lower interest rates supporting 
housing as well as travel disruptions 
associated with the effects of the COVID-19 
pandemic and respective policy responses. 
The New Zealand-Australia correlation 
profiles for these items steepen over 2020-
22, much like the correlation of non-tradables 
inflation with the global inflation component 
in figure 4.1. However, these patterns do 
not recur consistently across other items 
in the New Zealand and Australian CPI 
non-tradables basket. The evidence of 
co-movement is much stronger in the case 
of aggregate New Zealand non-tradables 
inflation and broader global inflation.
Figure 4.2
Inflation correlations and economic 
activity correlations
Source: OECD, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: The chart shows how the correlations have evolved based on a sample range 
starting from Q1 1999 and ending between Q4 2008 and Q4 2022 (the sample range 
sequentially expanding from Q4 2008). The correlation coefficient is the simple 
contemporaneous correlation, and not the dynamic correlations between leads and lags  
of the data series.


Chapter 4 Special topics
33
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Why might non-tradables inflation 
and global inflation have become 
more correlated?
The correlations shown do not identify the 
causal drivers of the co-movement between 
non-tradables inflation and global inflation. 
There are several possible causes: 
•	 Global inflation may influence 
New Zealand non-tradables inflation 
more. This could be directly by entering 
into the production process of non-
tradable goods and services (e.g. through 
fuel costs). Or it could be indirectly, such 
as through global inflation feeding into 
New Zealand inflation expectations, in 
turn affecting the price- and wage-setting 
behaviour in the non-tradables sector. 
•	 During periods of global disruption – 
such as the COVID-19 pandemic and 
the war in Ukraine – countries may 
suffer similar economic impacts and see 
similar policy responses. This can create 
a similar impact on inflation overseas 
and in New Zealand, irrespective of 
any spillovers from global inflation to 
New Zealand non-tradables inflation. 
•	 Longer-term ‘structural’ change may 
have occurred across countries 
simultaneously. Common international 
trends in labour market policy, 
demographics and technology would 
also strengthen the correlation between 
New Zealand non-tradables inflation and 
global inflation.
What does this mean for 
monetary policy?
If non-tradables inflation remains high 
due to international influences, monetary 
policy may face a larger trade-off between 
reducing high inflation and higher 
economic costs through lost output and 
lower employment. If the effects of the 
extraordinary international price dynamics 
of the recent years persist, the costs of 
contractionary monetary policy on real 
activity may increase. Conversely, if global 
pressures are deflationary, monetary policy 
may not need to tighten as much in order to 
sustainably reduce New Zealand’s headline 
inflation. We will continue to monitor 
the impacts of international forces on 
New Zealand inflation. 
Figure 4.3
Correlations of selected New Zealand 
and Australian CPI subgroups
Source: Australian Bureau of Statistics, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The chart shows how the correlations have evolved based on a sample range 
starting from Q1 1999 and ending between Q4 2008 and Q4 2022 (the sample range 
sequentially expanding from Q4 2008). The correlation coefficient is the simple 
contemporaneous correlation, and not the dynamic correlations between leads and lags  
of the data series.


Chapter 4 Special topics
34
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Monitoring the labour market for inflationary
pressures with high-frequency microdata
6	
These results are not official statistics. They have been created for research purposes from the Integrated Data Infrastructure (IDI) and 
Longitudinal Business Database (LBD) which are carefully managed by Stats NZ. For more information about the IDI and LBD please visit 
https://www.stats.govt.nz/integrated-data/. The results are based in part on tax data supplied by Inland Revenue to Stats NZ under the Tax 
Administration Act 1994 for statistical purposes. Any discussion of data limitations or weaknesses is in the context of using the IDI for statistical 
purposes, and is not related to the data’s ability to support Inland Revenue’s core operational requirements.
Summary
•	 High-frequency ‘microdata’ (pay-period 
data at the individual worker level) for job 
changes and wage adjustments help us 
better monitor and understand inflationary 
pressures in the labour market and wider 
economy.
•	 Workers are changing jobs more often 
since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, 
consistent with other labour market 
indicators. 
	◦
Higher job-to-job transitions suggest 
relatively greater competition 
between firms for workers, creating 
upward pressure on wages.
	◦
This increased competition for labour 
is broad-based across industries in 
New Zealand. Most industries are 
offering above-average pay rises.
•	 In line with overall wage growth, the 
higher-frequency data indicate that 
wage increases have become larger and 
more broad-based, particularly in the 
second half of 2022. In addition, wage 
adjustments show tentative signs of 
occurring more frequently. 
•	 Overall, these newer high-frequency 
measures indicate that wage inflation, 
and relatedly consumer price inflation, 
will remain high over coming months. 
Recent strong overall growth in demand 
and widespread labour shortages have 
contributed to the tightest domestic labour 
market since 2007. Previous analysis 
indicates that same-job wage increases have 
not yet outpaced CPI inflation (see chapter 
4.2 in the November Statement). 
However, broader measures of wage and 
income growth have shown greater strength. 
At the aggregate level, it appears that one 
way in which workers have gained higher 
wages is by moving employers or obtaining 
promotions. The newer high-frequency data 
can help us better monitor and understand 
the degree to which this is occurring by 
allowing us to consider how much workers 
move between jobs, and the frequency and 
size of pay adjustments made by firms.6 
This supports our assessment of where 
the labour market is relative to maximum 
sustainable employment. We can then assess 
the corresponding impacts of these capacity 
pressures on wage growth and on domestic 
inflation. 
2


Chapter 4 Special topics
35
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
How changing jobs and wage 
adjustments impact inflation
Job-to-job transitions help gauge 
the degree of competition between 
employers
Job-to-job transitions (people moving 
directly from one job to another) are the 
most common way vacancies are filled 
in New Zealand.7 Increasing job-to-job 
transitions indicate greater competition 
between employers. If some people in
a firm change jobs for higher pay, others
may follow.
For example, job-to-job transitions are 
negotiated at the market wage. This has the 
potential to affect both current and previous 
employers’ wage setting, placing upwards 
pressure on the wages paid by each. For 
previous employers, high turnover signals to 
other undervalued staff to consider switching 
jobs. Further, this potentially increases the 
workloads of remaining employees until 
replacements are hired and trained. This 
increases the likelihood that overworked 
staff will look for work elsewhere. On the 
other hand, a business hiring new staff 
on higher wages than existing staff may 
encourage current employees to look 
elsewhere for better pay. These factors 
increase the pressure for employers to 
raise the wages of existing staff to retain 
them. Businesses have confirmed higher 
job turnover and wage increases in 
conversations with the Reserve Bank over 
the past 18 months.
When job turnover is higher, employees are 
in a stronger bargaining position to seek 
higher pay. This adds upward pressure to 
nominal wage inflation.
7	
New Zealand averages about 150,000 job-to-job transitions per quarter. See Karagedikli (2018), ‘Job-to-job flows and inflation: Evidence 
from administrative data in New Zealand’, Analytical Note, Reserve Bank of New Zealand. This is, on average, about 2.5 times larger 
than the 60,000 people entering employment from Not In the Labour Force (NILF) and 6.25 times larger than the 24,000 people entering 
employment from unemployment.
Wage adjustment frequency affects
the speed of pass-through from
wages to prices
As pay rises are given more often, there is likely 
to be a faster pass-through of higher wage 
costs to prices. This is because it is likely to lead 
firms to make more frequent price changes 
to preserve profitability where possible. More 
frequent pay rises are also indicative of greater 
competition for labour as employers bid up 
available labour more rapidly.
Job-to-job transitions are elevated
In line with a tight labour market, job-to-job 
transitions in the domestic economy have 
increased since the start of the COVID-19 
pandemic. Relative to the total working-age 
population, job-to-job transitions are around 
levels last seen just prior to the GFC (figure 
4.4). This is indicative of increased competition 
between firms for workers. 
Many people switching jobs likely reflects 
both cyclical and structural drivers:
•	 Cyclical: A strong positive output gap 
(where actual output is above its long-run 
capacity) is consistent with high labour 
demand (figure 4.4).
Source: Stats NZ, Stats NZ IDI, RBNZ estimates.
Note: WAP stands for ‘working-age population’. Private sector job-to-job transitions 
exclude transitions in the Education and Training and Public Administration and Safety 
industries. Job-to-job transitions data points for December 2017 and March 2018 have 
been removed due to quality concerns.
Figure 4.4
Job-to-job transitions and the output gap


Chapter 4 Special topics
36
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
•	 Structural: Changes to the structure of 
New Zealand’s economy in response to 
COVID-19-related health restrictions (e.g. 
border restrictions and consequently 
reduced international labour supply; a 
shift towards remote working) may have 
an impact. The structure of the economy 
can also change through changing 
preferences. For example, firms may be 
less willing to train new staff or would 
prefer to instead compete over existing 
workers to a greater extent than before. 
Such changes can result in increased 
job-to-job transitions, particularly across 
industries and regions, which would 
further support wage growth.
The relationship between job-to-job 
transitions and income growth is fairly 
broad-based across industries in the latest 
available data (September 2022). Most 
industries were offering above-average 
nominal pay increases. At the same time, 
job-to-job transitions were higher than when 
employment was last assessed to be around 
its maximum sustainable level in the second 
half of 2019 (figure 4.5). 
8	
Annualised pay increases reflect a standardised pay increase scaled to the annual equivalent. So for someone who has waited six months 
since their last pay increase the annualised version would be roughly twice the amount observed, and for someone who has waited two 
years since their last increase the annualised version is roughly half.
9	
The high-frequency pay period data collected by Inland Revenue from April 2019 can be used to identify ‘usual’ income spells – continuous 
periods of time when an employer/employee relationship has a frequently observed income over the period. These Inland Revenue data 
are noisy, and the income in a given pay period may vary from the usual income due to a range of factors such as unpaid leave, variability in 
hours worked, overtime, public holidays and other data entry errors. 
Wage adjustment data confirms 
ongoing pressure in the labour 
market
To construct measures of wage adjustment, 
a measure of ‘usual wage’ is derived from 
the administrative tax data available through 
Stats NZ’s Integrated Data Infrastructure (IDI). 
Three measures of wage adjustment are then 
calculated using this ‘usual wage’: 
•	 annualised wage increase;8 
•	 time since last increase; and 
•	 number of people receiving increases.9
These measures enhance the currently 
published labour market statistics on 
wages because they can also track wage 
adjustments that have been realised due to 
job switching. They also suggest that pay 
growth has increased and broadened since 
mid-2021. In addition, wage adjustments 
show early signs of occurring more frequently. 
Current higher-frequency measures of labour 
market activity indicate that: 
•	 The median annualised pay increase for 
those receiving it in a given week has 
increased from around 6.2 percent at 
the start of 2022 to around 7.5 percent 
in September (figure 4.6). In addition, 
more people have been receiving pay 
increases over this time period (figure 4.7).
•	 The median time since the previous pay 
increase remained relatively flat over 2022 
(figure 4.8). While this series is volatile there 
are clear indications of more frequent pay 
adjustments for those who have waited 
longer than average, as well as in most 
of the industries included in the higher-
frequency data. However, to confirm the 
robustness of this change, more data 
points will need to be collected over time 
as the current time series is too short.
Source: Stats NZ, Stats NZ IDI.
Note: Any industry above the x-axis is currently experiencing higher than average annual 
job-to-job transition rates. Any industry to the right of the y-axis is experiencing higher than 
average annual income growth. 
Annual income growth is compared to the industry average from 2000 to 2019, with the 
historical average indexed to 0 percent. The job-to-job transition rate is the ratio of the 
number of outward job transitions (employees leaving their previous employer) against 
total employment per industry. Owing to the short time series, the job-to-job transition rate 
is compared to the industry average from the second half of 2019. 
Figure 4.5
Job-to-job transitions and income 
growth across industries 
(September 2022 quarter)


Chapter 4 Special topics
37
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
All four of the new higher-frequency 
measures of labour market activity discussed 
in this section point to a tight labour market 
supporting higher nominal wage growth. Job-
to-job transitions usually lead nominal wage 
growth. The currently elevated number of 
job-to-job transitions suggest that both wage 
and price inflation will remain elevated in the 
near term. The Reserve Bank will continue 
to monitor these indicators as part of a wider 
range of labour market measures to help us 
continuously improve our understanding of 
inflationary pressures in the labour market.
Source: Stats NZ, Stats NZ IDI, RBNZ estimates.	
Note: The solid pink line shows the smoothed trend constructed using the Hodrick-
Prescott filter method. This smoothing method constructs a trend series by ignoring short-
term data fluctuations.
Figure 4.6
Annualised pay increases
Source: Stats NZ, Stats NZ IDI, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The solid pink line shows the smoothed trend constructed using the Hodrick-
Prescott filter method.
Figure 4.7
Number of workers receiving pay increases 
Source: Stats NZ, Stats NZ IDI, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Data has been sorted based on the time since their last pay increase. For example, 
the 75th percentile is the boundary above which 25 percent of people have waited 
longest. The solid lines show the smoothed trends constructed using the Hodrick-Prescott 
filter method. 
Figure 4.8
How long are workers waiting for an increase? 


Chapter 4 Special topics
38
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
CHAPTER 
05
Financial 
conditions
Marlborough Sounds. Photo: Rebecca Williams


Chapter 5 Financial conditions
39
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
CHAPTER 5
Financial conditions
Monetary policy affects economic activity by influencing 
financial conditions in New Zealand. These include the interest 
rates at which households and businesses save and borrow, the 
exchange rate, and other factors such as credit availability.
Financial conditions have tightened since the November Statement, with retail 
interest rates rising in response to past increases in wholesale interest rates. 
Market participants’ expectations for the OCR 
have risen since the November Statement, 
with market pricing for the OCR moving 
higher across 2023 and expected to peak 
in the middle of the year (figure 5.1). In line 
with this, shorter-term wholesale interest 
rates have increased slightly (figure 5.2), 
while domestic interest rates at longer terms 
have remained broadly unchanged. This has 
driven the interest rate swap curve to invert 
further. Inverted interest rate curves are 
usually a sign of slowing expected growth. 
Economic data surprises in major economies 
continue to result in strong reactions in 
global financial markets. Despite this, the 
New Zealand financial markets continue to 
function well (figure 5.3). The New Zealand 
dollar is broadly unchanged on a trade-
weighted basis since the November 
Statement, with a period of appreciation in late 
2022 followed by a depreciation in early 2023 
(figure 5.4). US dollar weakness has been 
partially offset by strength in the Australian 
dollar, Japanese yen and Chinese yuan. Risk 
sentiment has been buoyed recently by an 
earlier-than-expected reopening of China 
and tentative signs that inflation is starting to 
decline globally.
Both mortgage and term deposit rates have 
risen since the November Statement, slightly 
more than their comparable wholesale 
rates. Short-term mortgage rates have risen 
by more than longer-term mortgage rates, 
leading to an inversion of the mortgage curve 
for the first time since 2008. Interest rates 
on term deposits, which make up a large 
percentage of banks’ core funding, have 
increased significantly (figure 5.5). These 
increases in retail rates partially reflect the 
lagged transmission of past increases in 
wholesale interest rates.
The Funding for Lending (FLP) programme 
additional allocation window ended on 6 
December 2022, with total drawdowns 
amounting to just over $19 billion. The FLP 
funding (3-year duration) will begin to mature 
in December 2023. The cost of raising 
long-term wholesale bank funding relative to 
benchmark wholesale rates (credit spread) 
is expected to increase as the FLP funding 
matures, but has remained relatively stable 
since the November Statement (figure 5.6).


Chapter 5 Financial conditions
40
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Table 5.1
Developments in domestic financial conditions as at 16 February 2023
Wholesale interest rates 
Market pricing 
for the OCR
•	 Current market expectations for the OCR are contractionary, above our estimates for the neutral 
OCR (see figure 7.4). Market participants now expect a slightly higher peak in the OCR than just 
before the time of the November Statement. Financial market expectations for the peak OCR in 
this tightening cycle, as measured by overnight indexed swap pricing, have risen around 15 basis 
points over this period, to 5.3 percent as at 16 February.  
•	 These moves have been influenced by a combination of both domestic and offshore economic 
data releases, with market pricing for the peak OCR trading within a range of 5.2 to 5.6 percent 
since the November Statement.
New Zealand 
Government 
Bonds (NZGB)
•	 NZGB yields at 1- and 2-year terms have increased by 25-30 basis points since the November 
Statement. Longer-term yields are broadly unchanged however, with the 10-year NZGB trading 
at 4.35 percent, as at 16 February. 
•	 The NZGB market continues to function well despite a temporary pick-up in volatility through late 
December. This volatility has been mostly attributed to a reduction in liquidity over the festive 
period, as opposed to any significant deterioration in market conditions. Despite this volatility, 
bid-ask spreads (how far apart buyers and sellers are from reaching an agreed price to trade) 
have returned to their November 2022 levels. The intraday range for the NZGB 10-year (the 
difference between the low and high prices on a given trading day) is currently lower than at the 
time of the November Statement.
Interest rate 
swaps
•	 New Zealand dollar interest rate swaps have been broadly consistent with the change in NZGB 
yields since the November Statement. The 2-year swap rate is now around 10 basis points 
higher than it was at the November Statement. As a consequence, there is now a steeper 
inversion across the swap curve. The difference between 2- and 10-year swap rates is now 75 
basis points. 
•	 Global interest rate swaps have increased in recent weeks, but are broadly unchanged since 
the November Statement. These rates continue to be a key influence on domestic interest rate 
movements. The US 2-year swap moved lower at the start of the year following weaker-than-
expected US inflation. However, this move has retraced in response to strong US labour market 
data and contributed to the recent increase in New Zealand interest rates. 


Chapter 5 Financial conditions
41
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
New Zealand dollar
Interest rate 
differentials
•	 In recent months, the difference between interest rates in New Zealand and those in major 
economies such as Australia, the US and Europe has narrowed. For example, since the start of 
2023 the difference between the 2-year NZGB yield and the 2-year Australian government bond 
yield has decreased by around 20 basis points. Decreases in New Zealand interest rates relative 
to key trading partners would typically be associated with a depreciation in the New Zealand dollar. 
•	 Even though interest rate differentials between New Zealand and its key trading partners have 
been narrowing in recent months, the New Zealand dollar remains at a similar level to that at the 
time of the November Statement.
Risk sentiment
•	 During periods of low uncertainty, financial market participants’ willingness to take on additional 
risks increases and demand for safe haven currencies, such as the US dollar, decreases. 
Typically, more positive risk sentiment is associated with an appreciating New Zealand dollar. 
•	 Market risk appetite appears to have improved since the November Statement in anticipation 
of the end of monetary policy tightening cycles globally, easing global inflationary pressure, 
and a better-than-expected, but still weak, global growth outlook. Risk sentiment has also been 
buoyed by the removal of COVID-19 restrictions in China.
Commodity 
prices
•	 Global prices of New Zealand’s key export commodities fell steadily over 2022. In particular, 
dairy prices hit a 2-year low in mid-January this year, but have since stabilised.
•	 Decreases in New Zealand’s key export commodity prices tend to be associated with a 
depreciation in the New Zealand dollar. 
Retail interest rates
Mortgage rates
•	 For the first time since 2008, the mortgage rate curve has inverted. As at 16 February, the 1- 
and 2-year fixed rate terms had increased by 65 and 45 basis points, respectively, since the 
November Statement. Increases have been smaller in the 3- to 5-year terms, leading to an 
inversion of the mortgage curve, with some banks even decreasing rates at these longer terms.
•	 Bank funding costs remain historically low relative to wholesale rates. However, mortgage 
rate increases have been larger than moves in wholesale interest rates at comparable terms, 
meaning the historically small spread between mortgage rates and wholesale interest rates is 
beginning to normalise.
Deposit rates
•	 Term deposit rates have increased since the November Statement. As at 16 February, they had 
increased by 85 basis points and 70 basis points in the popular terms of 6 months and 1 year 
respectively.  
•	 These increases mean that the 6-month rate is now at its highest since 2011, and the 1-year rate 
is at its highest since 2008.
•	 The deposit curve is now relatively flat, with the 5-year term deposit rate currently a few basis 
points below the 1-year rate. The spreads between term deposit rates and wholesale rates at 
comparable terms are still low.


Chapter 5 Financial conditions
42
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Bank funding conditions
Funding 
composition
•	 Term deposit volumes continue to increase, particularly at the 6-month and 1-year terms, as 
depositors switch from on-call accounts. This is increasing banks’ average funding costs, as the 
interest rates paid on term deposits are higher than those for on-call accounts. 
•	 FLP drawdowns between the November Statement and the end of the additional allocation 
drawdown window on 6 December 2022 were $2.6 billion. This took the total drawdowns
to $19 billion.
•	 Banks remain well-funded and have strong liquidity buffers. The core funding ratio rose by 0.2 
percentage points in December, to 91.2 percent. This is the highest ratio since data collection 
began in April 2010. 
Credit spreads
•	 The cost of raising long-term wholesale bank funding relative to benchmark wholesale rates has 
been relatively stable since the November Statement. It sits at levels higher than the 2020/21 
period and is also slightly higher than pre-pandemic levels. Short-term credit spreads have not 
risen and remain around the levels prevailing since the monetary response to the pandemic.
•	 Domestic credit spreads have increased at a slower pace than comparable measures for 
offshore issuers, although offshore credit spreads have decreased recently.


Chapter 5 Financial conditions
43
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Charts
All charts are as at 16 February 2023.
Figure 5.1
Market expectations for the OCR
Source: Bloomberg.
Note: Each data point represents market expectations of the level of the OCR 
at a given point in the future, as measured by overnight indexed swap pricing. 
For example, at the time of the November 2022 Statement market participants 
expected the OCR to reach 4.75 percent at the February 2023 Statement.
Figure 5.4
New Zealand dollar TWI and selected 
bilateral exchange rates
(index=100 at November Statement)
Source: RBNZ, NZFMA.
Figure 5.5
Term deposit rates
Source: interest.co.nz.
Note: The term deposit rates shown for each term are the average of the latest 
fixed-term rates on offer from ANZ, ASB, BNZ and Westpac. 
Figure 5.6
5-year bank credit spread
Source: Bloomberg, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: This credit spread is the difference between banks’ secondary market 
bond yields and the interest rate swap curve. The bond yield used for the 
5-year measure is the average of bonds with a remaining maturity of five years 
issued in New Zealand dollars by ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac. A lower spread 
represents a lower implied borrowing cost.
Figure 5.2
Global 2-year interest rate swaps
Source: Bloomberg.
Figure 5.3
2-year and 10-year New Zealand 
government bond bid-ask spreads
Source: Bloomberg.


Chapter 5 Financial conditions
44
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
CHAPTER 
06
Economic 
projections


Chapter 6 Economic projections
45
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
CHAPTER 6
Economic projections
This chapter summarises the baseline economic projections 
that the MPC members considered when making their policy 
assessment. The projections were finalised on 16 February 2023.
These projections rely on a set of key 
assumptions about the global and domestic 
factors influencing the New Zealand economy. 
These include:
•	 the extent to which global monetary 
tightening reduces activity and inflation in 
our key trading partners, and demand for 
New Zealand’s export goods and services;
•	 the speed and strength of the recovery of 
international tourism in New Zealand;
•	 the level of the exchange rate, which 
could add to or reduce imported inflation 
and domestic inflationary pressure;
•	 the outlook for the housing market, and the 
extent to which recent house price declines 
contribute to lower residential construction 
activity and household consumption;
•	 how businesses, consumers and workers 
respond to rising costs and higher interest 
rates in New Zealand; and
•	 the scale of repair and rebuild activity 
associated with recent severe storms 
throughout the North Island, and the 
associated impacts on prices of some key 
goods and services.
There is significant uncertainty about these 
assumptions, and actual outcomes could be 
different if they do not hold.
The projections take into account recent 
data, which show strong levels of economic 
activity, high inflation and a very tight labour 
market. High-frequency and forward-looking 
indicators suggest that economic growth is 
starting to slow, providing an early signal that 
capacity pressures may be easing from very 
elevated levels. The factors underpinning this 
starting point are discussed in chapter 2.
Inflation is expected to remain elevated 
in the near term. The ongoing recovery of 
international tourism in the 2022/23 summer 
has put further strain on an already stretched 
services sector, including transportation, 
hotels and restaurants. The severe storms 
throughout the North Island are likely to put 
additional pressure on scarce resources in 
the near term. 
However, global inflationary pressures 
are showing early signs of easing. Global 
shipping costs have declined substantially 
from their peak, and the prices of many 
commodities, including oil, have declined. 
Over time, these lower global price pressures 
are expected to result in lower imported 
inflation in New Zealand.
Over the medium term, we assume that 
lower export prices, ongoing weakness in 
the housing market, a declining share of 
government spending in the economy, and 
higher interest rates in New Zealand will 
substantially slow domestic demand growth. 
This will help labour market pressures to 
ease, as will an increasing labour supply 
through domestic population growth and net 
immigration. 
Consumer price inflation is expected to return 
to its 2 percent target midpoint towards the 
end of 2025. Given the expected slowing in 
domestic demand, the unemployment rate 
is likely to rise from exceptionally low levels. 
Employment is expected to fall below its 
maximum sustainable level.


Chapter 6 Economic projections
46
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Table 6.1
Key projection assumptions
Key factors
Global factors
•	 The global economic environment is highly inflationary, particularly in the short term. COVID-19 
and the war in Ukraine are still contributing to supply-chain disruptions and high energy costs. 
In the near term, elevated global inflation is expected to contribute to strong imported inflation 
in New Zealand. Over the medium term, falling global inflation is expected to see tradables 
inflation in New Zealand fall.
•	 The global economy is slowing in response to monetary policy tightening. Over the coming 
year, softening global demand is expected to reduce confidence, activity and export revenue 
in New Zealand.
•	 COVID-19 restrictions in China were eased earlier than expected at the end of 2022. This has 
likely contributed to lower commodity prices and reduced export demand out of China initially, 
as the country works through a difficult transitional phase. Over the second half of this year and 
beyond, the removal of restrictions on Chinese activity is expected to support goods export 
prices and volumes, and Chinese tourists are expected to gradually return to New Zealand.
•	 Prices for New Zealand’s export commodities have declined. The total expected peak-to-trough 
decline in New Zealand’s export goods basket is about 9 percent in world terms. In the near 
term, the weaker terms of trade are expected to reduce economic activity in New Zealand. 
However, this is expected to reverse in the medium term as real (inflation-adjusted) import 
prices fall to pre-COVID-19 levels and real export prices recover to around long-run historical 
averages.
•	 The New Zealand dollar TWI is assumed to remain around 71.5 over the projection.
International 
tourism
•	 International tourism has recovered strongly over the 2022/23 summer, in line with 
expectations at the time of the November Statement. Additional spending by overseas tourists 
is contributing to capacity pressures across the transport, accommodation and hospitality 
sectors. 
•	 We assume that tourism exports will have recovered to around 75 percent of their pre-
pandemic levels by the end of the summer season, and will surpass pre-pandemic levels by 
the end of the projection. The positive impulse to economic activity from the reopening of the 
border is expected to outweigh any negative impacts from softening global demand.
House prices 
and residential 
construction
•	 House prices have fallen by 15.2 percent since the peak in November 2021. House prices are 
projected to keep falling in 2023, consistent with very low sales volumes in recent months. 
House prices are assumed to have fallen by around 23 percent from their peak in 2021 to their 
trough in mid-2024, before recovering as interest rates decline toward their neutral setting. 
•	 Higher interest rates and lower house prices are expected to reduce incentives for residential 
construction over the projection horizon. Over the medium term, we assume that residential 
investment will decline towards its pre-pandemic share of the economy.
•	 Continued house price falls are expected to slow household spending growth over the 
projection as aggregate household wealth falls.
Severe storms 
throughout the 
North Island
•	 Severe storms have occurred over much of the North Island. It is still early in the recovery process 
and estimates of the wider economic impacts are highly uncertain (see Box A in chapter 2).
•	 Although estimates are uncertain, we assume that the recovery from these events adds about 
1 percent to annual GDP, spread over coming years. This estimate assumes that some recovery 
activity crowds out activity that would have otherwise occurred.
•	 We assume that the additional strain on resources, particularly in food, used cars, construction 
and maintenance materials, will increase quarterly inflation by about 0.3 percentage points in 
the March 2023 quarter, and an additional 0.3 percentage points in the June 2023 quarter. 
These effects are assumed to be largely temporary.


Chapter 6 Economic projections
47
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Economic growth
Production
•	 We assume the economy is still growing in the March 2023 quarter, supported by the return of 
international visitors.
•	 Economic activity has been expanding much faster than is sustainable over the past two years, 
leading to a large positive output gap and high inflation. The average annual output gap in 
2022 is estimated to be 2.4 percent of potential GDP, compared to 2.1 percent in 2021. 
•	 These projections contain a sustained, albeit shallow, period of economic contraction. GDP is 
assumed to decline by 1.1 percent over 2023. The timing of this contraction is
highly uncertain.
•	 We expect the output gap to start closing quickly as households and businesses cut back 
spending in response to higher interest rates.
•	 Over the medium term, the supply of goods and services is also expected to improve, 
expanding the productive capacity of the economy. 
•	 The combination of slower demand and rising supply is expected to result in a negative output 
gap for an extended period. The annual average output gap in 2024 is assumed to be -1.6 
percent of potential GDP.
Consumption
•	 Consumption growth was strong over 2022, supported by rising aggregate incomes. Incomes 
were buoyed by high export prices through 2022, high employment and longer working hours.
•	 High interest rates and lower house prices are expected to slow consumption growth over the 
coming quarters. Consumption is expected to decline on a per capita basis to trough at slightly 
above pre-pandemic levels by mid-2024.
Investment
•	 We assume that business investment is robust in the near term, reflecting the impacts from 
currently high capacity pressures. Business investment is expected to decline over the medium 
term, due to higher interest rates, declining export prices and easing capacity pressures. Global 
weakness is also likely to weigh further on business investment by adding to uncertainty about 
future global demand. 
•	 The outlook for residential construction remains similar to that of the November Statement. 
While building consent issuance has remained relatively elevated, we assume the construction 
sector remains at capacity and experiences limited near-term growth. Higher interest rates 
and lower house prices are expected to reduce demand and result in declines in residential 
construction over the next year.
Government
•	 We assume that government consumption and investment evolve in line with the fiscal 
forecasts in the Half Year Economic and Fiscal Update 2022. Elevated inflation is assumed to 
reduce government consumption in real terms.
Exports and 
imports
•	 Goods export prices and volumes have deteriorated in recent months as the global slowdown 
has started to impact export demand and domestic supply challenges have arisen. In the 
medium term, we assume that goods exports recover, in part due to the earlier-than-anticipated 
loosening of COVID-19 restrictions in China.
•	 International tourist arrivals and departures have increased roughly as anticipated in the 
November Statement, and with the eventual resumption of Chinese tourism we expect services 
export prices and volumes to be stronger over the next year than previously assumed. 
•	 Non-oil import prices are currently elevated in real (inflation-adjusted) terms. Non-oil import 
prices are expected to decline over the projection in line with moderating global inflation, 
declining shipping costs and easing of acute bottlenecks in global production.
•	 In the near term, imports have been weaker than expected, despite stronger GDP growth. 
However, a number of factors make data on the import share of GDP difficult to interpret, 
including the resumption of international travel and changes in the composition of oil imports 
following the closure of the Marsden Point oil refinery. 


Chapter 6 Economic projections
48
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Labour market
Employment 
and wages 
•	 The New Zealand labour market has remained exceptionally tight. Labour constraints are 
prevalent and the unemployment rate remained near record lows at 3.4 percent in the 
December 2022 quarter, while employment as a share of the working-age population reached 
record high levels. Our suite of labour market indicators continues to suggest that the economy 
is well above maximum sustainable employment (MSE). 
•	 Employment is starting from a very strong level. Over the medium term, employment is 
projected to decline in line with the economic contraction and may fall below MSE. This 
projection contains a modest decline in total employment, while the population continues to 
grow. The slowing in economic activity over several quarters, together with gradual growth in 
the labour force, is expected to reduce labour market pressures. The unemployment rate is 
assumed to increase from very low levels to around 5.7 percent at the end of the projection.
•	 Annual labour cost index (LCI) private sector wage inflation is expected to continue to increase, 
peaking at around 5.2 percent in 2023. This reflects ongoing labour shortages, expected 
further rises in the minimum wage and increased living-cost adjustments by employers.
Inflation
Headline
•	 Annual headline inflation is assumed to be 7.3 percent in the March 2023 quarter.
•	 Annual headline inflation is projected to decline to the top of the 1 to 3 percent target band in 
the second half of 2024, reaching the 2 percent target midpoint in 2025.
Tradables
•	 In the near term, the prices for some tradable goods, particularly food, appliances and used 
cars, are likely to increase. The severe storms have destroyed some supply of fruit, vegetables 
and other crops and have damaged some goods, increasing demand for these goods as 
people seek to replace them. 
•	 Tradables inflation is assumed to have peaked and is projected to decline over the projection 
horizon. This reflects lower petrol prices, falling prices for food and other commodities over the 
medium term, and generalised easing in global inflationary pressures. 
Non-tradables
•	 Non-tradables inflation is expected to remain high over the next two quarters. This is being 
driven by ongoing labour shortages, and is likely to be exacerbated by rising international 
tourism spending.
•	 Shortages of materials and labour in the construction industry have continued to underpin 
housing-related cost increases. In the very near term, maintenance, rebuild and repair work 
associated with the severe storms throughout the North Island are expected to put upward 
pressure on building costs. 
•	 Capacity pressures are expected to ease as higher interest rates reduce consumption and 
house prices and slow home building. Slower domestic activity and lower house prices are 
expected to cause non-tradables inflation to ease over coming years.


Chapter 6 Economic projections
49
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Figure 6.3
Unemployment rate
(unemployed people as share of labour force, 
seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Charts
Figure 6.1
Inflation breakdown
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Dotted lines show the projections from the November Statement. The 
light brown shaded area represents the MPC’s 1-3 percent target range for 
inflation over the medium term.
Figure 6.2
Private sector LCI wage inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.4
House price growth
(annual)
Source: CoreLogic, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.5
Production GDP
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.6
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 6 Economic projections
50
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Figure 6.9
Business investment
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.7
Private consumption
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.8
Residential investment
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.10
Government consumption
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.11
Total exports
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.12
Total imports
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 6 Economic projections
51
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
CHAPTER 
07
Appendices
Punakaiki Pancake Rocks. Photo: Nele McHattie


Chapter 7 Appendices
52
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
CHAPTER 7
Appendices
Appendix 1:
Our recent research
This appendix summarises the Reserve Bank’s monetary-policy-related 
research that has been published over the past twelve months, together 
with speeches made by the Reserve Bank’s senior leaders at various 
forums over this period. 
The Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) is responsible 
for achieving and maintaining price stability and 
supporting maximum sustainable employment. 
Several publications and speeches over the past 
year review the performance of monetary policy over 
the turbulent times of recent years, ranging from 
assessing our forecast errors to our use of alternative 
monetary policy tools. We have also undertaken 
research to deepen our understanding of the labour 
market. The research has been developed to aid 
our efforts in supporting maximum sustainable 
employment, and to help analyse distributional issues 
relevant to monetary policy.
Since March 2021, the MPC’s Remit has also directed 
the MPC to assess the effects of its decisions on 
the Government’s policy of supporting sustainable 
house prices. The Bank’s assessment of the impacts 
of MPC decisions on the wider economy, including 
the Government’s housing objective, is underpinned 
by its research programme. Over the past twelve 
months, Reserve Bank staff have investigated the 
drivers of house prices. This has included exploring 
factors that have increased demand and limited the 
supply of housing, and the role that monetary policy 
plays in influencing house prices. 
The Bank’s research is disseminated through 
Analytical Notes, Bulletin articles and Discussion 
Papers as well as publications in external outlets 
such as academic journals and working paper series 
of other policy institutions and universities. The Bank 
also produces a series of accompanying videos 
where staff present their published research.
Analytical Notes
Alternative monetary policy
The effects of the Funding for Lending 
Programme (FLP) on funding costs and 
mortgage rates
The Reserve Bank deployed the Funding for Lending 
Programme (FLP) to offer low-cost, 3-year funding 
to banks in 2020 as part of a package to deliver 
monetary stimulus to the economy during the 
pandemic. Using a counterfactual analysis, Gulnara 
Nolan and Eric Tong examine the programme and 
find the FLP lowered banks’ funding costs by about 
15 basis points from the policy announcement date 
(12 August 2020) to the end of 2020. While banks 
passed on these reduced costs to households over 
this period, the pass-through from funding costs to 
mortgage rates was slow. As a result, the 6-month, 
1-year and 2-year mortgage rates would fall by about 
10-20 basis points over a period of up to a year. 
They highlight these results may underestimate the 
full impact of the programme, as pass-through likely 
continues beyond the sample period studied.


Chapter 7 Appendices
53
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Housing
How does monetary policy affect the 
New Zealand housing market through the 
credit channel?
Meltem Chadwick and Aynaz Nahavandi analyse 
the effects of a monetary policy shock on real house 
prices in New Zealand through the credit channel 
of monetary policy transmission. They find that an 
unanticipated increase in the policy rate of 1 percent 
reduces real house prices by up to 1.6 percent and 
the growth rate of residential loans by 0.6 percent 
after two and a half years. After an unanticipated 
increase in the policy rate, total bank loans stay 
broadly unchanged for 12 months. They consider 
this as evidence that total bank loans may contain 
a countercyclical component in New Zealand. 
Housing supply, house prices,
and monetary policy
Meltem Chadwick, Karan Dasgupta and Punnoose 
Jacob present empirical evidence that confirms 
the effects of monetary policy on house prices in 
New Zealand are amplified when housing supply 
is not responsive to strong housing demand. They 
focus on intra-national differences in the house price 
responses to monetary policy in order to understand 
the role of housing supply rigidities. In their Analytical 
Note, they show that 12 months after an unanticipated 
increase of 40 basis points in the Official Cash Rate, 
the real median house price in the least supply-
responsive areas declines by over six times more 
than house prices in the most responsive areas. 
Housing as an investment asset in 
New Zealand
Why has housing been a popular investment asset 
in New Zealand? Patrick Aguiar Carvalho, Ben 
Baker and Ashley Farquharson explain housing’s 
popularity from a portfolio investment perspective. 
They highlight housing’s relatively robust financial 
returns over the past two decades. From a risk-return 
portfolio perspective, the New Zealand housing 
share of portfolio investment is no international 
outlier and is in line with historical investment return 
data. They add that both the ability to leverage and 
favourable tax treatment support housing investment 
attractiveness across a range of portfolios. However, 
investing in housing is not without risks and past 
performance is no guarantee of future results. 
New Zealand house prices and the decline
in longer-term financing costs
Matthew Brunton and Punnoose Jacob examine the 
contributions of long-term and short-term financing 
costs to the growth in New Zealand house prices 
over the past two decades by employing a user cost 
model. They find that the decline in expected future 
financing costs over a longer term has been the 
single most important driver of house price growth. 
They also demonstrate that the response of house 
prices to declines in interest rates is amplified when 
housing supply is less responsive to prices. The 
determinants of shorter-term financing costs, such as 
monetary policy, are more likely to shape the cyclical 
dynamics of New Zealand house prices than the 
long-term trend.
How do we stack up? The New Zealand 
housing market in the international context
Several developed countries have experienced 
increasing house prices since the Global Financial 
Crisis (GFC). But why have New Zealand’s house 
prices increased the most? To answer this question, 
Hamish Fitchett and Punnoose Jacob investigate 
a wide range of factors such as population growth, 
housing supply and interest rates. They conclude 
that New Zealand has seen the steepest decline 
in mortgage rates since the GFC and almost the 
strongest increase in population. Despite the rapid 
pace of residential construction in New Zealand 
in the past decade, the number of dwellings per 
inhabitant remains low and below the average for 
OECD countries. These factors led the supply of 
housing to fail to keep pace with demand for housing 
in New Zealand, leading to high house price growth. 


Chapter 7 Appendices
54
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Differences in labour and capital market 
outcomes across groups
Labour market cycles across different 
groups: What does history tell us? Part I: 
Theory, ethnicities
Ethnic minorities usually experience poor labour 
market outcomes across countries. Are Māori and 
Pasifika more exposed to labour market changes 
in New Zealand? Shaun Markham, Murat Özbilgin 
and Finn Robinson analyse labour market cycles in 
New Zealand and find that Māori and Pasifika are 
much more exposed to labour market fluctuations 
than Europeans. One explanation could be that 
Māori and Pasifika have relatively young populations 
with less experience and lower levels of education, 
and hence may be over-represented in low-
skilled industries. They also find that labour market 
contractions in New Zealand last considerably longer 
than contractions in gross domestic product. 
Labour market cycles across different 
groups: What does history tell us? Part II:
Age and sex
Shaun Markham, Murat Özbilgin and Finn Robinson 
look at different age groups in the New Zealand 
labour market. They find that young males and 
females are much more affected by labour market 
fluctuations than older age groups. Older people 
have a higher chance of remaining in employment 
throughout an economic downturn as they are 
likely to have more experience and higher levels 
of education, and to work in industries that are less 
vulnerable to economic downturns.
Labour market cycles across different 
groups: What does history tell us? Part III: 
Regions
Shaun Markham, Murat Özbilgin and Finn Robinson 
analyse how New Zealand’s regions have been 
affected by previous labour market cycles. They 
find that the length of labour market cycles differs 
across regions. Smaller regions tend to experience 
more volatility in unemployment cycles than larger 
regions. For example, Northland’s unemployment 
rate increases by twice as much as Wellington’s 
during labour market contractions. This is perhaps 
because smaller regions may not have a diverse mix 
of industries, and the industries that are located there 
may be more susceptible to shocks.  
Ethnic variations in firm financing
Christopher Ball, Adam Richardson and Guanyu 
Zheng use annual tax filings from firms to calculate an 
implied interest rate on debt. They find Māori firms, 
defined using the ethnicity of the owners, are paying 
higher implied interest rates on average than non-
Māori firms, by about 50 basis points. However, their 
analysis does not find evidence of systemic ethnic 
bias in the financial sector contributing to the interest 
rates paid by firms. The difference in interest rates 
paid by Māori and non-Māori firms perhaps can be 
explained by the characteristics of the firms receiving 
the loans.  


Chapter 7 Appendices
55
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Bulletin articles and
Discussion Papers
Money creation in New Zealand
Money plays an essential role in the economy. There 
are several forms of money – some are created by 
the Reserve Bank directly, and others are created 
by commercial banks via interactions with their 
customers. In this Bulletin, John Knowles, Laura 
Austin and Lewis Kerr describe the mechanics of how 
money is created and by whom. They also explain 
how the money supply fits in with monetary policy.
Evaluating the Reserve Bank’s
forecasting performance
This Bulletin article looks at the accuracy of the 
Reserve Bank’s forecasts, including if they are 
unbiased and how they compare with forecasts from 
other frameworks. It finds that the forecast process is 
structured to ensure that the economic outlook and 
associated risks are comprehensively considered. 
Thomas Bohm and Marea Sing’s findings include how 
our forecast errors during the COVID-19 pandemic 
were comparable to those of the big four private 
banks — ANZ, ASB, BNZ and Westpac. None of the 
forecasters foresaw the strong inflation increases that 
have occurred since the June 2021 quarter.
What matters for job finding and separation 
in the long-run? Evidence from labour market 
dynamics in New Zealand.
This Discussion Paper is a joint work with the IMF. 
The paper analyses job finding rates (the probability 
of an individual moving from being unemployed to 
employed) and job separation rates (the probability 
of an individual moving from being employed to 
unemployed) in New Zealand. Guanyu Zheng, 
Gulnara Nolan, Christopher Ball, Siddharth Kothari 
and Yosuke Kido find that individual characteristics, 
including age, gender, ethnicity and education have 
a significant impact on job finding and separation 
rates. Further, they find that higher separation rates 
of young workers play a large role in explaining 
differences in employment outcomes across age 
groups, while differences in finding rates are more 
important in explaining differences by education 
level. Both finding and separation rate differences are 
important in explaining differences across ethnicities. 
The results underscore the importance of well-
targeted labour market support policies.


Chapter 7 Appendices
56
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Speeches on
monetary policy
Insights from staff research also inform the speeches 
made by the Reserve Bank’s senior leaders at various 
domestic and international forums. This section 
lists recent Reserve Bank speeches on monetary 
policy that have been made available on the Bank’s 
website. 
Testing our resilience
27 October 2022
Governor Adrian Orr discusses recent global 
economic challenges, including COVID-19 and high 
inflation. In responding to these challenges, central 
banks worldwide face a trade-off between the long-
run benefits of low and stable inflation and near-
term spending and employment. These trade-offs 
are complicated in the context of rising geopolitical 
tensions and climate change adaption. However, 
New Zealand’s financial system remains well placed 
to support the economy, and the Reserve Bank is 
firmly focused on meeting its policy targets.
New Zealand’s monetary policy 
implementation framework
7 September 2022
To implement monetary policy, the Reserve Bank 
manages the supply of settlement cash in order to 
keep short-term interest rates anchored around 
the Official Cash Rate (OCR). Assistant Governor 
Karen Silk explains recent changes to the monetary 
policy implementation framework that were made 
during the pandemic. Alternative monetary policy 
(AMP) tools influenced settlement cash levels, with 
Large Scale Asset Purchases financed by settlement 
cash while the Funding for Lending programme lent 
settlement cash to banks. To ensure the Reserve 
Bank could still anchor short-term interest rates 
around the OCR, there was a shift from a ‘tier’ to a 
‘floor’ system for managing settlement cash. In the 
future, settlement cash will decline to a lower level 
as AMP tools wind down and the Reserve Bank’s 
balance sheet reduces, but the ‘floor’ system will be 
retained. 
Housing (still) matters – the big picture
30 June 2022
Chief economist Paul Conway discusses how, over 
the past decade, the demand side of New Zealand’s 
housing market has been boosted by strong 
population growth, steadily declining neutral interest 
rates and a favourable tax system. The supply side, 
however, has been held back by strict land-use 
regulations and a construction sector prone to boom-
bust cycles while carrying very high building costs. 
Excess demand led to New Zealand’s experience 
with some of the highest house prices relative to 
income in the world. In this speech, Paul explores 
these drivers of supply and demand, and concludes 
with how we can forge a new approach to housing 
and economic prosperity in Aotearoa New Zealand.
Why we embraced Te Ao Māori
13 June 2022
Governor Adrian Orr explains how the Reserve Bank 
embraces its indigenous history and heritage, and 
applies a Te Ao Māori – or Māori world view – in 
what it does. The inclusion of a Te Ao Māori view 
encourages the Reserve Bank to think holistically and 
long term as it goes about its legislative tasks. The 
Reserve Bank has refreshed its vision and values via a 
reconceptualisation through Te Ao Māori, and utilised 
a Te Ao Māori framework to describe the purpose and 
interconnectedness of its work. To do this, the Reserve 
Bank adopted the legend of Tāne Mahuta, with the 
Bank akin to the being Tāne Mahuta of New Zealand’s 
financial landscape. Finally, Governor Orr explains how 
the Reserve Bank breathes life into its Te Ao Māori 
strategy through three key work programmes: policy, 
engagement and culture.
Tackling inflation during a pandemic
25 February 2022
Governor Adrian Orr discusses the key monetary 
policy challenges facing the Reserve Bank of 
New Zealand – Te Pūtea Matua. The COVID-19 
pandemic presented a unique setting for many 
central banks globally. The Reserve Bank must meet 
its low and stable inflation mandates in the context 
of a large and evolving health shock to the global 
economy, global and domestic inflationary pressures, 
and volatile asset prices. Governor Orr concludes 
that the Reserve Bank is committed and confident 
it will return inflation back towards its medium-
term target levels (ie, 1-3 percent with a focus on 2 
percent) through the use of its monetary policy tools.


Chapter 7 Appendices
57
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Appendix 2: 
Statistical tables
Table 7.1
Key forecast variables
GDP growth 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Annual
Unemployment 
rate
TWI
OCR
2021
Mar
2.1
0.8
1.5
4.6
74.9
0.3
 
Jun
2.4
1.3
3.3
3.9
74.7
0.3
 
Sep
-3.9
2.2
4.9
3.3
74.4
0.3
 
Dec
2.9
1.4
5.9
3.2
74.3
0.6
2022
Mar
-0.4
1.8
6.9
3.2
72.6
0.9
 
Jun
1.9
1.7
7.3
3.3
72.1
1.6
 
Sep
2.0
2.2
7.2
3.3
70.6
2.7
 
Dec
0.7
1.4
7.2
3.4
70.8
3.8
2023
Mar
0.2
1.8
7.3
3.5
71.5
4.5
Jun
-0.5
1.1
6.6
3.8
71.5
5.1
Sep
-0.4
1.7
6.2
4.3
71.5
5.4
Dec
-0.2
0.6
5.3
4.8
71.5
5.5
2024
Mar
0.1
0.7
4.2
5.1
71.5
5.5
Jun
0.1
0.5
3.6
5.3
71.5
5.5
Sep
0.3
0.8
2.7
5.5
71.5
5.4
Dec
0.4
0.4
2.4
5.6
71.5
5.3
2025
Mar
0.5
0.5
2.3
5.7
71.5
5.1
Jun
0.7
0.4
2.1
5.7
71.5
4.9
Sep
0.8
0.8
2.1
5.6
71.5
4.6
Dec
0.8
0.3
2.0
5.6
71.5
4.3
2026
Mar
0.7
0.5
2.0
5.5
71.5
4.0


Chapter 7 Appendices
58
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Table 7.2
Measures of inflation, inflation expectations, and asset prices
2021
2022
2023
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Inflation (annual rates)
CPI
3.3
4.9
5.9
6.9
7.3
7.2
7.2
CPI non-tradables
3.3
4.5
5.3
6.0
6.3
6.6
6.6
CPI tradables
3.4
5.7
6.9
8.5
8.7
8.1
8.2
Sectoral factor model
estimate of core inflation
3.2
3.8
4.3
4.9
5.3
5.6
5.8
CPI trimmed mean
(30 percent measure)
3.0
4.0
4.3
5.2
5.8
6.4
6.1
CPI weighted median
3.0
3.3
3.8
3.9
4.8
5.0
5.0
GDP deflator (expenditure)
2.1
3.7
5.4
6.2
6.4
5.4
Inflation expectations
ANZ Business Outlook – inflation 
1 year ahead (quarterly average to date)
2.2
2.9
4.0
5.4
6.0
6.1
6.3
6.0
RBNZ Survey of Expectations – 
inflation 2 years ahead
2.0
2.3
3.0
3.3
3.3
3.1
3.6
3.3
RBNZ Survey of Expectations – 
inflation 5 years ahead
2.1
2.0
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.3
2.4
2.4
RBNZ Survey of Expectations – 
inflation 10 years ahead
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.1
2.1
2.1
2.2
2.2
Long-run inflation expectations*
2.1
2.1
2.1
2.2
2.2
2.2
2.3
2.3
Asset prices (annual percent changes)
Quarterly house price index 
(CoreLogic NZ)
29.8
30.7
27.1
13.7
5.4
REINZ Farm Price Index (quarterly 
average to date)
6.3
15.1
20.5
25.6
31.0
5.9
0.6
NZX 50 (quarterly average to date)
16.7
10.3
3.0
-4.0
-9.3
-11.3
-12.8
-2.6
*  Long-run expectations are extracted from a range of surveys using a Nelson-Siegel model. Source: ANZ, Consensus Economics, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 7 Appendices
59
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Table 7.3
Measures of labour market conditions	
(seasonally adjusted, changes expressed in annual percent terms, unless specified otherwise)	
2021
2022
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Household Labour Force Survey
Unemployment rate
3.9
3.3
3.2
3.2
3.3
3.3
3.4
Underutilisation rate
10.5
9.2
9.2
9.3
9.3
9.0
9.4
Labour force participation rate
70.6
71.1
71.0
70.9
70.9
71.7
71.7
Employment rate (percentage of 
working-age population)
67.8
68.8
68.7
68.6
68.6
69.3
69.3
Employment growth
1.5
3.9
3.3
2.5
1.4
1.2
1.3
Average weekly hours worked
34.0
31.3
33.4
33.4
33.7
33.7
34.1
Number unemployed
(thousand people)
114
97
92
94
96
97
99
Number employed (million people)
2.78
2.82
2.82
2.82
2.82
2.85
2.86
Labour force (million people)
2.89
2.92
2.91
2.91
2.91
2.95
2.95
Extended labour force
(million people)
2.98
3.00
2.99
3.00
3.00
3.03
3.04
Working-age population
(million people, age 15 years+)
4.10
4.10
4.10
4.10
4.11
4.11
4.12
Quarterly Employment Survey – QES
Filled jobs growth
2.5
4.0
4.1
4.2
1.5
1.5
1.3
Average hourly earnings growth 
(private sector, ordinary time)
4.4
3.6
4.1
5.3
7.0
8.6
8.1
Other data sources
Labour cost index growth,
private sector, adjusted
2.2
2.5
2.8
3.1
3.4
3.9
4.3
Labour cost index growth,
private sector, unadjusted
3.7
4.1
4.5
5.0
5.2
5.6
6.1
Estimated net working-age 
immigration (thousands, quarterly)
-4.8
-3.2
-6.0
Change in All Vacancies Index
162.9
50.0
33.4
21.4
3.2
8.7
-3.4
Note: The All Vacancies Index is produced by MBIE as part of the monthly Jobs Online report, which shows changes in job vacancies advertised by businesses 
on internet job boards. The unadjusted labour cost index (LCI) is an analytical index that reflects quality change in addition to price change (whereas the official 
LCI measures price changes only). For definitions of underutilisation, the extended labour force, and related concepts, see Statistics New Zealand (2016), 
‘Introducing underutilisation in the labour market’. Estimated net working-age immigration is the Stats NZ outcomes-based measure.


Chapter 7 Appendices
60
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Table 7.4
Composition of real GDP growth
(annual average percent change, seasonally adjusted, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
Final consumption expenditure
Private
4.2
6.5
4.8
4.5
2.4
-0.2
5.9
2.0
-0.7
0.8
3.1
Public authority
2.1
2.1
3.9
3.4
5.5
7.6
8.1
3.0
-2.8
-1.9
-0.6
Total
3.7
5.4
4.6
4.3
3.1
1.6
6.5
2.3
-1.3
0.1
2.2
Gross fixed capital formation
Residential
7.1
8.8
-1.8
-0.1
2.7
2.2
2.6
5.6
-5.0
-8.2
4.6
Other
2.2
0.0
10.1
7.2
2.8
-3.1
12.9
5.4
-0.8
-5.2
1.9
Total
3.4
2.3
6.8
5.3
2.8
-1.8
10.3
5.5
-1.8
-5.9
2.5
Final domestic 
expenditure
3.6
4.7
5.1
4.5
3.0
0.8
7.4
3.0
-1.4
-1.3
2.3
Stockbuilding*
-0.3
0.1
0.2
-0.2
-0.2
-0.3
0.6
0.1
-0.3
-0.1
0.0
Gross national 
expenditure
3.2
4.8
5.6
4.4
2.7
-0.4
8.6
3.2
-1.4
-1.4
2.3
Exports of goods and 
services
6.9
2.0
3.8
3.3
0.4
-17.6
1.4
7.0
9.7
9.2
5.1
Imports of goods and 
services
3.1
5.2
7.8
4.8
1.2
-15.9
17.2
2.3
1.6
1.3
4.4
Expenditure on GDP
4.3
3.9
4.3
3.9
2.5
0.0
4.5
4.4
0.2
0.4
2.4
GDP (production)
3.7
3.8
3.5
3.5
2.4
-0.7
5.2
3.9
0.1
0.5
2.4
GDP (production, 
March qtr to March qtr)
4.0
3.3
3.6
3.4
0.9
4.1
0.8
4.9
-1.0
1.3
2.9
*Percentage point contribution to the growth rate of GDP.


Chapter 7 Appendices
61
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Table 7.5
Summary of economic projections
(annual percent change, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
Price measures
CPI 
0.4
2.2
1.1
1.5
2.5
1.5
6.9
7.3
4.2
2.3
2.0
Labour costs
1.8
1.5
1.9
2.0
2.4
1.6
3.1
4.7
5.1
4.1
3.4
Export prices
(in New Zealand dollars) 
0.7
4.1
3.3
1.1
6.8
-6.2
21.4
-1.1
-1.2
4.5
3.0
Import prices
(in New Zealand dollars) 
0.5
1.2
1.6
4.0
2.3
-2.5
19.0
8.0
-1.5
-0.5
-0.4
Monetary conditions
OCR (year average)
2.9
2.0
1.8
1.8
1.2
0.3
0.5
3.1
5.4
5.4
4.5
TWI (year average)
72.6
76.5
75.6
73.4
71.7
72.4
74.0
71.3
71.5
71.5
71.5
Output
GDP (production, annual 
average % change)
3.7
3.8
3.5
3.5
2.4
-0.7
5.2
3.9
0.1
0.5
2.4
Potential output (annual 
average % change)
3.2
3.3
3.3
3.3
3.0
-0.6
3.1
3.4
2.8
2.4
2.4
Output gap (% of potential 
GDP, year average)
-0.2
0.3
0.5
0.7
0.1
0.0
2.1
2.7
0.0
-1.9
-1.9
Labour market
Total employment 
(seasonally adjusted)
2.2
5.9
2.9
1.5
2.6
0.1
2.5
1.5
-0.3
0.7
1.4
Unemployment rate 
(March qtr, seasonally 
adjusted)
5.3
4.9
4.4
4.2
4.2
4.6
3.2
3.5
5.1
5.7
5.5
Trend labour productivity 
0.7
0.6
0.6
0.7
0.9
1.0
0.9
0.7
0.7
0.8
0.9
Key balances
Government operating 
balance* (% of GDP, 
year to June)
0.7
1.5
1.9
2.4
-7.3
-1.3
-2.6
-0.9
-0.5
-0.2
Current account balance 
(% of GDP)
-2.4
-2.6
-3.1
-3.8
-2.3
-2.5
-6.6
-7.7
-8.1
-5.4
-4.1
Terms of trade
(SNA measure, annual 
average % change)
-2.6
2.1
4.5
-2.1
2.0
-1.0
0.4
-4.6
-5.7
5.0
3.8
Household saving rate 
(% of disposable income)
-0.8
-0.4
-0.5
0.3
2.6
8.9
4.7
4.1
2.1
2.1
1.8
World economy
Trading-partner GDP 
(annual average % change)
3.4
3.5
3.9
3.5
1.7
-0.6
5.9
2.7
2.5
3.2
3.1
Trading-partner CPI 
(TWI weighted)
1.2
1.9
1.8
1.4
2.4
0.8
4.0
5.0
2.8
2.1
2.2
* Government operating balance is a model-based estimate of OBEGAL divided by nominal GDP in the projection. The estimate is partial because it relies 
on projections for some components from the HYEFU 2022.


Chapter 7 Appendices
62
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Appendix 3: Chart pack
Figure 7.1
Composition of CPI inflation
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 7.2
Output gap and output gap indicators
(share of potential)
Source: NZIER, MBIE, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The output gap indicators based on information about the labour market 
are shown separately from the other indicators. For each group of indicators, the 
shaded area shows the range of values and the line shows the mean value.
Figure 7.3
Unemployment and underutilisation rates
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 7.4
OCR and nominal neutral OCR indicator suite
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area indicates the range between the maximum and minimum 
values from our suite of long-run nominal neutral OCR indicators. See chapter 4.1 
of the November 2022 Statement for more information.
Figure 7.5
GDP and potential GDP
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 7.6
Measures of core inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Core inflation measures exclude the GST increase in 2010. The light 
brown shaded area represents the MPC’s 1-3 percent target range for inflation 
over the medium term.


Chapter 7 Appendices
63
Monetary Policy Statement  February 2023
Figure 7.7
Inflation expectations
(annual) 
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: Inflation expectations are estimates from the RBNZ inflation expectations 
curve, based on surveys of businesses and professional forecasters. The light 
brown shaded area represents the MPC’s 1-3 percent target range for inflation 
over the medium term.
Figure 7.9
House price inflation
(annual, nominal) 
Source: REINZ.
Source: Stats NZ, Global Dairy Trade, Reuters, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 7.12
Terms of trade, dairy and oil price indices
Figure 7.10
Mortgage interest rates
Source: interest.co.nz, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The rates shown for the fixed terms are the average of the advertised 
rates from ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac, shown as weekly data. The floating 
rate represents the monthly yield on floating housing debt from the RBNZ 
Income Statement survey.
Figure 7.8
Private sector wage growth
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Private sector wage growth is measured by the labour cost index, all 
salary and wage rates, private sector. Real labour cost index is deflated with 
headline CPI inflation.
Figure 7.11
New Zealand dollar exchange rates
(quarterly average) 
Source: Reuters, RBNZ.
