BANK: RBNZ
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: Monetary Policy Statement May 2023
DATE: 23/05/2023
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/monetary-policy-statements/2023/may/mpsmay23.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

05/2023
Monetary Policy
STATEMENT


ii
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
STATEMENT
of the MPC’s monetary policy strategy
The Monetary Policy Committee’s (MPC’s) monetary policy strategy is its 
overarching plan for how it will formulate monetary policy under different 
circumstances to achieve its objectives.1 It outlines a consistent approach 
to how the MPC intends to achieve its objectives across time, accounting 
for trade-offs and uncertainty. Agreeing on and publishing a strategy 
promotes transparency, public understanding, and accountability.
1	
For a more in-depth discussion of monetary policy strategy in New Zealand, see J. Ratcliffe and R. Kendall (2019), ‘Monetary policy strategy in New Zealand’, 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand, Bulletin, Vol. 82, No. 3, April.
2	
These economic objectives contribute to the overall purpose of the Act, which is to promote the prosperity and well-being of New Zealanders, and contribute to 
a sustainable and productive economy. See monetary policy framework for more information on New Zealand’s monetary policy framework, including the full 
text of the Remit.
Monetary policy 
framework and objectives
Under the Reserve Bank of 
New Zealand Act 2021 (the 
Act), the MPC is responsible for 
formulating monetary policy to 
maintain a stable general level of 
prices over the medium term and 
to support maximum sustainable 
employment.2 Operational 
objectives for monetary policy are 
set out in the Remit. The current 
Remit sets out a flexible inflation 
targeting regime, under which the 
MPC must set policy to: 
•	 keep future annual inflation 
between 1 and 3 percent over 
the medium term, with a focus 
on keeping future inflation 
near the 2 percent mid-point; 
and
•	 support maximum sustainable 
employment, considering 
a broad range of labour 
market indicators and taking 
into account that maximum 
sustainable employment is 
largely determined by non-
monetary factors.
In pursuing these objectives, 
the Remit requires the MPC to 
have regard to the efficiency 
and soundness of the 
financial system, seek to avoid 
unnecessary instability in the 
economy and financial markets, 
and discount events that have 
only transitory effects on inflation. 
The MPC must also assess the 
effects of its monetary policy 
decisions on the Government’s 
policy to support more 
sustainable house prices.
The Reserve Bank’s flexible 
inflation targeting framework 
and the MPC’s monetary policy 
strategy reflect the fact that: 
•	 low and stable inflation is 
monetary policy’s best long-
run contribution to the well-
being of New Zealanders;
•	 in the short to medium term, 
monetary policy can influence 
real variables such as 
employment, and hence policy 
trade-offs can arise; and
•	 monetary policy is more 
effective if the Bank’s policy 
targets are credible, so policy 
should be formulated in a 
way that ensures credibility is 
maintained.
Key aspects of monetary 
policy strategy
The MPC practises forecast 
targeting, which means that it 
sets monetary policy such that 
it expects to achieve its inflation 
and employment goals in the 
medium term. In most instances 
the MPC aims to return inflation 
to the target mid-point within a 
one- to three-year horizon. The 
appropriate horizon at each 
policy decision will vary based 
on how different policy paths 
will contribute to maximum 
sustainable employment, whether 
price-setters’ expectations are 
consistent with the inflation 
target, and other considerations 
such as the balance of risks to the 
MPC’s central economic outlook.


iii
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
The MPC does not attempt to 
return inflation and employment 
to target immediately, because 
monetary policy actions take time 
to transmit through the economy. 
Attempting to return inflation to 
target too quickly would result 
in unnecessary instability in the 
economy and financial markets. 
The 1 to 3 percent target range for 
inflation provides the MPC with 
flexibility to ensure that managing 
inflation variability does not come 
at the cost of excessive variability 
in the real economy. For similar 
reasons, the MPC does not 
attempt to offset events that are 
expected to have only transitory 
effects on inflation. 
The MPC takes into account both 
its inflation and employment 
objectives when setting policy. In 
the long run, no trade-off exists 
between the MPC’s objectives. 
In the short to medium term, 
there may be situations where 
monetary policy can move one 
objective closer to target only 
at the cost of the other, resulting 
in a trade-off. When a trade-off 
does arise, the MPC will consider 
outcomes for both objectives 
in setting policy. In general, if 
employment is projected to be 
below its long-run sustainable 
level, the MPC would let inflation 
overshoot the target mid-point 
for a time, and vice versa (while 
staying within the 1 to 3 percent 
target range). 
The MPC responds to both 
deviations above target and 
deviations below target. The 
MPC sets policy to stabilise 
employment near its maximum 
sustainable level, and to return 
inflation near to the target mid-
point, regardless of whether 
inflation is currently below or 
above 2 percent. This approach 
helps to anchor inflation 
expectations at the target mid-
point and promotes sustainable 
growth and employment by 
dampening fluctuations in the 
business cycle.
The MPC considers the balance 
of risks to its objectives that 
arise from uncertainty about 
the economic outlook and 
the transmission of its policy 
decisions. In general, the MPC 
will incorporate likely future 
developments into its central 
economic projections and set 
monetary policy in response. 
However, the MPC will also take 
into account risks to its central 
projections when setting policy. 
Under extreme uncertainty, the 
MPC may choose to publish 
scenarios instead of central 
projections to illustrate the 
range of possible situations and 
economic outcomes that could 
occur when circumstances are 
highly unpredictable.
The MPC has regard to the 
efficiency and soundness of 
the financial system, while 
recognising that in most 
instances prudential policy is 
better suited to leaning against 
risks to financial stability. The 
Reserve Bank takes prudential 
policy settings into account when 
setting monetary policy, and 
vice versa.
Implementation of strategy
The MPC applies the following 
process when formulating a 
policy decision:
1.	 Firstly, it assesses the outlook 
for the economy and the 
implications for its policy 
objectives. It then discusses 
risks to achieving its policy 
objectives.
2.	 Next, it considers which stance 
of monetary policy is most 
consistent with its monetary 
policy strategy given the 
current economic outlook, 
risks, and trade-offs.
3.	 Finally, the MPC decides how 
it will achieve the desired 
stance of monetary policy, 
including whether or not 
to adjust its policy settings 
at the current meeting and 
how it will communicate the 
policy outlook. The MPC has 
a suite of monetary tools to 
achieve its goals, and uses its 
Principles for Monetary Tools 
to make decisions on which 
tools to deploy.


REPORT AND SUPPORTING NOTES PUBLISHED AT:
www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/monetary-policy-statement
Subscribe online: www.rbnz.govt.nz/email-updates
Copyright © 2023 Reserve Bank of New Zealand
This report is published pursuant to section 129
of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 2021. 
ISSN 1770-4829
rbnz.govt.nz
Cover image: Kepler Track. Photo: Nele McHattie.
Thank you to RBNZ staff for photography in this report.


The projections were finalised on 18 May 2023. The Official Cash Rate (OCR) 
projection incorporates an outlook for monetary policy that is consistent with the 
MPC’s monetary policy assessment, which was finalised on 24 May 2023. 
05/2023
Monetary Policy
STATEMENT
Contents
Statement of the MPC’s monetary policy strategy	
ii
1.	 Policy assessment	
2
	
Summary record of meeting	
4
2.	 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook	
8
3.	 Global developments and outlook	
24
4.	 Special topics	
30
	
4.1	 The recovery in international tourism 
	
	
over the 2022/23 summer	
32
	
Box A – Employment recovery in tourism-related industries	
36
	
4.2	 Have inflation expectations become more 
	
	
sensitive to higher inflation? 	
38
5.	 Financial conditions	
42
6.	 Economic projections	
48
7.	 Appendices	
56
	
Appendix 1: Statistical tables 	
57
	
Appendix 2: Chart pack	
62


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
2
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
CHAPTER 
01
Policy 
assessment
Mt Maunganui. Photo: Lydia Dudson


Chapter 1 Policy assessment
3
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
CHAPTER 1
Policy assessment
Tēnā koutou katoa, welcome all.
The Monetary Policy Committee today voted to raise 
the Official Cash Rate (OCR) from 5.25% to 5.50%.
The Committee agreed the level of interest rates is 
constraining spending and inflation pressure. The 
OCR will need to remain at a restrictive level for the 
foreseeable future, to ensure that consumer price 
inflation returns to the 1-3% annual target range, 
while supporting maximum sustainable employment. 
Global economic growth remains weak and inflation 
pressures are easing. This follows a period of 
significant monetary policy tightening by central 
banks internationally. International supply-chain 
constraints have also eased following a period of 
disruption, and shipping costs have declined. The 
weaker global growth has led to lower export prices 
for New Zealand’s goods.   
In New Zealand, inflation is expected to continue 
to decline from its peak and with it measures of 
inflation expectations. However, core inflation 
pressures will remain until capacity constraints ease 
further. While employment is above its maximum 
sustainable level, there are now signs of labour 
shortages easing and vacancies declining.  
Consumer spending growth has eased and 
residential construction activity has declined, while 
house prices have returned to more sustainable 
levels. More generally, businesses are reporting 
slower demand for their goods and services, and 
weak investment intentions. Businesses report that
a lack of demand, rather than labour shortages, is 
now the main constraint on activity.
There has been a return of net inward migration 
since international borders reopened. The 
Committee expects the pace of immigration to ease 
back toward pre-COVID-19 trend levels over coming 
quarters. While immigration has assisted to ease 
labour shortages, its net impact on overall spending 
is uncertain. The recent recovery in tourism 
spending, to around three-quarters of its pre-
COVID-19 trend level, is also supporting demand.  
The repair and rebuild facing significant regions of 
the North Island – due to the recent severe weather 
events – will support economic activity, in particular 
the horizontal construction sector. The timing of 
this predominantly government investment will be 
spread over several years. Broader government 
spending is anticipated to decline in inflation-
adjusted terms and in proportion to GDP.  
The Committee is confident that with interest 
rates remaining at a restrictive level for some time, 
consumer price inflation will return to within its target 
range of 1-3% per annum, while supporting maximum 
sustainable employment.
Meitaki, thanks.
Adrian Orr
Governor 


4
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
SUMMARY 
Record of meeting 
The Monetary Policy 
Committee discussed 
recent developments 
in the New Zealand 
economy. The 
Committee agreed that 
monetary conditions 
are restricting 
spending and reducing 
inflationary pressure. 
However, current 
inflation remains high 
and spending will 
have to continue to 
slow to better match 
the supply capacity 
of the economy, so 
that consumer price 
inflation returns to its 
target range. While 
employment indicators 
reflect easing capacity 
pressures, they remain 
elevated. 
Global economic growth has 
slowed below trend for most of 
our key trading partners. The 
Committee noted this weakness 
has been reflected in slowing 
demand for our goods exports, 
as seen in lower dairy and 
meat prices. For a number of 
years, COVID-19 and the war in 
Ukraine have constrained global 
production, disrupted supply 
chains, and increased shipping 
costs. These global supply 
bottlenecks have eased and 
commodity prices – in particular 
oil prices – have remained below 
their peaks in early 2022. Overall, 
headline inflation is continuing to 
decline amongst our key trading 
partners. Nevertheless, core 
inflation remains elevated in most 
of our trading partner economies. 
Members discussed 
developments in global financial 
markets. Recent banking stress 
in the United States and Europe 
has been contained by regulators 
so far but has added to financial 
market volatility, tighter credit 
conditions, and uncertainty 
regarding the global economic 
outlook. The impacts from these 
events on domestic financial 
conditions have been limited 
to date, and the New Zealand 
banking system is sound. 
The Committee discussed 
domestic economic 
developments. Economic activity 
in New Zealand contracted by 
0.6% in the December 2022 
quarter. This contraction was 
unexpected. Business and 
residential investment and overall 
government spending contracted 
in the December 2022 quarter, 
and domestic spending remained 
flat. The near-term outlook for 
activity remains subdued. 
In addition, annual CPI inflation 
was lower than assumed in the 
February Statement, easing to 
6.7%  in the March 2023 quarter. 
Short-term price pressure from 
recent severe weather events 
appears to have been less than 
initially assumed. Both annual 
non-tradables and tradables 
inflation were lower than 
expected, with a reduction in 
tradables inflation accounting 
for a larger share of the overall 
decline in inflation. 
Members discussed the evidence 
that demand is slowing in those 
parts of the economy that are 
most sensitive to higher interest 
rates. The constraining impact 
of higher interest rates has been 
most visible in spending and 
economic activity related to 
housing. Residential investment 
has started to ease and falling 
consent numbers suggest it 
will continue to slow. Feedback 
from the industry suggests the 
pipeline of future building activity 
is subdued. The rebuild work 
following the recent floods is 
assumed to provide a small offset 
to this decline. 


5
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
Members also discussed the 
impact interest rate increases 
were having on the housing 
market and household spending. 
House prices have continued to 
decline, while first home buyers 
were accounting for a larger 
share of new home purchases. 
Overall, current monetary policy 
is supporting a moderation in 
house prices to more sustainable 
levels. The wealth effects from 
this decline in house prices have 
contributed to slowing spending 
on durable goods since early 
2022. In addition, the rate of 
credit growth for households has 
declined. 
The Committee discussed 
evidence that elevated interest 
rates were constraining business 
activity. Businesses are reporting 
a general slowing in demand, a 
weaker outlook for investment, 
and business credit growth has 
declined. Businesses are also 
reporting that orders are now 
the main constraint on activity – 
after a period of it being labour 
availability. 
The Committee noted that while 
the total number of international 
visitors remains below pre-
COVID-19 levels, its recovery 
since the border was reopened 
has supported aggregate 
demand.
Members discussed the recent 
increase in net inward migration. 
The projections incorporate a 
stronger starting point for net 
inward migration. The Committee 
discussed what this stronger 
starting point for migration 
means for the economy. Overall, 
it suggests that spending and 
activity have been subdued, 
even in an environment of 
strong population growth. The 
increase in net inward migration 
is providing some relief in a very 
tight labour market, but the net 
impact on demand – including for 
housing – is uncertain, as is the 
impact on inflationary pressure. 
Members noted this increase 
in migration is assumed to 
be temporary. Migration is 
assumed to fall back towards 
the average inflows seen in the 
years preceding COVID-19, and 
settle at an inflow of around 
36,000 working-age people 
per year. While the recent 
increase may partly reflect some 
pent-up demand to migrate to 
New Zealand, immigration rules 
have also been eased to alleviate 
acute labour shortages in some 
sectors. The Government recently 
made it temporarily possible for 
some migrants on work visas 
who had already been living in 
New Zealand for a period to apply 
for a special resident class visa. 
Given these new residents would 
have already been participating 
in the economy and the housing 
market as renters, it is expected 
this change will add only modest 
pressure to housing demand. 
The Committee discussed likely 
economic impacts of recent 
severe weather events. Public 
infrastructure was significantly 
damaged. Clean-up, repair and 
rebuild work continues. While 
estimates are uncertain, the 
Committee assumes the recovery 
from these events will add about 
1.5 percent to GDP spread over 
a number of years. 
Members discussed the impact 
of Budget 2023. Fiscal policy 
is projected to add to demand 
over the 2023/24 fiscal year, then 
dampen demand in subsequent 
years. Overall, fiscal policy will 
be contractionary on demand 
over the projection horizon. 
This reflects that government 
consumption, which is the larger 
share of government spending, 
is expected to fall as a share of 
GDP in coming years. Government 
investment is expected to 
continue to grow, in part due to 
the repair and rebuild work in the 
aftermath of the weather events. 
Fiscal policy is projected to be less 
contractionary than the Committee 
had assumed in February. 
The Committee also discussed 
the functioning of the 
New Zealand Government bond 
market. This was particularly 
in the context of an expansion 
to the New Zealand Treasury’s 
bond issuance programme, and 
ongoing sales of bonds in the 
Large Scale Asset Purchase 
Programme portfolio. Overall, the 
market continues to function in 
line with historic norms. Notably 
spreads between government 
bond and swap rates have 
remained relatively stable. 


6
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
The Committee discussed the 
New Zealand labour market. 
Employment is above its 
maximum sustainable level. The 
unemployment rate was 3.4% in 
the March 2023 quarter, still near 
record lows. However, same-
job wage inflation was weaker 
than expected. The majority of 
maximum sustainable employment 
measures are now pointing to less 
labour market capacity pressure 
relative to March last year. Firms 
are reporting that labour is now 
less of a constraint to production. 
In addition, measures of skilled 
and unskilled labour shortages 
have eased. 
Members discussed inflation 
expectations. Measures 
of inflation expectations of 
businesses have eased, while 
household inflation expectations 
moved higher. It was noted that 
there was increasing evidence 
that New Zealand households 
were putting greater weight on 
recent past inflation outturns 
when setting their inflation 
expectations. This has likely 
contributed to persistence in 
domestic inflationary pressure
as inflation has risen. 
The Committee discussed 
evidence that monetary 
conditions are having a 
contractionary effect on the 
economy. Members were 
confident that the interest rates 
faced by firms and households 
have constrained spending and 
investment for some time. This 
reflects the significant increase in 
the Official Cash Rate (OCR) that 
has occurred since late 2021. 
The Committee then discussed 
if monetary conditions were 
contractionary enough to 
get inflation back to the 1-3% 
target in a suitable timeframe. 
Overall, current mortgage rates 
and business lending rates 
were restrictive, supporting a 
further moderation in inflation. 
A normalisation in bank funding 
costs, including increases in retail 
term deposit rates, is expected 
to support the maintenance of 
current mortgage rates. Some 
households would further limit 
their spending as they rolled onto 
higher fixed mortgage rates. Debt 
servicing costs for households 
have risen from historically low 
levels during the pandemic, and 
are projected to rise further. 
In addition, the usual lags of 
monetary policy transmission 
mean that the full effects of past 
OCR increases will still take some 
time to occur. 
Members discussed the key 
economic developments they 
would need to see in coming 
quarters to remain confident that 
lending rates around current 
levels remained sufficiently 
contractionary. The Committee 
noted that the projections 
incorporate a moderation 
in inflation and inflation 
expectations, a continued slowing 
in household spending growth, 
and a continued moderation in 
global inflationary pressure.
Members discussed the key risks 
to the outlook for activity and 
inflation. Views on the outlook 
for the inflationary impact of 
migration were mixed. Some 
members saw the risk that strong 
migration inflows could persist for 
longer than assumed in current 
projections and boost spending 
and inflation. Other members 
saw the risks as more balanced. 
In particular, there were not yet 
obvious signs that high rates of 
migration were affecting house 
prices and spending – and 
there were reasons to believe 
that current strength reflects 
pent up demand, and will prove 
temporary. In addition, migration 
could further alleviate labour 
shortages. There has also been a 
recent change in policy settings in 
Australia that eases the pathway 
to citizenship for emigrating 
New Zealanders. The effect of 
this on both the quantity and 
composition of net migration has 
yet to be seen.
Some members saw upside risk 
to tourism activity. New Zealand 
has already experienced a 
strong recovery in tourism. This 
has occurred at a time when the 
arrival of tourists from China has 
remained weak. A recovery in 
tourist arrivals from China would 
add demand in an already supply 
constrained sector.


7
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
The Committee discussed 
risks around the outlook for 
inflation expectations, notably 
the implications of evidence that 
New Zealand households were 
putting greater weight on recent 
past inflation outturns when 
setting their inflation expectations. 
Some members noted this could 
mean inflation expectations fall 
faster than in past cycles, as 
headline inflation declines. Others 
noted this behaviour could be 
asymmetric on the downside, and 
core inflation could prove stickier 
than currently assumed. 
Members also discussed risks 
around the pass-through of past 
OCR increases to activity and 
inflation. Some members saw the 
risk of stronger than expected 
pass-through. Most notably, a 
large number of households are 
still facing the prospect of rolling 
onto higher fixed rate mortgages. 
This could constrain spending 
more than currently projected. 
The Committee discussed the 
reaction to the April monetary 
policy review decision. The 
Committee’s view in April was 
that inflationary pressures were 
still elevated, with little risk of 
fallout from global bank failures. 
In addition, the Committee was 
of the view that rebuild activity 
following recent weather events 
would necessitate a rise in 
government investment. A 50 
basis point OCR increase was 
seen as necessary to support 
retail interest rates, especially 
given the fall in wholesale rates 
that had occurred at the time. 
The Committee discussed the 
stance of policy to be confirmed 
at this meeting and the outlook 
for the OCR. The Committee was 
comfortable with the projected 
forward path for the OCR. The 
Committee discussed the suitability 
of keeping the OCR on hold at 
5.25% or increasing it to 5.50%. 
The Committee agreed that neither 
decision would cause unnecessary 
instability in output, interest rates, or 
the exchange rate. 
Raising the OCR to 5.50% is 
consistent with the projections. 
This reflects the view that while 
monetary policy is having a 
moderating effect on demand at 
this point in time, a 25 basis point 
increase in the OCR will increase 
confidence that inflation falls back 
to the midpoint of the target band. 
The case for keeping the OCR 
at 5.25% with the same forward 
projections rested on the 
recognition that monetary policy 
is having a sufficiently moderating 
effect on demand and inflation, 
and that we are yet to see the 
full effects of past tightening on 
the economy. A pause would 
also allow more time to assess 
the impact of the significant 
tightening, and the timing of any 
further increase that might be 
needed. 
On Wednesday 24 May, the 
Committee took the decision to 
vote on the two options. By a 
majority of five votes to two, the 
Committee agreed to increase 
the OCR by 25 basis points from 
5.25% to 5.50%. 
The Monetary Policy Committee 
reached a consensus that 
interest rates will need to remain 
at a restrictive level for the 
foreseeable future, to ensure 
consumer price inflation returns 
to the 1 to 3%  target range while 
supporting maximum sustainable 
employment. 
Attendees:
Reserve Bank members 
of MPC: 
Adrian Orr, Karen Silk,
Christian Hawkesby,
Paul Conway
External MPC members: 
Bob Buckle, Peter Harris,
Caroline Saunders
Treasury Observer: 
Dominick Stephens
MPC Secretary: 
Adam Richardson


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
8
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
Milford Sound. Photo: Thomas Bohm
CHAPTER 
02
Current
economic 
assessment
and monetary 
policy outlook


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
9
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
CHAPTER 2
Current economic assessment 
and monetary policy outlook
Key points
•	 The New Zealand economy contracted 
in the final quarter of 2022, with Gross 
Domestic Product (GDP) data much 
weaker than expected in the February 
Statement. Although activity declined, 
demand continued to exceed the 
economy’s ability to supply goods 
and services sustainably. More recent 
indicators suggest the economy 
recovered slightly over the start of 2023, 
despite the disruptions caused by the 
severe weather events in the North Island.
•	 Demand is slowing in parts of the 
economy that are more sensitive to 
higher interest rates, such as spending on 
housing-related goods and services and 
home building. However, several less-
interest-rate-sensitive factors are adding 
to demand in the New Zealand economy. 
These include the rebound in international 
tourism, the resurgence in net immigration 
and the clean-up, repair and rebuild work 
in the aftermath of the severe weather 
events.
•	 The Government announced higher 
spending in Budget 2023, which was 
more than assumed in the February 
Statement. Much of the increase was due 
to the repair and rebuild of infrastructure 
following the severe weather events. 
However, overall government spending 
growth has slowed from high levels as 
COVID-19 support measures have been 
phased out. As a result, government 
spending will be less inflationary than in 
recent years.
•	 Supply-chain disruptions have contributed 
to lower goods export volumes since the 
beginning of the pandemic. However, 
some of these supply factors have 
improved. At the same time, global 
demand for our goods exports has been 
waning. These factors have contributed 
to a decline in commodity prices – in 
particular for dairy and meat – since early 
2022. Demand for our goods exports is 
expected to remain low, as the global 
growth outlook is subdued despite the 
reopening of China.  
•	 Recent banking stress in the United 
States and Europe has been contained by 
regulators so far but has added to financial 
market volatility, tighter credit conditions 
and uncertainty about the global economic 
outlook. The effects of these events on 
the New Zealand dollar trade weighted 
index (TWI) and domestic financial 
conditions have been limited to date, as 
the New Zealand banking system is well 
placed to handle higher interest rates. 
•	 On the supply side, global supply-chain 
bottlenecks have continued to ease and 
commodity prices – in particular oil prices 
– have remained below their peaks in early 
2022. The costs of international shipping to 
New Zealand have fallen in recent months. 
Domestically, a sharp recovery in net 
immigration seems to have reduced acute 
labour shortages in some sectors of the 
economy. However, higher net immigration 
also supports demand – including for 
housing – and the net impact on inflationary 
pressure is uncertain at this point.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
10
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
•	 On balance, inflationary pressures in the 
economy have eased due to weaker 
demand and improved supply. Prices for 
some goods and services that tend to 
be volatile – such as petrol prices and 
airfares – have declined from high levels 
in 2022. These factors resulted in annual 
consumer price inflation easing to 6.7 
percent in the March 2023 quarter, which 
was lower than expected in the February 
Statement. The immediate inflationary 
pressure from the severe weather events 
appears to have been less than initially 
assumed. Many measures of inflation 
expectations have declined from recent 
highs, particularly at the 1-year and 2-year 
horizons. However, inflation remains too 
high, well above the Monetary Policy 
Committee’s (MPC’s) 1 to 3 percent target 
band. Most measures of persistent or 
‘core’ inflation have also remained near 
their recent highs.
•	 Although labour market tightness appears 
to have eased since early 2022, it 
continues to support inflationary pressure. 
Employment remains above its maximum 
sustainable level. The unemployment 
rate was 3.4 percent in the March 2023 
quarter, unchanged from the previous 
quarter and still near record lows. Labour 
market participation and employment 
as a share of the population increased 
to record highs. The underutilisation 
rate – a measure of those unemployed, 
underemployed and potentially looking 
for work – remained very low. Broader 
measures of wage inflation have remained 
strong, supporting household incomes 
and demand.
•	 High interest rates are still needed to 
further lower domestic demand relative 
to the economy’s ability to supply goods 
and services sustainably. Lower demand 
relative to supply reduces inflationary 
pressure over the medium term. 
•	 While economic activity in the last quarter 
of 2022 was weaker than expected, 
further economic contraction during 2023 
remains possible. The level of GDP is 
assumed to decline over 2023, but to a 
lesser extent than was expected in the 
February Statement.
•	 Conditional on our central economic 
outlook, it is expected that the OCR 
will need to follow a similar path to that 
assumed in the February Statement in 
order for the MPC to meet its inflation 
and employment objectives. Relative 
to the February Statement, higher net 
immigration, a slower decline in house 
prices and higher government spending 
are offset by the lower starting point level 
of GDP and consumer price inflation as 
well as a more negative outlook for our 
goods exports.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
11
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
Current economic assessment
1	
GDP can be calculated through different approaches.
“The production approach to GDP measures the total value of 
goods and services produced in New Zealand, after deducting 
the cost of goods and services used in the production 
process. This is also known as the value-added approach. The 
expenditure approach to GDP (also known as gross domestic 
expenditure or GDE) measures the final purchases of goods 
and services produced in New Zealand. Exports are added to 
domestic consumption, as they represent goods and services 
produced in New Zealand. Imports are subtracted, as they 
represent goods and services produced by other economies.” 
See Stats NZ – Gross domestic product.
Demand has eased but
continues to exceed supply
Economic activity in New Zealand, as 
measured by production GDP, contracted by 
0.6 percent in the December 2022 quarter.1 
This was much lower than expected in the 
February Statement (figure 2.1). Weaker-than-
projected output in services industries, which 
account for about two-thirds of GDP, was the 
key contributor to the unexpected decline. 
While GDP data remain volatile, the underlying 
weakness in demand was reflected in most 
components of expenditure GDP. Private 
consumption was flat and business and 
residential investment and overall government 
spending contracted in the December 2022 
quarter (figure 2.2). Higher interest rates, 
lower house prices and the higher cost of 
living contributed to a decline in domestic 
demand. Lower government consumption 
reflected a normalisation of government 
expenditure as COVID-19-related spending 
has largely been phased out.
Despite the easing in domestic spending, 
demand continues to exceed the economy’s 
ability to supply goods and services 
sustainably. The output gap – a measure of 
the extent to which demand is matched by 
the level of production that the economy can 
supply sustainably – has been very strong 
over the last two years, consistent with the 
high inflation environment. However, as 
higher interest rates have reduced domestic 
demand, the output gap is estimated to 
have been declining since its peak in 
2022 (figure 2.3). Consequently, domestic 
inflationary pressure has started to decrease.
Figure 2.1
Production GDP
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.2
Selected components of real expenditure GDP
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted, index=100 in Q4 2019)
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 2.3
GDP, potential GDP and the output gap
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
12
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
An increase in survey-based business 
activity indicators and robust labour 
market data suggest that economic activity 
recovered slightly over the March 2023 
quarter (figure 2.4). This was despite the 
disruptions to economic activity from the 
recent severe weather events, which were 
offset to some extent by the strong recovery 
in international tourism. Nonetheless, the 
near-term outlook for activity is subdued, and 
a second consecutive quarter of negative 
growth remains possible. 
Higher interest rates are
reducing demand
The constraining impact of higher interest 
rates has been most visible in spending 
and economic activity related to housing. 
Higher interest rates have contributed to 
slowing demand for housing, with house 
prices falling about 15 percent from their 
peak in November 2021 to April 2023. 
Higher mortgage rates increase debt-
servicing costs for households, reducing 
the amount of household income available 
for other spending. Lower house prices 
also reduce spending by households as 
they feel less wealthy. Consistent with these 
effects, spending on durable goods – such 
as household appliances like fridges and 
washing machines – has been slowing since 
early 2022 (figure 2.5).
Figure 2.5
Spending on durable goods
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: ‘Real ECT durables’ is ‘nominal ECT durables’ deflated with relevant components 
of the consumers price index.
Figure 2.4
Top-down indicators for production GDP
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: ANZ, BusinessNZ, NZIER, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area indicates the range between the maximum and minimum values 
of the GDP top-down and nowcasting indicators. The GDP top-down indicators comprise 
the Performance of Services Index (activity/sales), Performance of Manufacturing Index 
(production), Quarterly Survey of Business Opinion (domestic trading activity, past quarter), 
New Zealand activity index, ANZ Truckometer (heavy traffic), ANZ Business Opinion 
(capacity utilisation) and QES (total paid hours). The GDP top-down indicators were created 
through linear regressions for each indicator with GDP in quarterly or annual percentage 
changes. In addition, a GDP nowcasting indicator is included that is based on a dynamic 
factor model and uses Kalman filtering techniques. This nowcasting indicator is based 
on the Nowcasting Report from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. For all indicators 
the fitted values were transformed back into GDP levels. To avoid statistical bias, for most 
top-down indicators the nationwide COVID-19 lockdowns in 2020 and 2021 were captured 
through dummy variables in the regressions as these indicators were likely unable to 
sufficiently capture the lockdown impacts on GDP.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
13
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
Higher interest rates have also made 
borrowing for housing more expensive. 
This, combined with lower house prices 
and higher construction costs, has made 
it less attractive for residential developers 
to build more houses. Falling consent 
numbers suggest that residential investment 
will continue to slow (figure 2.6). Support 
to construction from the high number of 
consents issued in previous years is also 
waning. The rebuild work following the 
severe weather events is assumed to provide 
an only small offset to this broader decline, 
with the rebuild work spread over several 
years.
Beyond housing-related spending, higher 
interest rates have meant businesses are 
seeing a general slowing in demand. In the 
Quarterly Survey of Business Opinion (QSBO) 
for the March 2023 quarter, more firms 
reported a lack of orders to be the factor 
most limiting output than any other single 
factor (figure 2.7). While this is still at a low 
level, it is the first quarter since mid-2021 in 
which more businesses have reported orders 
as being a more limiting factor than labour.
Higher interest rates and the worsening 
demand outlook contributed to a slight fall 
in business investment from high levels over 
2022. Firms’ investment intentions have 
fallen sharply since late 2021 and are below 
historical averages across all industries. 
Bank lending to non-agricultural businesses 
has also been declining since late 2022, 
suggesting that firms are more pessimistic 
about the demand outlook and are hesitant 
to invest. Business investment is expected to 
fall further over coming quarters, particularly 
given the recent decline in export prices.
Demand is likely to ease further as the 
outstanding debt obligations of households 
and businesses continue to roll onto higher 
interest rates. For businesses, much of 
the increase in debt servicing costs has 
already occurred, as around 80 percent of 
business lending is either floating or reprices 
within three months. However, mortgages 
are typically fixed for one to two years. As 
a result, average debt-servicing costs for 
households will continue to increase, as 
borrowers roll onto higher interest rates.
Figure 2.6
Residential investment and consents
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.7
QSBO factor most limiting output
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: NZIER, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
14
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
Factors less influenced by interest 
rates are adding to demand
Currently, several factors that are less 
sensitive to higher interest rates are adding 
to demand and inflationary pressure. While 
the total number of international visitors 
remains below pre-COVID-19 levels, the 
rapid recovery since the border reopened 
has boosted demand (see chapter 4.1). At 
the same time, airlines and businesses 
in tourism-related industries – such as 
accommodation and food services – 
struggled to meet this strong demand over 
the peak summer months. Shortages of 
labour, accommodation and transport limited 
the extent of the recovery, creating higher 
inflationary pressure than otherwise. 
The border reopening has also contributed 
to much higher net immigration than 
assumed in the February Statement 
(figure 2.8). Net immigration was particularly 
high over recent quarters but is expected 
to decline to around pre-COVID-19 levels 
over the medium term. While this may partly 
reflect some ‘pent-up’ demand to migrate to 
New Zealand, immigration rules have also 
been eased to allow increased immigration 
of workers to alleviate acute labour 
shortages in some sectors. This is providing 
some relief in a very tight labour market, 
but the net impact on demand – including 
for housing – is highly uncertain, as is the 
impact on inflationary pressure. Adding to 
this uncertainty, changing immigration rules 
have also meant changes to the composition 
of immigrants. As a result, the extent and 
timing of immigrants adding to demand and 
inflationary pressure may be different to 
before COVID-19. 
2	
For more details, see Immigration New Zealand on the 2021 Resident Visa.
3	
See Immigration New Zealand on approvals numbers for the 2021 Resident Visa.
In addition, between September 2021 and July 
2022 the Government made it temporarily 
possible for immigrants on work visas who met 
certain criteria to apply for a special resident 
class visa.2 More than 93,000 applications 
have been approved so far,3 increasing the 
pool of people eligible to buy residential 
property in New Zealand. This factor, when 
combined with strong net immigration, has led 
to a less negative outlook for house prices. 
While the outlook for house prices is highly 
uncertain, house prices are assumed to fall by 
less over coming quarters than assumed in the 
February Statement (figure 2.9). 
Figure 2.8
Net working-age immigration
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 
Figure 2.9
House prices
(nominal, seasonally adjusted)
Source: CoreLogic, REINZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The REINZ house price index is indexed to the CoreLogic house price index in the 
March 2007 quarter.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
15
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
The recent severe weather events led to 
several deaths and many people lost their 
homes, vehicles and other possessions. 
Public infrastructure, farms and orchards 
were significantly damaged. The clean-up, 
repair and rebuild work in the aftermath of 
these events continues. While estimates are 
highly uncertain, we assume the recovery 
will add about 1.5 percent to annual GDP, 
roughly double the amount  we expected 
in the February Statement. However, this 
impact will be spread over several years, with 
infrastructure repairs in particular assumed 
to take a long time. In Budget 2023, the 
Government announced a $6 billion National 
Resilience Plan to help fund the rebuild from 
the severe weather events.4 This was in 
addition to the roughly $900 million already 
announced following the severe weather 
events.5
Government spending to 
normalise from elevated
COVID-19 levels
In recent years, overall government 
spending in the form of nominal government 
consumption, investment and subsidies to 
households and businesses has increased 
significantly (figure 2.10). This spending 
has predominantly been in response to 
the COVID-19 pandemic, and has added 
to demand and inflationary pressure in the 
economy. Government expenditure itself 
has been affected by the more inflationary 
environment over the past two years, 
as the cost of delivering a given level of 
government services has risen.
4	
See the Government’s announcement on 18 May 2023.
5	
See pre-budget speech to BNZ business breakfast on 14 May 2023.
Most COVID-19 support measures have been 
phased out since early 2022. Government 
subsidies are expected to stay low, but the 
outlook for real (inflation-adjusted) government 
consumption is somewhat higher than 
assumed in the February Statement. Real 
(inflation-adjusted) government investment 
is expected to continue to grow strongly, 
partly due to the repair and rebuild work in 
the aftermath of the severe weather events. 
However, overall real government spending
as a share of the economy is assumed to 
decline over the medium term. As a result, 
government spending will be less inflationary 
than in recent years. 
Figure 2.10
Government spending
(nominal, quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
16
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
New Zealand’s goods exports 
have remained low
New Zealand’s services exports have 
increased rapidly due to the recovery 
in international visitors since the border 
reopened. However, our goods exports 
have remained somewhat below their pre-
COVID-19 levels (figure 2.11). This has partly 
been due to labour shortages, reduced 
shipping capacity and less favourable 
growing conditions on farms and orchards 
overall, mainly affecting our commodity 
exports. 
Some of these supply factors have improved 
in recent quarters. At the same time, global 
demand for our goods exports has been 
slowing. These factors have contributed to a 
decline in commodity prices since early 2022 
(figure 2.12). Over 2023, global economic 
growth is expected to slow to below 
trend for most of our key trading partners. 
The economic growth outlook for China 
has improved further since the February 
Statement, as the easing of COVID-19 
restrictions in China has contributed to a 
stronger-than-expected economic recovery. 
However, growth indicators in China 
softened slightly in April. Overall, demand for 
our goods exports is expected to remain low 
over 2023.
The New Zealand dollar TWI has provided 
some offset to slowing global demand for 
our goods exports. For most of the last 
three months, the TWI was lower than what 
was assumed in the February Statement 
(figure 2.13). Since most of our goods exports 
are traded in foreign currencies, export 
revenue  – all else unchanged – increases 
when converted back into New Zealand 
dollars at a lower exchange rate. However, 
the New Zealand dollar TWI has more 
recently returned to be around the level 
assumed in the February Statement
(see chapter 5). 
Figure 2.11
Goods exports
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.12
Commodity prices
(nominal, seasonally adjusted)
Source: ANZ, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.13
New Zealand dollar TWI
(nominal)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
17
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
Recent banking stress in the US and Europe 
has been contained by regulators so far, but 
has added to financial market volatility, tighter 
credit conditions and uncertainty about the 
global economic outlook. The effects of these 
events on the New Zealand dollar TWI and 
other financial conditions in New Zealand 
have been limited to date. New Zealand’s 
banks are well capitalised and profitable, have 
strong liquidity and funding positions, and 
are relatively well placed to manage higher 
interest rates (see Financial Stability Report 
May 2023). 
In early May, US Treasury Secretary Janet 
Yellen indicated that the level of US 
sovereign debt is likely to reach its statutory 
limit in June 2023 if the US Congress does 
not raise this limit. If this limit (or ‘debt ceiling’) 
is not increased, the US will be at risk of 
defaulting on its debt. While this is unlikely 
to happen, it has contributed to volatility in 
some US interest rates.
Supply constraints have 
continued to ease 
Global supply-chain bottlenecks have 
continued to ease. Shipping costs for 
consumer goods imports to New Zealand 
have declined sharply over recent months 
(figure 2.14). The reopening of China has 
contributed to an increase in Chinese supply 
and logistics activity, although the reopening 
will also add to global demand.
Global commodity prices – in particular 
oil prices – have remained below their 
early-2022 peaks (figure 2.15). The 
disruptions to commodity demand and 
supply due to Russia invading Ukraine in 
early 2022 have largely unwound. Many 
commodity prices are close to their levels 
prior to the war in Ukraine. At this stage, the 
reopening of China does not appear to have 
added significantly to global commodity 
price pressure.
Figure 2.14
Shipping costs for consumer goods imports
(share of import value for duty)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: These series are estimated by taking the value of consumer merchandise imports 
including freight and insurance costs (CIF) and subtracting the reported value for duty 
(VFD), which excludes these costs. They are expressed as a percentage of the VFD figure.
Figure 2.15
Global commodity prices
(nominal)
Source: Bloomberg, Reuters.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
18
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
Domestically, discussions with businesses 
suggest that labour shortages have eased 
slightly but remain elevated, consistent with 
the lower number of firms reporting difficulty 
finding skilled and unskilled labour than in 
previous quarters (figure 2.16). The number 
of job vacancies has also fallen from recent 
peaks around mid-2022. This indicates that 
businesses have been able to fill some open 
positions and that labour demand – while 
still strong – has not added as much to new 
vacancies. 
The additional labour supply is coming from 
a rising share of the population participating 
in the labour force. This share reached a 
record high of 72 percent of the working-
age population in the March 2023 quarter. 
In addition, net immigration has increased 
rapidly since the full border reopening in the 
latter half of 2022. 
Inflation has been lower than 
expected but is still too high
On balance, inflationary pressure in the 
economy has reduced due to weaker 
demand and improved supply. Prices for 
some goods and services that tend to be 
volatile – such as petrol prices and airfares – 
have declined. Annual consumers price index 
(CPI) inflation eased from 7.2 percent in the 
December 2022 quarter to 6.7 percent in the 
March 2023 quarter. 
The decline in headline inflation was mainly 
due to a large fall in tradables inflation,  
which measures price changes for goods 
and services that are more exposed to 
international competition (figure 2.17). Annual 
tradables inflation fell from 8.2 percent in 
the December 2022 quarter to 6.4 percent 
in the March 2023 quarter. This decline was 
partly due to the strong March 2022 quarter 
dropping out of the annual percentage 
change calculation. However, prices for 
petrol and international airfares also declined 
sharply, reflecting lower oil prices and 
improving global supply chains and flight 
connectivity. These factors more than offset 
the increase in food prices during the March 
2023 quarter.
Figure 2.16
QSBO difficulty in finding labour
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: NZIER, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.17
Contributions to CPI inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
19
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
Figure 2.18
CPI inflation surprise in Q1 2023
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
In contrast, annual non-tradables inflation – 
which measures price changes for goods 
and services that are less exposed to 
international competition – continued to 
increase, from 6.6 percent in the December 
2022 quarter to 6.8 percent in the March 
2023 quarter. This is the highest recorded 
value since the start of this series in 1999, 
reflecting resilient demand and the tight 
labour market. Higher prices for construction, 
household utilities, restaurant meals and 
ready-to-eat food accounted for much of 
this annual increase. Prices for those goods 
and services affected by the recovery in 
international tourism, such as domestic 
accommodation, also increased.
While inflation remains high, it was lower 
than assumed in the February Statement. 
Although both annual non-tradables and 
tradables inflation were lower than expected, 
tradables inflation accounted for a larger 
share of the surprise (figure 2.18). Lower-
than-expected prices for domestic and 
international airfares and second-hand 
cars accounted for much of the surprise in 
tradables inflation, partly offset by stronger-
than-expected food prices. On the non-
tradables side, much of the downside 
surprise was due to lower price increases for 
the purchase of new housing and household 
contents than assumed. Overall, the March 
2023 CPI data imply that the immediate 
inflationary impact of the severe weather 
events was less material than assumed in the 
February Statement.
While inflation decreased more than expected 
in the March 2023 quarter, it is still too high. 
Most measures of persistent or ‘core’ inflation 
have remained near their recent peaks 
(figure 2.19). This implies that inflation will take 
some time to return to the mid-point of the 
MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range. 
Figure 2.19
Headline and core inflation measures
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI 
inflation over the medium term.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
20
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
Following lower inflation in the latest CPI 
data release, many measures of inflation 
expectations have declined from recent 
highs. This has particularly been the case at 
the 1-year and 2-year horizons (figure 2.20). 
The fall in inflation expectations is in line 
with falling pricing and cost pressure 
indicators in business sentiment surveys, 
although these remain at very high levels. 
Research discussed in chapter 4.2 found that 
household expectations for inflation have 
become more sensitive to recent inflation 
outturns in a high-inflation environment. 
While a higher sensitivity to recent inflation 
outturns makes it harder for monetary policy 
to reduce inflation expectations, it also 
means that expectations are likely to fall 
faster once actual inflation starts to decline 
more materially. 
Many economies have experienced similar 
developments in inflation. For most of our 
key trading partners, headline inflation 
seems to have peaked and has started to 
fall, mainly due to falling energy prices and 
more stable food prices. However, inflation is 
still well above the targets of central banks, 
and measures of persistent or ‘core’ inflation 
remain at high levels.
The tight labour market is still 
supporting inflationary pressure
Inflationary pressure continues to be 
supported by a tight labour market, with 
employment above its maximum sustainable 
level. The unemployment rate remained very 
low at 3.4 percent in the March 2023 quarter, 
unchanged from the previous quarter 
(figure 2.21). Although most of our labour 
market indicators show that labour market 
pressures have eased since early 2022, they 
remain strong (figure 2.22). Labour market 
participation and employment as a share of 
the working-age population has increased 
to record highs, and the underutilisation rate 
remains near record lows. 
Figure 2.21
Unemployment rate
(unemployed people as a share of the labour force, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.22
Maximum sustainable employment (MSE)
indicator suite
Source: ANZ, MBIE, NZIER, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The Reserve Bank uses a range of indicators when assessing maximum sustainable 
employment, consistent with clause 2.1b of the Remit. The vertical lines on the left-hand 
and right-hand sides represent the weakest and strongest data outcomes since 2000, 
respectively. For example, a lower unemployment rate is considered to be stronger. An 
orange dot to the left of a black dot means that the latest data outcome was weaker than  
in the March 2022 quarter, when the labour market was particularly tight.
Figure 2.20
Inflation expectations
(annual, years ahead)
Source: RBNZ Survey of Expectations (Business).
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI 
inflation over the medium term.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
21
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
Same-job wage inflation continued to 
increase below CPI inflation in the March 
2023 quarter, somewhat less than expected 
in the February Statement. However, broader 
wage and income measures – which also 
include the impacts of workers getting 
promoted, changing jobs or working more 
hours – grew at a faster pace than CPI 
inflation (figure 2.23).6 Consequently, average 
household income has remained robust 
relative to strong consumer price increases 
in the past two years. Very high employment, 
strong household income growth and 
accumulated savings are expected to provide 
some support to household spending in the 
near term.
High interest rates are required to 
return annual inflation to 2 percent
High interest rates are required to further 
slow demand relative to the economy’s ability 
to supply goods and services sustainably. 
Lower demand will result in less pressure 
on available labour and capital resources 
in the economy. This will help to reduce 
upward pressure on prices, leading to lower 
domestic inflation. Slowing global growth 
is also expected to contribute to falling 
inflationary pressure through declining import 
price inflation and lower demand for our 
goods exports.
Labour market tightness is expected to 
decrease substantially over coming quarters, 
reducing wage inflation pressure. Easing 
labour market conditions are assumed to 
accompany declining economic activity. As a 
result, the unemployment rate is expected to 
increase from its current low level. Keeping 
the unemployment rate near current levels 
without experiencing unsustainably high 
wage and inflation pressures would require 
structural changes in the labour market that 
are beyond the control of the Reserve Bank.
6	
For more information on real wages see chapter 4.2 in the November 2022 Statement.
Figure 2.23
Wage measures and headline CPI
(index=100 in Q4 2019)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Same-job wage measure: The adjusted labour cost index (LCI) measures wage 
inflation for a fixed quantity and quality of labour.
Broad same-job wage measure: The unadjusted LCI measures the same as the adjusted 
LCI but includes any wage changes due to quality changes within an occupation (as 
reported by employers).
Broad wage measure: The Quarterly Employment Survey (QES) average hourly earnings 
measure the average hourly earnings across the economy. It is affected by opportunities 
that arise in a tight labour market, for example from promotions or shifts from low paying 
industries to high paying industries.
Income per worker: The QES total gross earnings per filled job measure the total income 
per job. In addition to the influence of the above, the QES income measure also takes into 
account employees working extra hours.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
22
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
While economic growth in the last quarter 
of 2022 was weaker than expected, an 
economic contraction over 2023 remains 
possible. However, the decline in the level 
of GDP is assumed to be less than was 
assumed in the February Statement. There 
remains considerable uncertainty about the 
timing of this contraction. The extent of the 
underlying contraction may also be masked 
by volatility in activity due to the recovery 
following the severe weather events. 
Weaker demand is expected to lead to 
declines in non-tradables and tradables 
inflation over the medium term. Annual 
headline CPI inflation is assumed to return to 
within the 1 to 3 percent target range in the 
second half of 2024, and to 2 percent by the 
end of 2025 (figure 2.24).
Figure 2.24
CPI inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI 
inflation over the medium term.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
23
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
Figure 2.25
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Monetary policy outlook
Overall, offsetting developments since 
the February Statement have resulted in 
the outlook for inflation and employment 
remaining broadly unchanged. Relative to the 
February Statement, higher net immigration, 
a slower decline in house prices and higher 
government spending are offset by the lower 
starting point level of GDP and consumer 
price inflation and a more negative outlook 
for our goods exports. Measures of core 
inflation remain elevated, but most near-
term inflation expectation measures have 
declined.
Conditional on our central economic 
outlook, it is assumed that the OCR will need 
to follow a similar path to that assumed in the 
February Statement in order for the MPC to 
meet its inflation and employment objectives 
(figure 2.25). 


Chapter 3 Global developments and outlook
24
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
CHAPTER 
03
Global 
developments 
and outlook
Craters of the Moon, Taupō. Photo: Jinny Leong


Chapter 3 Global developments and outlook
25
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
CHAPTER 3
Global developments
and outlook
Growth has slowed to below trend in most 
of our key trading partner economies 
(figure 3.1). China is an exception, with 
activity rebounding following the removal 
of COVID-19 restrictions at the end of last 
year. Most other trading partners’ growth has 
slowed, partly due to central bank tightening 
in response to high inflation. Headline 
inflation has continued to decline across 
economies. Underlying price pressures 
remain persistent, with demand exceeding 
supply in most economies. 
Central banks have continued to increase 
interest rates. However, recent banking 
stress in the US and Europe has contributed 
to market participants revising down their 
expectations for future interest rates, 
particularly in the US. An additional tightening 
in credit conditions in the US as a result of 
recent banking sector stress is expected to 
reduce lending and dampen demand.
Global uncertainty is heightened 
due to recent banking stress
Stress has emerged in parts of the banking 
system in both the US and Europe since 
March 2023. This has resulted in volatility in 
financial markets and elevated uncertainty 
about the global economic outlook. Rising 
global interest rates have reduced the 
current market value of long-term financial 
assets such as government bonds and 
mortgage-backed securities. This has 
exposed vulnerabilities where interest rate 
risk has been inadequately hedged by 
some banks. 
In early March, Silicon Valley Bank in the US 
failed after a loss in confidence led to rapid 
deposit withdrawals. The failure triggered 
investors and depositors to reassess 
the health of other financial institutions, 
particularly those with similar characteristics. 
These included banks with high proportions 
of assets sensitive to interest rate risk, such 
as commercial real estate, and those with 
relatively large proportions of uninsured 
deposits. 
US authorities have launched a number 
of interventions to limit broader financial 
system contagion. Despite this, two other US 
banks have since failed, most recently First 
Republic Bank in early May. In Switzerland, 
authorities facilitated the merger of UBS with 
Credit Suisse, the two largest Switzerland-
based global investment banks. This was 
in response to a loss of investor and client 
confidence in Credit Suisse following a 
reassessment of the bank’s vulnerabilities 
by the market. 
Figure 3.1
Key trading partner GDP
(index=100 in Q4 2019)
Source: Haver Analytics, Consensus Economics, RBNZ estimates.
Note: GDP forecasts are based on Consensus Economics estimates, except New Zealand’s 
which is based on our current projection. Official estimates and data for Q1 2023 for China, 
the euro area and the US are shown here.


Chapter 3 Global developments and outlook
26
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
The recent banking stress has increased 
uncertainty around the global economic 
outlook. So far, broader spillovers to global 
financial markets have been limited, with a 
moderate increase in credit spreads and 
lower equity prices for some banks. However, 
the banking stress is expected to contribute 
to a tightening in credit conditions in the US 
in particular, resulting in lower loan growth 
and aggregate demand. Any renewed 
escalation in global financial system stress 
could result in a significant deterioration of 
the global economic outlook if not contained.
Global economic growth
is slowing
Growth has slowed to below trend across 
most major economies, as central banks 
have tightened monetary policy. However, 
some timely indicators of global economic 
activity have improved since the February 
Statement. Growth is generally expected to 
remain below trend over 2023 and 2024. 
However, it is expected to recover towards 
trend over the medium term as central banks 
return inflation to target and monetary policy 
normalises to more neutral interest rates. 
US GDP increased 1.6 percent annually 
in the March 2023 quarter, below rates of 
growth typically seen before the pandemic. 
The International Monetary Fund expects 
US growth of 1.6 percent over the year to 
December 2023. Uncertainty arising from 
stress in the banking sector poses downside 
risk to the US outlook, through lower 
confidence and reduced lending growth. 
Nonetheless, the US labour market remains 
resilient as job growth continues to exceed 
market expectations.
Euro area GDP grew 1.3 percent annually 
in the March 2023 quarter, although GDP 
was relatively flat compared to six months 
ago. Growth forecasts for the euro area 
have been revised higher for 2023, due to 
falling gas and energy prices in Europe and 
stronger demand from China. Labour markets 
in the euro area remain tight. Combined with 
high inflation, this is putting upward pressure 
on wage growth.
In Australia, timely indicators suggest 
economic growth remained subdued 
over the March 2023 quarter, despite a 
recent surge in net immigration. While the 
unemployment rate remains near historical 
lows, some indicators of labour demand have 
eased slightly, and higher population growth 
is supporting labour supply. 
Economic growth in China increased sharply 
to 4.5 percent annually in the March 2023 
quarter, due to a strong recovery following 
the removal of COVID-19 restrictions at the 
end of last year. Services and travel-related 
consumption have rebounded, fiscal and 
monetary policy support has remained 
supportive and the housing sector appears 
to have stabilised. While some indicators 
have softened in the past month, China’s 
economy is forecast to expand by around 6 
percent in 2023.


Chapter 3 Global developments and outlook
27
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
Headline inflation is easing, but 
underlying pressures persist
Headline inflation has continued to decline 
in most of our key trading partner economies 
(figure 3.2). In particular, energy prices 
have fallen and food prices are beginning 
to stabilise. Global commodity prices 
have eased from the elevated levels they 
reached following the Russian invasion 
of Ukraine. Inflationary pressures remain 
higher for services than they do for goods. 
Despite falling headline inflation, underlying 
price pressures remain firm as reflected in 
elevated core inflation (figure 3.3).
In the US, annual headline inflation has 
slowed to 4.9 percent, the lowest rate since 
May 2021. However, core inflation has 
remained elevated. This has been supported 
by continued increases in housing costs 
and other services, consistent with the tight 
labour market and strong wage growth.
Headline and core inflation in the euro area 
has remained notably higher than that in the 
US. This, in part, reflects higher energy prices 
as a result of Europe’s proximity to the war in 
Ukraine. Headline inflation is also declining in 
Australia, but services inflation has increased 
to the highest level since 2001. This has been 
caused by strong price growth for holiday 
travel, medical services, rents and restaurant 
meals. 
China continues to have relatively low 
headline and core inflation compared to 
most other key trading partners. Pass-
through of international commodity prices to 
inflation in China has been modest, due to 
government intervention and weak domestic 
demand throughout the prolonged period of 
COVID-19 restrictions.
Figure 3.2
Headline inflation for key trading partners
(annual)
Source: Haver Analytics.
Figure 3.3
Inflation excluding food and energy 
for key trading partners
(annual)
Source: Haver Analytics.


Chapter 3 Global developments and outlook
28
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
Central banks continue to tighten, 
but at a slower pace 
Most major central banks have continued 
to raise interest rates since the February 
Statement, although at a slower pace than 
in previous months (table 3.1). Market pricing 
reflects the expectation that central banks 
have now reached, or are near, peak policy 
rates in this tightening cycle (figure 3.4). The 
impact of past tightening is already beginning 
to be observed in declining headline inflation 
and some signs of moderating demand. The 
recent global monetary policy tightening 
cycle has resulted in policy rates above 
longer-run estimates of neutral interest rates 
in most major economies. 
Table 3.1
Selected central bank policy rate 
changes
Fed
ECB
BoE
RBA
RBNZ
Current policy rate (%)
5.00-5.25
3.25
4.50
3.85
5.25
Expected peak rate (%)
5.1
3.6
4.9
4.0
5.8
Previous policy move (bps)
+25
+25
+25
+25
+50
Expected next move (bps)
0
+25
+25
0
+25
Next meeting date
14 June
15 June
22 June
6 June
24 May
Source: Bloomberg.
Note: The ‘expected peak rate’ and ‘expected next move’ are implied by overnight indexed swaps as of 18 May 2023.
Market expectations for future interest 
rates in many economies have declined 
since the February Statement. This reflects 
expectations of weaker demand as a result 
of the recent banking stress, and the risk of 
further escalation of financial stress. This is 
particularly the case in the US, where market 
pricing now indicates that participants expect 
the policy rate to decrease by around 50 
basis points by the end of 2023. Market 
participants expect central banks to begin 
reducing policy rates later this year or early 
next year as capacity pressures ease and 
inflation returns closer to target.
Figure 3.4
Central bank policy interest rates and 
market pricing for future policy rates
(as at 18 May 2023)
Source: Bloomberg.
Note: For the RBA, RBNZ, and ECB market pricing is implied by overnight indexed swaps as 
of 18 May 2023. For the Fed market pricing is implied from Fed fund futures contracts as of 
18 May 2023.


Chapter 3 Global developments and outlook
29
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
Financial markets have
been volatile
Global financial market volatility has 
increased since the February Statement, 
largely as a result of the recent banking 
stress in the US and Europe. However, 
general spillovers to financial markets have 
been limited. Global credit spreads for 
investment-grade issuers have increased 
moderately, although they remain well below 
the levels seen in early 2020. Equity prices 
for some banks have declined. At present, 
New Zealand credit spreads have not been 
materially impacted by these developments. 
However, wider global credit spreads will 
increase the cost of New Zealand banks’ 
offshore funding (see chapter 5).
Banking stress in the US has contributed to 
market participants lowering expectations 
of further monetary policy tightening, 
and bringing forward their expectations 
of policy cuts. This is partially due to the 
expected effects of the banking stress on 
lending and economic activity. As a result, 
sovereign yields have fallen since the 
February Statement in both the US and euro 
area (figure 3.5). Large declines in equity 
prices as a result of the banking stress have 
mostly been limited to financial institutions 
perceived to have vulnerabilities similar 
to those of the failed banks. Global equity 
prices have remained largely unchanged or 
slightly higher since the February Statement. 
Measures of volatility reflect the greater 
effect of banking stress on bond markets 
than on equity markets, with elevated bond 
market volatility but stability in equity markets 
(figure 3.6).
Figure 3.5
2-year sovereign bond yields
Source: Bloomberg.
Figure 3.6
Measures of market volatility
Source: Bloomberg.
Note: The VIX and MOVE indices are measures of volatility in equity markets and bond 
markets, respectively.


Chapter 4 Special topics
30
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
Queenstown. Photo: Gerelmaa Bayarmagnai
CHAPTER 
04
Special topics


Chapter 4 Special topics
31
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
CHAPTER 4 
Special topics 
Before the publication of each Statement, the MPC is provided 
with analyses of some topical issues. 
Topics for the May Statement included: 
1.	 The recovery in international tourism over the 2022/23 summer 
2.	 Have inflation expectations become more sensitive to higher inflation? 
Special topics in the past 12 months
Topic
Date/publication
The international dimension of non-tradables inflation
February 2023 Statement (Chapter 4)
Monitoring the labour market for inflationary
pressures with high-frequency microdata
February 2023 Statement (Chapter 4)
The neutral interest rate
November 2022 Statement (Chapter 4)
Developments in real wages
November 2022 Statement (Chapter 4)
Global inflation developments 
August 2022 Statement (Chapter 3)
Assessing recent inflation surprises
August 2022 Statement (Chapter 3)
Business conditions
August 2022 Statement (Chapter 3)
Global inflation developments
May 2022 Statement (Chapter 4)
The outlook for household spending, house prices, 
and construction
May 2022 Statement (Chapter 4)


Chapter 4 Special topics
32
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
The recovery in international tourism
over the 2022/23 summer
Summary
•	 Prior to COVID-19, tourism was one of 
New Zealand’s largest export industries. 
International tourism accounted for 
roughly 20 percent of total exports.
•	 We have been assuming that pent-up 
demand for travel would be strong, 
supporting a swift recovery in tourism 
following the border reopening. Our 
forecast for services export volumes 
in the February Statement assumed 
that capacity constraints would limit the 
2022/23 summer to 75 percent of pre-
COVID-19 levels in real terms (that is, 
adjusted for higher overall prices).
•	 To date, available data have been 
consistent with this assumption, so it 
has been maintained in the current 
projection. While factors such as the 
recovery of travel between China and 
New Zealand and the weak outlook for 
the global economy pose some risk to 
our projection, we assess the risks as 
being broadly balanced.
Tourism has recovered broadly
as expected
Recent tourism-related data have generally 
been in line with our assumption that the 
available capacity of airlines and tourism 
operators would limit the recovery of 
international tourism over the 2022/23 
summer to 75 percent of pre-COVID-19 
levels. Short-term overseas visitor arrivals 
for the 2022/23 summer (December-
February) were 68 percent of the levels for 
the 2019/20 summer (figure 4.1). In January 
2023 the number of international phone sim 
cards in New Zealand – another indicator 
of international tourism – was 83 percent of 
the same month in 2020 (figure 4.2). While 
the number of tourists in February 2023 
remained high, we started to see the typical 
seasonal slowdown in visitor numbers, in 
line with the pre-pandemic pattern.
Foreign credit card spending in 
New Zealand has reached 90 percent of 
the 2019/20 summer levels (figure 4.3). 
Given the increase in prices in New Zealand 
generally, these data must be adjusted for 
inflation to provide a clear signal of spending 
strength. When adjusted for inflation, foreign 
credit card spending in the December 2022 
quarter reached 79 percent of the level in 
the December 2019 quarter. Although there 
have been fewer arrivals this summer than 
was typical pre-COVID-19, real spending per 
visitor has been higher.
Figure 4.1
Short-term overseas visitor arrivals
(monthly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
1


Chapter 4 Special topics
33
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
Figure 4.2
Overseas phone SIM cards in NZ
(index=100 at January 2020)
Source: Tourism New Zealand, Data Ventures.
Figure 4.3
Overseas credit card spending in NZ 
(seasonally adjusted, index=100 at Q4 2019)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: ‘Real foreign credit card spending in NZ’ is ‘nominal foreign credit card spending in 
NZ’ deflated with CPI.
Figure 4.4
Number of short-term arrivals by travel purpose
(weekly)
Source: Stats NZ.
The higher spending per visitor is in line with 
feedback we have received from businesses 
suggesting that the composition of visitors 
was different from that before COVID-19. 
In the 2022/23 summer New Zealand had 
a strong recovery in visitors from Australia, 
Europe and North America. However, 
visitors from China and other Asian countries 
recovered to a lesser extent (figure 4.7). 
Income per capita is higher in Australia, 
Europe and North America than it is in China 
and other Asian countries, contributing to 
higher average visitor spending than before 
COVID-19. The higher spending per visitor 
may have also resulted from visitors staying 
longer than they did before COVID-19 
(figure 4.6).
Tourism-related businesses noted that the 
FIFA Women’s World Cup in July and August 
2023 is likely to have a material impact on 
services exports. A bump in foreign credit 
card spending can be observed around the 
time of the 2011 Rugby World Cup (figure 4.3).


Chapter 4 Special topics
34
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
How has the composition of 
visitors changed?
In 2019, about half of all the short-term 
arrivals to New Zealand declared their 
purpose of travel to be a holiday, and more 
than a quarter were visiting friends and family 
(figure 4.4). Since the border reopened, 
the number of arrivals visiting friends and 
family has recovered the fastest, reaching 
more than 80 percent of the 2019 levels 
(figure 4.5). By contrast, holiday arrivals 
have recovered the slowest out of all travel 
purposes, reaching roughly half of the 2019 
levels. The relatively rapid increase in the 
number of people visiting friends and family 
is consistent with a catch-up from deferred 
family travel and family reunification following 
the extended period of closed borders. 
A comparatively slow recovery in holiday 
travel is consistent with the relatively late 
border reopening of China, a key market for 
overseas tourists coming to New Zealand 
before the pandemic.
The near-term shift towards friends and 
family travel has also been associated with 
an increase in the average length of stay of 
visitors (figure 4.6). This reflects the fact that 
those visiting friends and family tend to stay 
longer than holiday arrivals.
By country of residence, arrivals from 
Australia and North America have recovered 
the fastest, reaching 77 percent of 2019 
levels in February (figure 4.7). An expansion 
of direct flights to various cities in the US 
has helped support strong arrival numbers 
from the region. European arrival numbers 
continue to recover steadily, reaching 68 
percent of 2019 levels. Arrival numbers 
from Asia remain low. This mostly reflects 
fewer visitors from China (8 percent of 2019 
levels) as travel restrictions in the country 
were eased later than those in most other 
countries. China was our second largest 
source of arrivals prior to the COVID-19 
pandemic.
Figure 4.5
Short-term arrivals by travel purpose 
(relative to the same month in 2019)
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 4.6
Average length of stay of visitors 
(December to February)
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 4.7
Visitor arrivals by country/continent of residence
(monthly)
Source: Stats NZ.


Chapter 4 Special topics
35
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
Risks to the outlook
for service exports
Overall, we assess the risks to our forecast 
for services export volumes in the May 
Statement to be broadly balanced. Key risks 
include:
China returning to global travel (upside 
risk): In February 2023, visitors from China 
accounted for 2 percent of visitor arrivals, 
well below the 12 percent of all visitors 
in the same month in 2019. The return of 
China to the global travel market and the 
announcement that New Zealand has 
been included on a list of 20 approved 
destinations for group tourism will likely 
support New Zealand’s tourism recovery 
throughout 2023. The extent and pace of 
this support remain uncertain. 
Airline capacity (balanced risk): Recent 
feedback from businesses was that the 
pace of the tourism recovery will depend 
on when and to what degree airlines 
reintroduce connections to New Zealand. 
While international flight capacity is steadily 
increasing, it remains below pre-COVID-19 
levels (figure 4.8). Key near-term constraints 
on reintroducing capacity include lack of 
aircraft and global labour shortages.
Timing of domestic versus global 
slowdown (balanced risk): More broadly, 
our tourism recovery will depend on how 
the domestic economy evolves relative 
to our trading partners. Relative growth 
trends could also affect services export 
volumes through the exchange rate channel. 
For example, if the economic slowdown 
in New Zealand is more abrupt than in 
our trading partners, we could see the 
New Zealand dollar depreciate and increased 
demand from tourists as New Zealand 
becomes a relatively cheap travel option.  
Labour supply constraints (downside risk): 
The number of people directly employed in 
tourism decreased from 221,000 in March 
2019 to 145,000 in March 2022, before the 
full border reopening (see box A). When 
we talked to businesses, they often noted 
that with the tourism recovery underway, 
operators were facing shortages of both 
skilled and unskilled labour. This is consistent 
with job advertisements at elevated levels, 
particularly in the hospitality industry, over 
the second half of 2022 and the summer 
2022/23 period  (figure 4.9). Labour 
constraints could lead to lower-than-assumed 
capacity in the tourism industry, reducing
real activity. 
Figure 4.8
Flight capacity to and within NZ
(index=100 at December 2019)
Source: Tourism New Zealand, Sabre Market Intelligence.
Figure 4.9
Online job ads
(index=100 at February 2020)
Source: MBIE.


36
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
Box A
7	
See Zheng & Sing (2023), ‘Sectoral Reallocation and Income Growth in the Labour Market During the COVID-19 Pandemic’, Analytical Note, Reserve Bank 
of New Zealand.
8	
These results are not official statistics. They have been created for research purposes from the Integrated Data Infrastructure (IDI) and Longitudinal Business 
Database (LBD) which are carefully managed by Stats NZ. For more information about the IDI and LBD please visit https://www.stats.govt.nz/integrated-data/. 
The results are based in part on tax data supplied by Inland Revenue to Stats NZ under the Tax Administration Act 1994 for statistical purposes. Any discussion 
of data limitations or weaknesses is in the context of using the IDI for statistical purposes, and is not related to the data’s ability to support Inland Revenue’s core 
operational requirements.
Employment recovery in
tourism-related industries
Tourism directly employed 
7.9 percent of New Zealand’s 
working population in the 
March 2020 year. This is in 
line with tourism being one of 
New Zealand’s largest export 
industries prior to COVID-19. 
The closing of the border to 
international tourists led to 
workers formerly employed in the 
tourism sector moving to other 
industries.7 This resulted in an 
annual 35.5 percent fall in directly 
employed tourism workers 
(around 78,000 people) in March 
2021, with a provisional recovery 
of only 2.6 percent in the year to 
March 2022.
As international tourists return, 
we would expect workers to 
be pulled back into tourism-
related sectors. Using labour 
market microdata from Stats NZ’s 
Integrated Data Infrastructure 
(IDI) database (based on 
administrative tax data from the 
Inland Revenue Department), we 
are able to monitor employment 
at a more detailed level.8 In 
addition, these data are available 
with a relatively short time lag, 
allowing us to view employment 
movements until the end of 
February 2023.
For the initial analysis, we look 
at employment in seven tourism-
related sub-industries, and 
classify them into two groups. 
The affected group comprises 
the sub-industries where 
employment fell significantly 
following the closure of the 
border to international tourists 
(figure A1). The less affected 
group captures the sub-industries 
where employment remained 
relatively stable despite the 
border closure. The industries in 
this group were likely supported 
by robust domestic tourism.
Affected: Accommodation, air 
and space transport, scenic and 
sightseeing transport, and travel 
agency services.
Less affected: Food and 
beverage services, heritage 
activities, and road transport.
Figure A1
Total employment in tourism-related sub-industries
(index=100 at December 2019)
Source: Stats NZ IDI.


37
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
In the past 12 months, as 
international tourism has 
returned to New Zealand, total 
employment in the affected 
group has increased (figure A2). 
The recovery in services export 
volumes to date has been 
associated with an increase in 
the number of people working 
in accommodation, air and 
space transport, scenic and 
sightseeing transport, and travel 
agency services. Tourism-related 
industries are showing an inflow 
of workers, but total employment 
is still well below the pre-
COVID-19 levels.
Figure A2
Quarterly services export volumes and total 
employment in tourism-related sub-industries
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, Stats NZ IDI.


Chapter 4 Special topics
38
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
Have inflation expectations become more
sensitive to higher inflation? 
Summary
•	 New Zealand households’ expectations 
of future inflation depend on past actual 
inflation, which we term as an ‘adaptive’ 
expectations process.
•	 Households’ one-year-ahead inflation 
expectations have become more sensitive 
to actual inflation in recent years. 
•	 Households pay less attention to inflation 
when inflation is low and stable, and more 
attention to inflation when it is high. We 
capture this behaviour using the concept 
of ‘rational inattention’. 
•	 Higher inflation expectations make it 
harder for monetary policy to reduce high 
inflation. All else being equal, interest 
rates need to be higher to stop high 
inflation becoming entrenched.
•	 However, once actual inflation falls due 
to monetary policy and other factors, 
households’ inflation expectations are 
likely to decrease quickly. 
Inflation expectations play a crucial role in 
shaping how inflation evolves. Expectations 
can either increase or decrease the 
momentum of price changes. When 
individuals and businesses expect inflation 
to be higher, they adjust their behaviour 
accordingly. For example, they may demand 
higher wages and increase prices, which 
then leads to higher actual inflation. By 
effectively communicating a commitment to 
price stability and demonstrating a credible 
track record, central banks can foster 
confidence in households and businesses 
that inflation will remain low and stable over 
the medium term. This confidence can shape 
inflation expectations and ultimately influence 
actual inflation outcomes. 
Actual inflation and inflation expectations 
have increased significantly over the last 
two years. Only recently actual inflation and 
many measures of inflation expectations 
have started to decline, but they remain high. 
When changes in actual inflation are very 
large, the dynamics of inflation expectations 
may change. Businesses and households 
may become more attentive to current high 
inflation, as it becomes increasingly costly 
for them when they get their expectations 
repeatedly wrong. The analysis in this 
chapter shows that this is the case for 
New Zealand households.
2


Chapter 4 Special topics
39
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
New Zealand households’ inflation 
expectations are adaptive  
Understanding how households form their 
expectations of inflation has important 
implications for the setting and effectiveness 
of monetary policy. This understanding 
is particularly important in the current 
environment, with the sharp increase in 
headline inflation and inflation expectations 
since the end of 2020 (figure 4.10). 
Policymakers consider these expectations to 
be a major factor in household decisions, as 
they affect spending and saving choices.
9	
This finding is consistent with previous Reserve Bank research. See for example, Karagedikli and McDermott (2016), ‘Inflation expectations 
and low inflation in New Zealand’, Discussion Paper, Reserve Bank of New Zealand and McDonald (2017), ‘Does past inflation predict the 
future’, Analytical Note, Reserve Bank of New Zealand.	
In order to better understand how inflation 
expectations are formed in New Zealand, 
we use the Reserve Bank’s Tara-ā-Whare 
Household Expectations Survey, collating 
12-months-ahead inflation expectations 
from about 1,000 households each quarter, 
starting from the June 1998 quarter. We use 
household expectations in this particular 
analysis, rather than expectations of 
businesses (in the Reserve Bank’s Survey of 
Expectations), due to the household dataset 
being larger and therefore allowing us to 
assess the different models more robustly. 
Households have different amounts of 
information available to them. It is also costly 
for households to access and process 
information. In the literature, several models 
assume that the formation of inflation 
expectations is based on households’ 
perceptions of current and/or past inflation. 
We tested different empirical models to see 
which best explains the formation of inflation 
expectations by New Zealand households. 
We find that the ‘adaptive’ expectations 
model better explains how New Zealand 
households form their inflation expectations, 
compared to other models.9 Under the 
‘adaptive’ expectations concept, households 
form their expectations about future inflation 
based on past inflation and their past inflation 
expectations. Households update their 
expectations as new information becomes 
available.
Source: Stats NZ, ANZ Business Outlook Survey, RBNZ Survey of Expectations (Business), 
RBNZ Tara-ā-Whare Household Expectations Survey.  
Figure 4.10
Headline inflation and one-year-
ahead inflation expectations
(annual)


Chapter 4 Special topics
40
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
Inflation expectations have 
become more sensitive to recent 
inflation outturns 
Using the ‘adaptive’ expectations concept, 
we can estimate how strongly past inflation 
expectations and past actual inflation affect 
households’ inflation expectations. We 
also test if the strength of these effects has 
changed over time.
We estimate that the influence of past 
inflation expectations on households’ 
current inflation expectations has generally 
weakened since 1998 (figure 4.11a). 
Conversely, recent actual inflation 
outturns have become more important 
in the formation of households’ inflation 
expectations (figure 4.11b). Since late 
2019, recent actual inflation has become 
an increasingly important determinant of 
households’ inflation expectations. This 
may be due to the current high-inflation 
environment. 
More emphasis on recent inflation outturns 
when forming inflation expectations means 
that households’ expectations will update 
more quickly when actual inflation changes 
significantly. This implies that if high levels of 
inflation were to persist, for instance during a 
series of successive adverse supply shocks, 
households may be more likely to demand 
higher wages in response. Businesses may 
then be more likely to pass on these higher 
wage costs to higher prices. Consequently, 
inflation could become more generalised 
throughout the economy and rise faster.
These factors can make it harder for 
monetary policy to reduce actual inflation 
when inflation expectations are elevated. All 
else being equal, interest rates would need 
to be higher to lower actual inflation. On the 
other hand, inflation expectations would likely 
decline much faster once monetary policy 
and other factors have led to a reduction in 
actual inflation, since households adjust their 
inflation expectations more quickly to actual 
inflation. 
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: We estimate a time-varying parameter model to get these sensitivities.  
For example, see Kamber et al. (2016), ‘Modelling the business cycle of a small open 
economy: The Reserve Bank of New Zealand’s DSGE model’, Economic Modelling,  
Vol. 59, Pages 546-569.
Figure 4.11
Sensitivity of household expectations 
(a) to past inflation expectations
(b) to recent actual inflation 


Chapter 4 Special topics
41
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
New Zealand households pay 
more attention to inflation when
it is high 
A possible explanation for households’ 
inflation expectations appearing to have 
become more sensitive to actual inflation is 
that they pay more attention to inflation when 
it is at a high level. 
In an information-rich environment where 
processing information is costly, households 
need to decide how much time and energy 
they will spend on figuring out how inflation 
is likely to evolve. The concept of ‘rational 
inattention’ suggests that if a change in 
inflation is large enough to cause households 
to pay more attention, their decision-making 
would differ compared to periods when they 
paid less attention. As the general price level 
increases, the opportunity cost of ignoring 
inflation becomes higher. This environment 
encourages households to become more 
attentive to current inflation and to give 
it further consideration in their decision-
making. This also implies that as people pay 
more attention to inflation, they are able to 
better predict actual inflation and are more 
responsive to new information. 
One way to measure rational inattention is to 
calculate the share of households that report 
they do not know what the current inflation 
rate is. Using the same data from the Tara-
ā-Whare Household Expectations Survey, 
we found when actual inflation increased, 
the share of people who answered “I do not 
know the current inflation rate” declined. 
The share of “Don’t Know” responses was 
significantly lower in periods of high inflation 
above the 2 percent midpoint of the MPC’s 
medium-term inflation target band, compared 
to periods of low inflation below 2 percent. 
These results also held at the 3 percent level, 
the top of the MPC’s inflation target band. 
This provides evidence that New Zealand 
households are, naturally, paying more 
attention to inflation when it is higher. It 
confirms the Reserve Bank’s assumption 
that the risk of high inflation becoming 
entrenched has increased since 2021. 
Another way to assess whether households 
pay more attention to higher inflation is to 
test if households correct their past inflation 
expectation mistakes more. We observe 
that New Zealand households put a higher 
weight on past mistakes in times of high 
inflation above 2 percent than they do in 
times of inflation below 2 percent. These 
results also hold at the 3 percent threshold. 
This implies that households are likely to 
pay more attention to their forecast misses 
and adjust their over- or under-shooting 
of expectations when inflation is high. As 
a result, New Zealand households have 
tended to forecast inflation better when 
inflation is higher. 


Chapter 4 Special topics
42
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
CHAPTER 
05
Financial 
conditions
Smails Beach, Dunedin. Photo: Rachael Grant


Chapter 5 Financial conditions
43
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
CHAPTER 5
Financial conditions
Monetary policy affects economic activity by influencing 
financial conditions in New Zealand. These include the interest 
rates at which households and businesses save and borrow, the 
exchange rate, and other factors such as credit availability.
Overall financial conditions are broadly similar to those at the time of the February 
Statement. Short-term retail interest rates are higher, while medium- and long-term 
wholesale rates have declined. 
Market participants’ expectations for the OCR 
over the near term have increased since the 
February Statement. As at 18 May, pricing for 
the peak in the OCR in this tightening cycle 
was around 5.75 percent, while pricing for the 
level of the OCR in 12-months’ time was about 
50 basis points higher than at the February 
Statement (figure 5.1). Market participants 
expect the OCR to begin declining from its 
peak level later this year.  
Medium- and long-term wholesale interest 
rates in New Zealand have fallen slightly since 
the February Statement, with swap rates 
across the 3-year to 10-year tenors down by 
around 5 to 15 basis points. However, the 1-year 
swap rate is 40 basis points higher since the 
February Statement, while the 2-year swap rate 
has increased by 15 basis points. This contrasts 
with swap rates in other advanced economies 
that declined sharply through March 2023 
in response to banking stress in the US and 
Europe, and have remained around those 
lower levels in the weeks since (figure 5.2). 
Increases in short-term interest rates alongside 
declines in domestic wholesale interest rates 
at longer terms have led the interest rate swap 
curve to invert further than at the time of the 
February Statement. Inverted interest rate 
curves usually indicate expectations for slowing 
economic growth.
Offshore economic and financial 
developments have led to an increase in 
global financial market volatility. This includes 
recent developments relating to US sovereign 
debt limits, with US financial debt likely to 
reach its statutory limit in June. Risks around 
the debt ceiling are contributing to significant 
volatility in US treasury bills and significant 
price increases for credit default swaps, which 
are a form of insurance against sovereign 
default. Despite this volatility, New Zealand 
financial markets have continued to function 
well (figure 5.3). The New Zealand dollar has 
appreciated slightly on a trade-weighted basis 
since the February Statement (figure 5.4). The 
currency has remained relatively resilient to 
the weaker global risk appetite, and been 
supported by wider interest rate differentials. 
Movements in the New Zealand dollar have 
been relatively small since the start of the 
year, particularly in the context of the general 
increase in financial market volatility.
Both short-term mortgage and term deposit 
rates have increased since the February 
Statement, and by slightly more than 
comparable wholesale rates. However, 
longer-term mortgage rates have fallen, 
leading the mortgage rate curve to invert 
further. The 1-year mortgage rate is currently 
around 60 basis points higher than the 5-year 
mortgage rate, which is the largest absolute 
difference since 2008. Interest rates on the 
popular 6-month and 1-year term deposits, 
which make up a large percentage of banks’ 
core funding, have increased. This has 
marginally narrowed the spread between term 
deposit rates and comparable wholesale rates 
(figure 5.5). However, these spreads remain 
negative compared to moderately positive 
pre-pandemic averages, and are holding 
down overall funding costs for New Zealand 
banks. The cost of raising long-term wholesale 
bank funding relative to benchmark wholesale 
rates (credit spreads) has increased slightly, 
but it has remained relatively stable since the 
February Statement (figure 5.6).


Chapter 5 Financial conditions
44
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
Table 5.1 
Developments in domestic financial conditions as at 18 May 2023
Wholesale interest rates 
Market pricing 
for the OCR
•	 Current market pricing for the OCR is higher over the near term than at the time of the February 
Statement. Financial market expectations for the peak OCR in this cycle, as measured by 
overnight indexed swap (OIS) pricing, have increased by around 45 basis points, to 5.75 percent. 
However, expectations for the level of the OCR in early 2024 are lower than this peak level, with 
the OCR expected to be at around 5.45 percent after the February 2024 Statement. The current 
and expected OCR settings are contractionary, sitting well above our estimates of the neutral 
OCR (see figure 7.4). 
•	 Recent moves in OCR expectations have been strongly influenced by domestic developments. 
To the upside, key drivers include the larger-than-expected OCR increase at the Monetary Policy 
Review (MPR) in April, the relatively strong March 2023 quarter labour market data, and the 
larger government expenditure announced at the May 2023 Budget. This has been partly offset 
by weaker-than-expected December 2022 quarter GDP data, and March 2023 quarter inflation 
data and inflation expectations data, as well as reduced expectations for monetary policy 
tightening offshore in response to the banking stress in the US and Europe.
New Zealand 
Government 
Bonds
•	 Medium- and long-term New Zealand Government Bond (NZGB) yields have decreased slightly 
since the February Statement. Primarily offshore developments have contributed to downward 
pressure on NZGB yields since the February Statement.   
•	 The NZGB market has continued to function relatively well despite the increase in global fixed 
income volatility through March 2023. Measures of NZGB market functioning, such as bid-ask 
spreads (how far apart buyers and sellers are from reaching an agreed price to trade) and the 
intraday range for the 10-year NZGB (the difference between the low and high price on a given 
trading day) are both around their historical averages after increasing in March 2023.
•	 Demand for NZGBs at New Zealand Debt Management (NZDM) tenders has remained relatively 
robust, with strong bid-cover ratios (the volume of bids relative to the volume of bonds offered), 
especially in recent weeks. 
Interest rate 
swaps
•	 Moves in New Zealand interest rate swaps have been broadly consistent with the changes 
in NZGB yields since the February Statement. The 1-year swap rate is around 40 basis points 
higher over this period, while rates beyond the 2-year tenor are 5 to 15 basis points lower. As a 
consequence, the interest rate swap curve has inverted further, with the difference between 2- 
and 10-year swap rates currently at 95 basis points.
•	 Global interest rate swaps declined sharply in March in response to the banking stress in the 
US and Europe and have continued to trade around these lower levels in recent weeks. These 
global rates continue to be a key influence on domestic interest rate movements. The US 2-year 
interest rate swap rate moved significantly lower through this period, which contributed to 
declines in the equivalent New Zealand swap rate, through this period. However, the difference 
between short-term New Zealand swap rates and equivalent rates in other countries has 
widened, partly as a result of higher near-term domestic monetary policy expectations.


Chapter 5 Financial conditions
45
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
New Zealand dollar
Interest rate 
differentials
•	 The difference between interest rates in New Zealand and those in major economies such as 
Australia, the US and Europe widened in March 2023, and New Zealand short-term interest 
rates have remained higher over recent weeks. For example, the difference between the 2-year 
NZGB yield and the 2-year US government bond yield increased sharply in March 2023, and 
currently sits at 95 basis points. 
•	 Increases in New Zealand interest rates relative to key trading partners would typically be 
associated with an appreciation in the New Zealand dollar. Widening interest rate differentials 
have provided support to the New Zealand dollar since the February Statement, even as risk 
sentiment and commodity prices have declined, on average, over this period. 
Risk sentiment
•	 During periods of high uncertainty or volatility, financial market participants’ willingness to take 
on additional risk decreases and demand for safe haven currencies, such as the US dollar, 
increases. Typically, more negative risk sentiment is associated with a depreciating New Zealand 
dollar.
•	 Market risk sentiment has broadly deteriorated since the February Statement, in response to the 
banking stress in the US and Europe and the subsequent increased uncertainty for the future 
path of global monetary policy settings. Despite this, the New Zealand dollar has remained 
relatively steady during this period. A potential explanation for this is that market participants 
expect limited pass-through from the recent banking stress in the US and Europe to economic 
activity in New Zealand.   
Commodity 
prices
•	 Prices of key export commodities in New Zealand have continued to fall since the February 
Statement, although they have stabilised slightly in recent weeks. 
•	 Declines in New Zealand’s key export commodity prices tend to be associated with a 
depreciation in the New Zealand dollar, all else being equal.  
Retail interest rates
Mortgage rates
•	 The mortgage rate curve has continued to invert further in recent months. The average 1-year 
mortgage rate has increased by 10 basis points since the February Statement, while mortgage 
rates in the 3- to 5-year part of the curve have fallen by 35 to 50 basis points. Despite this curve 
inversion, the share of shorter fixed-term loans as a proportion of total new residential mortgage 
lending has continued to increase. 
Deposit rates
•	 Term deposit rates have increased since the February Statement. Rates at the 6-month and 
1-year tenors have increased by 65 basis points and 40 basis points respectively, resulting in 
a narrower spread to comparable wholesale rates. However, these spreads remain negative 
compared to moderately positive pre-pandemic averages. Bonus saver interest rates have 
also been slow to increase, and their spread to the OCR is significantly below pre-COVID-19 
averages.
•	 The term deposit curve is now inverted, with the 1-year rate around 60 basis points higher than 
the 5-year term deposit rate.  


Chapter 5 Financial conditions
46
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
Bank funding conditions
Funding 
composition
•	 Term deposit volumes have continued to increase since the February Statement, particularly in 
the 6-month and 1-year terms. Depositors have continued to switch from on-call accounts, as the 
spread between term and on-call deposit rates has continued to widen. Term deposit volumes 
grew by around $3 billion in March, while on-call deposits declined by around $1 billion.
•	 Banks remain well funded and have strong liquidity buffers. Lower-cost deposits remain a larger 
share of bank funding compared to pre-COVID-19 averages, and this has contributed to lower 
average bank funding costs. Bank core funding ratios remain high, at 90.4 percent in March.
Credit spreads
•	 The cost of raising long-term wholesale bank funding relative to benchmark wholesale rates 
widened in March, in line with the overseas banking sector stress. However, bank credit spreads, 
both domestically and offshore, have narrowed as the most acute global financial stability 
concerns have eased.
•	 Domestic bank credit spreads are currently around the same level as at the February Statement, 
having fully retraced increases through the March period. However, offshore credit spreads have 
remained slightly higher over this period. This is contributing to higher average funding costs for 
the largest New Zealand banks, which obtain a large portion of their wholesale funding offshore.


Chapter 5 Financial conditions
47
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
Charts
All charts are as at 18 May 2023.
Figure 5.1
Market expectations for the OCR
Source: Bloomberg.
Note: Each data point represents market expectations of the level of the OCR at 
a given point in the future, as measured by overnight indexed swap pricing. For 
example, as of the latest data market participants expected the OCR to reach 
5.5 percent at the May 2023 Statement.
Figure 5.4
New Zealand dollar TWI and selected 
bilateral exchange rates
(index=100 at February Statement)
Source: NZFMA, RBNZ.
Figure 5.5
Spread between the 6-month term deposit 
rate and the 6-month bank bill rate
Source: Bloomberg, interest.co.nz.
Note: The term deposit rates shown are the average of the latest fixed-term rates on 
offer from ANZ, ASB, BNZ and Westpac. Bank bill rates measure the weighted average of 
short-term domestic bank funding costs, reflecting the supply and demand for bank bills.
Figure 5.6
5-year bank credit spread
Source: Bloomberg, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: This credit spread is the difference between banks’ secondary market 
bond yields and the interest rate swap curve. The bond yield used for the 
5-year measure is the average of bonds with a remaining maturity of five years 
issued in New Zealand dollars by ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac. A lower spread 
represents a lower implied borrowing cost.
Figure 5.2
Global 2-year interest rate swaps
Source: Bloomberg.
Figure 5.3
2-year and 10-year New Zealand 
Government Bond bid-ask spreads
Source: Bloomberg.


Chapter 5 Financial conditions
48
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
CHAPTER 
06
Economic 
projections
Lake Waikaremoana Track. Photo: Rebecca Newman


Chapter 6 Economic projections
49
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
CHAPTER 6
Economic projections
This chapter summarises the baseline economic projections that 
MPC members considered when making their policy assessment. 
The projections were finalised on 18 May 2023.
These projections rely on a set of key 
assumptions about the global and domestic 
factors influencing the economy. They 
include:
•	 the extent to which activity and inflation 
in our key trading partners slows over 
coming years, and the consequences for 
domestic financial conditions and demand 
for New Zealand’s goods and services 
exports;
•	 the speed and strength of the recovery in 
international tourism in New Zealand;
•	 the persistence of labour market 
tightness, wage pressures, and the impact 
of these factors on household spending;
•	 the outlook for net immigration, and 
whether new migrants contribute 
relatively more to the labour supply or 
aggregate demand in the short term;
•	 the housing market, and the extent 
to which recent house price declines 
contribute to lower residential 
construction activity and household 
consumption;
•	 how businesses, consumers and workers 
respond to rising costs and higher interest 
rates in New Zealand; 
•	 the extent to which government 
consumption and investment – in 
particular the repair and rebuild of 
damaged infrastructure following 
the recent severe weather events – 
contribute to demand and inflationary 
pressure in the economy; and
•	 the scale of repair and rebuild activity 
associated with recent severe weather 
events, and the associated impacts on 
prices of some key goods and services.
There is significant uncertainty about these 
assumptions. 
The projections take into account recent 
data, which show that GDP contracted in 
the last quarter of 2022 despite resilient 
employment growth. Although high-
frequency indicators suggest a modest 
expansion in the first quarter of 2023, we are 
seeing broad signals that economic activity is 
slowing, particularly in interest-rate-sensitive 
parts of the economy. Capacity pressure 
remains elevated, but less so than assumed 
in the February Statement. The factors 
underpinning this starting point are discussed 
in chapter 2.


Chapter 6 Economic projections
50
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
In the medium term, we assume that lower 
goods export prices, subdued export 
volumes, ongoing weakness in the housing 
market, a declining share of government 
spending in the economy, and higher interest 
rates in New Zealand will substantially 
moderate domestic demand growth.
Inflation in New Zealand is assumed to 
have peaked. Global inflationary pressures 
are easing as activity levels slow in many 
advanced economies. Global shipping 
costs have declined substantially from their 
peak, and the prices of many commodities, 
including oil, have declined. Over time, these 
lower global price pressures are expected 
to result in lower imported inflation for 
New Zealand. On the other hand, high food 
prices – temporarily affected by the recent 
severe weather events – are expected to 
provide some offset in the near term.
Core inflation is elevated and the labour 
market remains tight, supporting strong wage 
growth. Non-tradables inflation is projected 
to decline only gradually as economic activity 
slows and labour supply improves, easing 
capacity pressures over the medium term.
Annual consumer price inflation is expected 
to return to its 2 percent target midpoint 
in 2025. Given the expected slowing in 
domestic demand, a higher unemployment 
rate is likely. Employment is expected to 
fall below its maximum sustainable level 
for a time.


Chapter 6 Economic projections
51
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
Table 6.1
Key projection assumptions
Key factors
Global factors
•	 Global inflationary pressures are easing, broadly in line with expectations at the time of the 
February Statement. Inflation appears to have peaked in many of our key trading partners. Some 
prices, particularly for oil and shipping, have fallen faster than anticipated so far in 2023.
•	 Global long-term interest rates have fallen since the February Statement in response to lower 
expectations for inflation and tightening credit conditions as a result of banking stress in the US 
and Europe. Transmission to the New Zealand economy via financial channels has been limited, 
and the New Zealand dollar TWI is currently around similar levels to those assumed in the 
February Statement.
•	 The global economy is continuing to slow in response to monetary policy tightening and 
tightening credit conditions. The Chinese economy is an exception, experiencing a stronger-
than-expected recovery following the removal of COVID-19 restrictions at the end of last year. 
The outlook for global activity is broadly unchanged relative to the February Statement, despite 
lower interest rates in some key trading partners.
•	 The New Zealand dollar TWI is assumed to remain around 71.5 over the projection.
International 
tourism
•	 Services exports, particularly tourism and education, appear to be recovering rapidly, and we 
maintain a strong growth projection. Visitor arrivals and card spending data indicate New Zealand 
had strong tourism inflows over the start of 2023, and that visitor arrivals have continued to 
increase on a seasonally adjusted basis. Additional spending by overseas tourists is contributing to 
capacity pressures across the transport, accommodation and hospitality sectors. 
•	 We assume that tourism exports recovered to around 75 percent of their pre-pandemic levels 
over the 2022/23 summer season, and will surpass pre-pandemic levels by the end of the 
projection.
International 
migration
•	 Over the past six months we have observed much stronger official net immigration data. This has 
led to a significant upward revision to the starting point of net immigration. 
•	 We have also revised our medium-term immigration forecast higher to a level slightly below 
the pre-COVID-19 period, reflecting our updated understanding of changes to New Zealand 
immigration policy. The Australian Government recently announced a direct pathway to 
Australian citizenship for New Zealanders who immigrated to Australia. No explicit assumption 
has been made about the potential impacts of this change in policy on New Zealand net 
immigration.
•	 Higher net immigration has likely mitigated acute labour market shortages so far in 2023, and 
has contributed to higher total spending. Over the medium term, migrants add to both demand 
and supply in the economy, growing the productive capacity of New Zealand. However, in the 
short term, new migrants’ contribution to demand may be greater than their supply contribution, 
particularly for high-income migrants, students and those bringing families and children. In 
markets where supply is slow to respond to higher demand, such as for housing, higher net 
immigration is likely to contribute to higher prices.
House prices
•	 House prices have fallen 15.3 percent since their peak in November 2021, measured in monthly 
terms. However, there are early signs that house prices may not decrease as much as expected 
in the February Statement.
•	 The rapid return of net immigration, an increase in the number of residents due to the one-off 
2021 resident visa, strong nominal wage growth, stable mortgage interest rates, and a relatively 
low number of houses available for sale have contributed to a smaller decline in house prices 
than expected in recent months. These factors have led us to revise our house price forecast 
higher since the February Statement, and we now expect a peak-to-trough price decline of 17 
percent, measured in quarterly terms.
•	 The fall in house prices to date is expected to flow through to lower household spending over 
the projection, as aggregate household wealth has fallen substantially.


Chapter 6 Economic projections
52
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
Economic growth
Production
•	 We assume that the economy expanded by 0.3 percent in the March 2023 quarter, but contracts 
modestly thereafter.
•	 Capacity pressures remain elevated but are weaker than assumed in the February Statement 
following a 0.6 percent contraction in GDP in the December 2022 quarter. We estimate that the 
output gap peaked at 3.2 percent of potential output in the September 2022 quarter, and has 
reduced to 1.6 percent of potential output in the March 2023 quarter.
•	 These projections contain a period of shallow economic contraction. Annual GDP growth is 
projected to be flat at 0.0 percent in the year to the December 2023 quarter. Quarterly changes 
in GDP are highly uncertain, and a technical recession (two consecutive quarters of negative 
GDP growth) is possible.
•	 Over the medium term, the supply of goods and services is also expected to improve, supported by 
strong population growth through migration that expands the productive capacity of the economy. 
•	 We expect the output gap to close and quickly become negative in 2023. An extended period 
of below-trend growth is expected to be necessary to meet our employment and inflation 
objectives sustainably over the medium term.
Consumption
•	 Consumption growth was strong over 2022, supported by rising aggregate incomes and 
government transfers. Incomes were buoyed by high export prices, high labour force 
participation and longer working hours.
•	 Consumption is estimated to have expanded in the March 2023 quarter, reflecting robust card 
spending data, increased population growth through migration and changing seasonal factors 
as international travel returns.
•	 Consumption is expected to slow over coming quarters as households with mortgages continue 
to roll onto higher interest rates, and the effects of lower house prices continue to pass through. 
However, stronger migration is likely to provide some support for aggregate consumption and 
house prices. Consumption is expected to decline on a per capita basis to slightly above pre-
pandemic levels in mid-2024.
Investment
•	 We assume that business investment is resilient in the near term, as businesses continue to 
respond to elevated capacity pressures, and repair and rebuild work associated with the severe 
weather events gets underway.
•	 Business investment is expected to decline over the medium term, due to high interest rates, 
lower export prices and easing capacity pressures. Global weakness is also likely to slow 
business investment by adding to uncertainty about future global demand.
•	 New consent issuance for residential building has slowed considerably so far this year, due to higher 
interest rates, elevated construction costs and falling house prices. Residential construction work is 
expected to slow further over the coming quarters, despite some increased demand pressure from 
migration and private repair and rebuild work associated with the severe weather events.
•	 Over the medium term, we project the share of residential construction to economic output to 
recover but to remain below pre-pandemic levels.
Government
•	 We assume that government consumption and investment evolve in line with the macroeconomic 
and fiscal forecasts in Budget 2023.
•	 Government investment, particularly in infrastructure, is projected to increase considerably as repair 
and rebuild work associated with the severe weather events continues.
•	 Real government consumption is expected to decline modestly from current levels, contributing 
less to economic growth and inflationary pressure than it has done in the past three years.
Exports and 
imports
•	 Goods export prices and volumes have been weak, reflecting softening global demand and 
domestic supply constraints. Over the first half of 2023, disruptions due to the severe weather 
events are assumed to further reduce export volumes.
•	 Over the medium term, goods export volumes are projected to recover as supply constraints 
ease and Chinese demand improves. However, the projected recovery is slower than assumed 
in the February Statement, in light of weak global economic conditions.
•	 International travel is recovering as expected. By the end of the projection, services exports are 
assumed to have surpassed pre-COVID-19 levels.
•	 Non-oil import prices are currently elevated relative to broader measures of inflation. Non-oil 
import prices are expected to remain elevated but to decline modestly over the projection in line 
with moderating global inflation, falling shipping costs and easing of supply-chain bottlenecks in 
global production.


Chapter 6 Economic projections
53
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
Labour market
Employment
and wages 
•	 The labour market has remained tight, but has shown some signs of easing. The unemployment 
rate remained at 3.4 percent in the March 2023 quarter, a near-record low. The number of 
people employed and the size of the labour force continued to grow.
•	 Although same-job wage growth remains strong, it was slightly weaker than assumed in the 
February Statement, and total hours worked decreased slightly. Our suite of labour market 
indicators continues to suggest that employment remains above its maximum sustainable level. 
•	 Employment is starting from a very strong level. Over the medium term, employment is projected 
to remain at about its current level, and may fall below maximum sustainable employment for a 
time. These projections assume total employment grows slowly relative to population growth. 
The slowing in economic growth over several quarters, together with gradual growth in the 
labour force, is expected to relieve labour market pressures. The unemployment rate is assumed 
to increase from very low levels to around 5.2 percent at the end of the projection, in line with a 
declining output gap.
•	 Annual labour cost index (LCI) private sector wage inflation is expected to have peaked at 4.5 
percent in the March 2023 quarter, but remains relatively elevated over the next two years. 
This reflects the balance of a gradual easing of labour shortages, expected further rises in the 
minimum wage, and increased living cost adjustments by employers.
Inflation
Headline
•	 Annual headline CPI inflation is assumed to have peaked, and is projected to decline to 6.1 
percent in the June 2023 quarter.
•	 Annual headline CPI inflation is projected to return to within the 1 to 3 percent target band in the 
second half of 2024, reaching the 2 percent target midpoint in 2025.
Tradables
•	 Annual tradables inflation is assumed to have peaked, and is projected to decline over the 
projection. This decline reflects lower petrol prices, falling prices for food and other commodities 
over the medium term and a generalised easing in global inflationary pressures. 
•	 Temporary reductions in road user charges and fuel excise tax are assumed to end on 30 June 
2023, in line with stated Government policy.
•	 Prices for some tradable goods – particularly food and appliances – are likely to be supported 
through increased demand and reduced supply following the severe weather events. However, 
the direct price impacts of the storms are assumed to be smaller than expected in the February 
Statement. The downward revision is in light of overall lower-than-expected inflation data for 
the March 2023 quarter and our evolving understanding of the economic consequences of the 
severe weather events.
Non-tradables
•	 Annual non-tradables inflation is assumed to have peaked, but is currently supported by 
domestic capacity pressures and strong wage growth.
•	 Capacity pressures are expected to ease quickly over 2023, as high interest rates reduce 
domestic demand in the context of improving supply conditions. However, non-tradables 
inflation is assumed to decline only slowly in light of high core inflation and still-elevated inflation 
expectations.
•	 Materials and labour shortages in the construction industry have continued to underpin housing-
related cost increases. In the near term, repair and rebuild work associated with the severe 
weather events is expected to put upward pressure on building costs, but to a lesser extent than 
assumed in the February Statement. 


Chapter 6 Economic projections
54
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
Figure 6.3
Unemployment rate
(unemployed people as share of the labour force, 
seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Charts
Figure 6.1
Inflation components
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Dotted lines show the projections from the February Statement. The 
shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI 
inflation over the medium term.
Figure 6.2
Private sector LCI wage inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.4
House price growth
(annual)
Source: CoreLogic, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.5
Production GDP
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.6
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 6 Economic projections
55
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
Figure 6.9
Business investment
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.7
Private consumption
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.8
Residential investment
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.10
Government consumption
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.11
Total exports
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.12
Total imports
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 6 Economic projections
56
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
CHAPTER 
07
Appendices
Te Anau. Photo: Lucas Chen


Chapter 7 Appendices
57
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
CHAPTER 7
Appendices
Appendix 1: 
Statistical tables
Table 7.1
Key forecast variables
GDP growth 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Annual
Unemployment 
rate
TWI
OCR
2021
Mar
2.0
0.8
1.5
4.6
74.9
0.3
 
Jun
2.1
1.3
3.3
4.0
74.7
0.3
 
Sep
-4.1
2.2
4.9
3.3
74.4
0.3
 
Dec
3.5
1.4
5.9
3.2
74.3
0.6
2022
Mar
-0.5
1.8
6.9
3.2
72.6
0.9
 
Jun
1.6
1.7
7.3
3.3
72.1
1.6
 
Sep
1.7
2.2
7.2
3.3
70.6
2.7
 
Dec
-0.6
1.4
7.2
3.4
70.8
3.8
2023
Mar
0.3
1.2
6.7
3.4
71.3
4.5
Jun
-0.2
1.1
6.1
3.5
71.5
5.3
Sep
-0.1
1.8
5.7
4.1
71.5
5.5
Dec
0.0
0.6
4.9
4.6
71.5
5.5
2024
Mar
0.2
0.6
4.3
4.9
71.5
5.5
Jun
0.3
0.6
3.7
5.1
71.5
5.5
Sep
0.4
0.9
2.7
5.3
71.5
5.4
Dec
0.4
0.4
2.5
5.4
71.5
5.3
2025
Mar
0.6
0.5
2.3
5.4
71.5
5.1
Jun
0.7
0.5
2.2
5.4
71.5
4.8
Sep
0.8
0.7
2.0
5.4
71.5
4.5
Dec
0.7
0.4
2.0
5.3
71.5
4.1
2026
Mar
0.6
0.5
2.0
5.2
71.5
3.7
Jun
0.6
0.5
2.0
5.2
71.5
3.3


Chapter 7 Appendices
58
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
Table 7.2
Measures of inflation, inflation expectations, and asset prices
2021
2022
2023
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Inflation (annual rates)
CPI
4.9
5.9
6.9
7.3
7.2
7.2
6.7
CPI non-tradables
4.5
5.3
6.0
6.3
6.6
6.6
6.8
CPI tradables
5.7
6.9
8.5
8.7
8.1
8.2
6.4
Sectoral factor model
estimate of core inflation
3.8
4.3
4.8
5.3
5.6
5.8
5.7
CPI trimmed mean
(30 percent measure)
4.0
4.3
5.2
5.8
6.4
6.1
6.1
CPI weighted median
3.3
3.8
3.9
4.8
5.0
5.0
5.6
GDP deflator (expenditure)
3.7
5.3
6.2
6.1
5.2
5.0
Inflation expectations
ANZ Business Outlook – inflation 
1 year ahead (quarterly average to date)
2.9
4.0
5.4
6.0
6.1
6.3
5.9
5.7
RBNZ Survey of Expectations – 
inflation 2 years ahead
2.3
3.0
3.3
3.3
3.1
3.6
3.3
2.8
RBNZ Survey of Expectations – 
inflation 5 years ahead
2.0
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.3
2.4
2.4
2.4
RBNZ Survey of Expectations – 
inflation 10 years ahead
2.0
2.0
2.1
2.1
2.1
2.2
2.2
2.3
Long-run inflation expectations*
2.1
2.1
2.2
2.2
2.2
2.2
2.3
2.4
Asset prices (annual percent changes)
Quarterly house price index 
(CoreLogic NZ)
30.7
27.1
13.7
5.4
-4.2
REINZ Farm Price Index (quarterly 
average to date)
15.1
20.5
25.6
31.0
5.9
0.6
-3.5
NZX 50 (quarterly average to date)
10.3
3.0
-3.9
-9.0
-11.3
-12.8
-3.5
4.3
*	Long-run expectations are extracted from a range of surveys using a Nelson-Siegel model. Source: ANZ, Consensus Economics, 
RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 7 Appendices
59
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
Table 7.3
Measures of labour market conditions	
(seasonally adjusted, changes expressed in annual percent terms, unless specified otherwise)	
2021
2022
2023
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Household Labour Force Survey
Unemployment rate
3.3
3.2
3.2
3.3
3.3
3.4
3.4
Underutilisation rate
9.2
9.2
9.3
9.3
9.0
9.3
9.0
Labour force participation rate
71.1
71.0
70.9
71.0
71.6
71.7
72.0
Employment rate (percentage of 
working-age population)
68.7
68.7
68.6
68.6
69.3
69.3
69.5
Employment growth
3.9
3.3
2.5
1.4
1.2
1.6
2.4
Average weekly hours worked
31.4
33.3
33.4
33.7
33.8
34.0
33.7
Number unemployed
(thousand people)
97
93
94
97
97
100
102
Number employed (million people)
2.82
2.82
2.82
2.82
2.85
2.86
2.89
Labour force (million people)
2.91
2.91
2.91
2.91
2.95
2.96
2.99
Extended labour force
(million people)
3.00
2.99
3.00
3.00
3.02
3.05
3.07
Working-age population
(million people, age 15 years+)
4.10
4.10
4.10
4.10
4.11
4.13
4.15
Quarterly Employment Survey – QES
Filled jobs growth
4.0
4.1
4.1
1.5
1.5
1.4
2.2
Average hourly earnings growth 
(private sector, ordinary time)
3.6
4.1
5.3
7.0
8.6
8.1
8.2
Other data sources
Labour cost index growth,
private sector, adjusted
2.5
2.8
3.1
3.4
3.9
4.3
4.5
Labour cost index growth,
private sector, unadjusted
4.1
4.5
5.0
5.2
5.6
6.1
6.1
Estimated net working-age 
immigration (thousands, quarterly)
-3.2
-6.0
-7.3
0.4
7.5
17.0
23.3
Change in All Vacancies Index
53.2
30.3
24.0
3.4
6.2
-3.8
-14.9
Note: The All Vacancies Index is produced by MBIE as part of the monthly Jobs Online report, which shows changes in job vacancies advertised by businesses on 
internet job boards. The unadjusted labour cost index (LCI) is an analytical index that reflects quality change in addition to price change (whereas the official LCI 
measures price changes only). For definitions of underutilisation, the extended labour force, and related concepts, see Statistics New Zealand (2016),
‘Introducing underutilisation in the labour market’. Estimated net working-age immigration is the Stats NZ outcomes-based measure.


Chapter 7 Appendices
60
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
Table 7.4
Composition of real GDP growth
(annual average percent change, seasonally adjusted, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
Final consumption expenditure
Private
4.2
6.4
4.8
4.5
2.4
-0.2
6.1
2.1
-0.5
0.4
2.6
Public authority
2.1
2.1
3.9
3.4
5.5
7.6
8.1
1.9
-1.4
-1.2
0.8
Total
3.7
5.4
4.6
4.3
3.1
1.7
6.5
2.1
-0.7
0.0
2.1
Gross fixed capital formation
Residential
7.1
8.8
-1.8
-0.1
2.7
2.2
2.6
1.7
-7.7
-8.6
7.0
Other
2.2
0.0
10.1
7.2
2.8
-2.8
13.3
2.5
-0.4
-1.4
3.0
Total
3.4
2.3
6.8
5.3
2.8
-1.6
10.6
2.3
-2.1
-2.9
3.8
Final domestic 
expenditure
3.6
4.7
5.1
4.5
3.0
0.9
7.5
2.1
-1.0
-0.7
2.5
Stockbuilding*
-0.3
0.1
0.2
-0.2
-0.2
-0.3
0.6
0.0
-0.3
0.1
0.0
Gross national 
expenditure
3.2
4.8
5.6
4.4
2.7
-0.4
8.7
2.7
-1.5
-0.6
2.5
Exports of goods and 
services
6.9
2.0
3.8
3.3
0.2
-17.9
2.4
5.3
7.9
8.8
5.2
Imports of goods and 
services
3.1
5.2
7.8
4.8
1.2
-15.9
17.4
3.7
0.6
1.4
4.5
Expenditure on GDP
4.3
3.9
4.4
3.9
2.5
0.0
4.8
3.0
0.0
1.1
2.6
GDP (production)
3.8
3.7
3.5
3.5
2.4
-0.7
5.2
3.0
0.1
1.1
2.6
GDP (production, 
March qtr to March qtr)
4.0
3.3
3.6
3.4
0.9
4.2
0.9
3.0
-0.2
1.7
2.9
* Percentage point contribution to the growth rate of GDP.


Chapter 7 Appendices
61
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
Table 7.5
Summary of economic projections
(annual percent change, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
Price measures
CPI 
0.4
2.2
1.1
1.5
2.5
1.5
6.9
6.7
4.3
2.3
2.0
Labour costs
1.8
1.5
1.9
2.0
2.4
1.6
3.1
4.5
4.2
4.1
3.6
Export prices
(in New Zealand dollars) 
0.7
4.1
3.3
1.1
6.8
-6.2
21.4
1.5
-3.9
4.1
3.7
Import prices
(in New Zealand dollars) 
0.5
1.2
1.6
4.0
2.3
-2.5
19.0
9.0
-1.0
-0.5
-0.2
Monetary conditions
OCR (year average)
2.9
2.0
1.8
1.8
1.2
0.3
0.5
3.1
5.5
5.3
4.3
TWI (year average)
72.6
76.5
75.6
73.4
71.7
72.4
74.0
71.2
71.5
71.5
71.5
Output
GDP (production, annual 
average % change)
3.8
3.7
3.5
3.5
2.4
-0.7
5.2
3.0
0.1
1.1
2.6
Potential output (annual 
average % change)
3.2
3.3
3.3
3.3
3.0
-0.8
3.2
2.8
2.8
2.6
2.5
Output gap (% of potential 
GDP, year average)
-0.2
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.1
0.1
2.1
2.2
-0.5
-1.9
-1.8
Labour market
Total employment 
(seasonally adjusted)
2.3
5.9
2.9
1.5
2.6
0.1
2.5
2.4
0.7
1.2
1.8
Unemployment rate 
(March qtr, seasonally 
adjusted)
5.3
4.9
4.4
4.2
4.2
4.6
3.2
3.4
4.9
5.4
5.2
Trend labour productivity 
0.7
0.6
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.8
0.6
0.3
0.1
0.2
0.3
Key balances
Government operating 
balance* (% of GDP, 
year to June)
0.7
1.5
1.9
2.4
-7.3
-1.3
-2.6
-1.3
-0.8
-0.5
0.5
Current account balance 
(% of GDP)
-2.4
-2.6
-3.1
-3.8
-2.3
-2.6
-6.6
-8.5
-8.9
-6.7
-5.1
Terms of trade
(SNA measure, annual 
average % change)
-2.6
2.1
4.5
-2.1
2.1
-1.0
0.4
-4.3
-6.0
2.6
4.5
Household saving rate 
(% of disposable income)
-0.8
-0.4
-0.5
0.3
2.6
8.9
4.5
3.1
1.5
2.6
3.4
World economy
Trading-partner GDP 
(annual average % change)
3.4
3.5
3.9
3.5
1.7
-0.6
6.0
2.7
2.8
2.9
3.1
Trading-partner CPI 
(TWI weighted)
1.2
1.9
1.9
1.4
2.4
0.8
4.0
4.8
3.0
2.1
2.2
* Government operating balance is a model-based estimate of OBEGAL divided by nominal GDP in the projection. The estimate is partial because it relies 
on projections for some components from the Budget 2023.


Chapter 7 Appendices
62
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
Appendix 2: Chart pack
Figure 7.1
Composition of CPI inflation
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 7.2
Output gap and output gap indicators
(share of potential)
Source: NZIER, MBIE, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The output gap indicators based on information about the labour market 
are shown separately from the other indicators. For each group of indicators, the 
shaded area shows the range of values and the line shows the mean value.
Figure 7.3
Unemployment and underutilisation rates
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 7.4
OCR and nominal neutral OCR indicator suite
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area indicates the range between the maximum and minimum 
values from our suite of long-run nominal neutral OCR indicators. See chapter 4.1 
of the November 2022 Statement for more information.
Figure 7.5
GDP and potential GDP
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 7.6
Measures of core inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Core inflation measures exclude the GST increase in 2010. The shaded 
area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI inflation 
over the medium term.


Chapter 7 Appendices
63
Monetary Policy Statement  May 2023
Figure 7.7
Inflation expectations
(annual) 
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: Inflation expectations are estimates from the RBNZ inflation expectations 
curve, based on surveys of businesses and professional forecasters. The 
shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI 
inflation over the medium term.
Figure 7.9
House price inflation
(annual, nominal) 
Source: REINZ.
Source: Stats NZ, Global Dairy Trade, Reuters, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 7.12
Terms of trade, dairy and oil price indices
Figure 7.10
Mortgage interest rates
Source: interest.co.nz, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The rates shown for the fixed terms are the average of the advertised 
rates from ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac, shown as weekly data. The floating 
rate represents the monthly yield on floating housing debt from the RBNZ 
Income Statement survey.
Figure 7.8
Private sector wage growth
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Private sector wage growth is measured by the labour cost index, all 
salary and wage rates, private sector. Real labour cost index is deflated with 
headline CPI inflation.
Figure 7.11
New Zealand dollar exchange rates
(quarterly average) 
Source: NZFMA, Reuters, RBNZ.
