BANK: RBNZ
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: Monetary Policy Statement November 2023
DATE: 28/11/2023
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/monetary-policy-statements/2023/november/mpsnov23.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

11/2023
Monetary Policy
STATEMENT
B.33


ii
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
POLICY ASSESSMENT
Monetary policy to remain restrictive
The Monetary Policy Committee 
today agreed to maintain the Official 
Cash Rate (OCR) at 5.50%. 
Interest rates are restricting spending in the 
economy and consumer price inflation is declining, 
as is necessary to meet the Committee’s Remit. 
However, inflation remains too high, and the 
Committee remains wary of ongoing inflationary 
pressures. 
Internationally, economic growth has been 
stronger than was expected at the start of this 
year but remains below trend and is likely to slow 
further. This subdued growth outlook will continue 
to restrain New Zealand’s export revenues. 
In New Zealand, demand growth has eased, but by 
less than anticipated over the first half of 2023 in 
part due to strong population growth. The OCR will 
need to stay restrictive, so demand growth remains 
subdued, and inflation returns to the 1 to 3 percent 
target range. 
Wage growth has eased from recent peaks. 
Demand for labour is softening, with job 
advertisements now below pre-COVID-19 levels. 
At the same time, strong inward migration is 
increasing the population and adding to 
labour supply. 
While population growth has eased supply 
constraints, the effects on aggregate demand are 
becoming apparent. This is increasing the risk of 
inflation remaining above target. 
The Committee is confident that the current level 
of the OCR is restricting demand. However, 
ongoing excess demand and inflationary pressures 
are of concern, given the elevated level of core 
inflation. If inflationary pressures were to be 
stronger than anticipated, the OCR would likely 
need to increase further. 
The Monetary Policy Committee agreed that 
interest rates will need to remain at a restrictive 
level for a sustained period of time, so that 
consumer price inflation returns to target and to 
support maximum sustainable employment.
Meitaki, thanks.
Adrian Orr 
Governor 
Figure i.1
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


REPORT AND SUPPORTING NOTES PUBLISHED AT:
www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/monetary-policy-statement
Subscribe online: www.rbnz.govt.nz/email-updates
Copyright © 2023 Reserve Bank of New Zealand
This report is published pursuant to section 129
of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 2021. 
ISSN 1770-4829
rbnz.govt.nz
Thank you to RBNZ staff for photography in this report.
Cover image: Ben Lomond, Queenstown. Photo: Thomas Bohm
Monetary Policy Framework
The Monetary Policy Committee operates and makes 
decisions under the monetary policy framework that 
comprises the following key components:
•	 the Remit;
•	 the Charter;
•	 the Code of Conduct; and
•	 the monetary policy strategy.
The corresponding documents to these components and 
additional information can be accessed on our website 
under the monetary policy framework.
iii
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023


The projections were finalised on 23 November 2023. The official cash 
rate (OCR) projection incorporates an outlook for monetary policy that is 
consistent with the MPC’s monetary policy assessment, which was finalised 
on 29 November 2023. 
11/2023
Monetary Policy
STATEMENT
Contents
Policy assessment	
ii
1.	 Summary record of meeting	
2
2.	 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook	
6
3.	 Global developments and outlook	
21
4.	 Special topic	
26
	
Monetary policy transmission lags	
28
5.	 Domestic financial conditions	
32
6.	 Economic projections	
38
7.	 Appendices	
47
	
Appendix 1: Statistical tables	
48
	
Appendix 2: Chart pack	
53
1
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023


Chapter 1 Policy assessment
2
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
1.	 Summary record of meeting
Brooklyn, Wellington. Photo: Chris Bloor
Summary  
record of 
meeting
CHAPTER 
01


Chapter 1 Policy assessment
3
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
CHAPTER 1 
Summary record of meeting 
The Monetary Policy Committee discussed recent developments in 
the New Zealand economy. The Committee agreed that monetary 
conditions are restricting spending and reducing inflationary pressure. 
Supply constraints in the economy continue to ease and demand 
growth is slowing, but to a lesser extent than expected. Inflation remains 
too high and inflationary pressures continue to emerge. Further slowing 
in spending growth is needed to reduce demand toward the economy’s 
ability to supply goods and services, to ensure that consumer price 
inflation returns to its target range. 
Global economic growth remains below trend 
as high interest rates weigh on demand. Easing 
global demand is placing downward pressure 
on New Zealand exports, and export revenues 
are lower than in recent years. However, global 
prices for some products, such as dairy, have 
stabilised in recent months. Members noted that 
to date, global growth has been stronger than 
was expected at the start of this year, supported 
by sustained strength in the US economy 
and a recent lift in economic activity in China. 
However, going forward, subdued global growth 
is expected to restrain demand and prices for 
New Zealand’s exports over the medium term. 
The Committee discussed international inflation 
trends. Globally, headline inflation continues 
to fall, but there are differences in both the 
timing and magnitude of these declines across 
countries. Housing rent inflation is an important 
source of difference in services inflation across 
countries, with greater upward pressure in 
economies experiencing high net immigration, 
such as New Zealand and Australia. 
In discussing global financial conditions, the 
Committee noted that long-term interest rates 
for government debt have increased, largely in 
response to the rising volume of public debt. 
More recently, interest rates have decreased as 
financial markets anticipate the end of the phase 
of monetary policy tightening by major central 
banks. Members also noted that most major 
central banks have indicated that they intend to 
retain current restrictive policy rates for longer, 
and are willing to tighten further, if required. 
The Committee discussed recent domestic 
economic developments. While growth in parts 
of the economy is slowing, there has been less 
of a decline in aggregate demand growth than 
expected earlier in the year. As was noted in 
the October Review, GDP growth in the second 
quarter of 2023 was higher than expected 
while growth in the first quarter was revised 
up. Consumer spending growth is broadly 
easing, but some areas of services spending 
remain more resilient. On an aggregate level, 
consumption is being supported by the strong 
growth in population, whereas on a per capita 
basis, consumption is declining.
Members noted that net immigration has 
been higher than previously assumed. This 
has increased the supply of workers into a 
tight labour market. However, the demand-
side effects are becoming apparent. Strong 
population growth has contributed to an 
increase in housing rents. Rent increases, and 
any increases in construction costs in response 
to greater housing requirements, affect inflation 
directly, as rental prices and construction costs 
are accounted for in the consumer price index. 
Members noted that the outlook for residential 
investment was currently muted, despite the 
surge in population growth. 
House prices have stabilised after earlier 
declines, with strong population growth and 
increased nominal disposable incomes offsetting 
the effect of higher debt servicing costs. House 
price increases affect inflationary pressures 
indirectly, via higher household wealth and an 
associated increase in consumption. Some 
members considered that the willingness of 


Chapter 1 Policy assessment
4
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
households to consume out of wealth may be 
lower given recent house price falls, higher debt 
servicing costs, and a softening labour market. 
Other members considered that there may be 
upside risks to house prices, and therefore 
consumption, given the anticipated decline in 
residential investment. 
Annual headline inflation was lower than 
expected in the September 2023 quarter. 
This was accounted for by lower inflation for 
tradable goods and services. Members noted 
that tradable inflation can be volatile and cannot 
be relied upon to achieve their inflation target. 
Non-tradable inflation is easing only gradually 
and, while all measures of core inflation have 
declined, they are still elevated. Short-term 
inflation expectations have declined, and 
members expect this to continue as headline 
inflation moves lower. Some members were 
concerned that 2-year inflation expectations 
were not declining particularly quickly and 
that longer-term inflation expectations had 
also increased. Other members were less 
concerned as they viewed longer-term inflation 
expectations as still close to the target midpoint.
In discussing the labour market, members noted 
that the underutilisation rate and unemployment 
rate both increased in the September 2023 
quarter. Population growth has increased 
labour supply, as seen in declines in surveyed 
measures of labour shortages. As economic 
activity slows, labour demand is also declining, 
with job advertisements falling to below pre-
COVID-19 levels. Wage inflation has eased. 
Members noted that whilst pressures in the 
labour market are easing, it is still tight, and 
employment remains above its maximum 
sustainable level. 
At the time of the October Review, members 
had noted updates in the Pre-election Economic 
and Fiscal Update 2023 (PREFU). Specifically, 
while total government spending as a share 
of potential GDP is still forecast to decline, this 
was now by less than previously expected. 
The PREFU included a material increase in 
government investment over the medium term, 
linked to infrastructure requirements. 
Members agreed that population growth and 
government investment would both likely 
support aggregate supply in the economy. 
However, they noted that in the short to medium 
term, demand could only sustainably grow at the 
economy’s production potential without adding 
to inflationary pressure. The current context 
is that aggregate demand has been greater 
than the economy’s ability to supply goods and 
services, creating inflationary pressure. While the 
economy is moving back into balance, ensuring 
that demand remains contained will make the 
task of returning inflation to target much easier.
The Committee noted that the estimate of the 
long-run nominal neutral OCR has increased 
by 25 basis points to 2.50 percent within 
the economic projections, consistent with 
the Reserve Bank’s indicator suite. The long-
run nominal neutral rate impacts the central 
economic projections but has a larger impact 
in the latter part of the forecast horizon and 
beyond. Members agreed that the current level 
of the OCR remains contractionary. 
The Committee discussed domestic financial 
conditions. Credit demand remains subdued 
as higher interest rates and a slowing economy 
reduce the ability and willingness of businesses 
and households to borrow. Mortgage rates have 
continued to increase, as expected. Members 
noted that the average rate on outstanding 
mortgages is expected to increase from 5.4 
percent currently to 6.4 percent by mid-2024. 
The share of disposable income going to debt 
servicing for households with a mortgage is 
expected to increase from 15 percent currently 
to 19 percent.
The Committee discussed the expected 
evolution of retail interest rates, given ongoing 
changes in bank funding. Term deposits rates 
and volumes have increased. Higher term 
deposit rates are now contributing to ongoing 
increases in mortgage rates. As competition for 
term deposits continues, the margin between 
mortgage rates and wholesale interest rates is 
expected to return to more historically normal 
levels. Members agreed this expectation was 
consistent both with their previous discussions 
around future changes to retail interest 
rates, and with assumptions in the economic 
projection.
The Committee discussed the balance of 
risks for inflation, output, and employment. 
Members agreed that the while the risk profile 
remained broadly similar to that discussed 
at the time of the August Statement, some of 
the short-term upside risks to activity appear 
to have eventuated and have therefore been 
incorporated in the central economic projection. 
In considering risks, members also specifically 
discussed two scenarios. 
The first scenario was one of persistent 
domestic demand strength supported by strong 
population growth, with increases in rents and 
aggregate consumption feeding into greater 
inflationary pressure and higher house prices. 
The second scenario considered a larger global 
economic slowdown, with growth below trend 
for longer than currently anticipated. A greater 


Chapter 1 Policy assessment
5
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
slowdown in global growth would see a fall in the 
price of imports and further reduce goods export 
prices and export volumes. 
Given the current high level of core inflation, 
members agreed that there was an asymmetry 
in the distribution of risks to the outlook for 
monetary policy across the two scenarios. 
A global slowdown would likely unwind the 
additional inflationary pressure that has recently 
been observed, whereas further domestic 
demand strength would likely necessitate 
additional monetary tightening. Some members 
noted that inflation has now been above target 
for some time, and that there should be a low 
tolerance for any increase in the time to return 
inflation to target. 
The Committee noted that the incoming 
Government’s policy programme will have 
implications for economic activity and inflation. 
Members agreed that this would be assessed 
as policies are formally incorporated into the 
Treasury’s official forecasts.
The Committee discussed the backdrop of 
heightened geopolitical tension and risk of 
spillovers to the global economy. Members 
noted that whilst they remain attentive to global 
developments, they will respond to shocks if 
and when they eventuate. The Committee also 
discussed the outlook for China and noted 
that while economic data over recent months 
have improved, structural challenges facing 
the Chinese economy remain concerning for 
long-term growth prospects. Potential growth is 
slowing, partly due to demographic trends, but 
also due to substantial declines in productivity 
growth. High levels of debt, particularly in the 
property sector, and weak demand remain the 
most acute downside risks.
Members were cognisant of the likelihood of 
an El Niño climate pattern in coming months. 
They noted that the scale of potential impact 
is highly uncertain and depends on the timing 
and location of any droughts. There may be 
differentiated impacts for different agricultural 
commodities. No specific drought impacts have 
been incorporated in the economic projection 
and members agreed they would continue to 
closely monitor the evolution of El Niño over 
coming months.
The Committee agreed that in the current 
circumstances, there is no material trade-off 
between meeting their inflation and employment 
objectives and maintaining stability of the 
financial system. Members noted that slowing 
economic activity is not being experienced 
evenly across the economy. The commercial 
property and agricultural sectors are starting to 
experience challenges and may be vulnerable. 
For highly-indebted households, pockets of 
stress are likely to grow as debt servicing 
burdens increase. 
In discussing their Remit objectives, the 
Committee noted inflation is still expected to 
decline to within the target band by the second 
half of 2024. Pressure in the labour market is 
easing, although employment remains above 
its maximum sustainable level. Members 
agreed that monetary policy was supportive of 
sustainable house prices.
In discussing the appropriate stance of monetary 
policy, members agreed they remain confident 
that monetary policy is restricting demand. 
Nevertheless, ongoing excess demand and 
inflationary pressures were of concern, given 
high core inflation. Members discussed the 
possibility of the need for increases to the OCR. 
Members agreed that with interest rates already 
restrictive, it was appropriate to wait for further 
data and information to observe the speed and 
extent of easing in capacity pressures in the 
economy. 
The Committee agreed that interest rates will 
need to remain at a restrictive level for longer, 
to ensure annual consumer price inflation 
returns to the 1 to 3 percent target range and 
to support maximum sustainable employment. 
On Wednesday 29 November, the Committee 
reached a consensus to maintain the Official 
Cash Rate at 5.50 percent.
Attendees:
Reserve Bank members 
of MPC: 
Adrian Orr, Karen Silk,
Christian Hawkesby,
Paul Conway
External MPC members: 
Bob Buckle, Peter Harris,
Caroline Saunders
Treasury Observer: 
Dominick Stephens
MPC Secretary: 
Kate Poskitt


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
6
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
2.	 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
Wellington. Photo: Karan Dasgupta
CHAPTER 
02
Current
economic 
assessment
and monetary 
policy outlook


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
7
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
CHAPTER 2
Current economic assessment 
and monetary policy outlook
Key points
•	 The New Zealand economy expanded in 
the second quarter of 2023, with growth 
in gross domestic product (GDP) higher 
than expected in the August Statement. 
Along with upward revisions to the March 
2023 quarter, this suggests that growth 
momentum in the first half of the year was 
stronger than anticipated. Recent data 
suggest that economic growth has been 
slowing more in the second half of 2023. 
Labour shortages also eased further in 
the September 2023 quarter. However, 
a more significant slowing in demand 
will likely be needed to bring it more in 
line with the economy’s ability to supply 
goods and services, and therefore reduce 
inflationary pressure.
•	 Restrictive interest rates continue 
to reduce demand in the economy. 
Spending in parts of the economy that 
are sensitive to interest rates – such as 
durables retail spending and residential 
investment – has declined when 
adjusted for inflation. Credit demand also 
remains subdued across businesses and 
households as higher interest rates and 
a slowing economy weigh on their ability 
and willingness to borrow. 
•	 However, developments in less interest 
rate sensitive parts of the economy 
continue to add to demand. In particular, 
high levels of net immigration appear to 
be adding slightly more upward pressure 
to house prices and rents. Net immigration 
has also coincided with stronger total 
household consumption, but this has 
been much softer on a per-capita basis. 
Government spending also continues to 
support demand, as evidenced by upward 
revisions to medium-term government 
investment in the Pre-election Economic 
and Fiscal Update (PREFU) 2023.
•	 Export revenues have declined, due to 
lower global commodity prices. However, 
global dairy prices have stabilised in 
recent months due to reductions in 
inventories and declines in expected milk 
supply. Slowing global growth is expected 
to restrain overall export demand and 
prices over the medium term.
•	 The New Zealand dollar is lower than 
assumed in the August Statement. Higher 
expectations for global interest rates 
relative to those in New Zealand have put 
downward pressure on the New Zealand 
dollar.
•	 Global supply-chain bottlenecks continue 
to free up. Surveyed global backlogs of 
work in manufacturing are declining, and 
shipping costs to New Zealand have fallen 
further in recent months.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
8
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
•	 High levels of net immigration have added 
to the available workforce and contributed 
to declines in surveyed labour shortages. 
However, high net immigration also adds 
to demand, and the overall effect on 
inflationary pressure is uncertain. In recent 
months, high net immigration appears 
to have put more pressure on rental 
price growth.
•	 Overall, current inflation remains too 
high, and above the Monetary Policy 
Committee’s (MPC) 1 to 3 percent target 
band. Inflationary pressures have eased 
due to declining demand and increasing 
supply. Annual headline inflation was 
lower than expected in the September 
2023 quarter. However, much of the fall 
was accounted for by lower inflation 
in tradable goods and services, which 
are more influenced by global factors. 
Domestically generated inflation is easing 
more gradually. While all measures of 
core inflation have declined, they remain 
elevated.
•	 Average inflation expectations for 
businesses and households have fallen at 
the one- and two-year horizons as headline 
inflation has continued to decline. We 
expect that shorter-term expectations will 
continue to fall relatively quickly.
•	 A tight labour market continues to add 
to inflationary pressure, but to a lesser 
extent. While we assess that employment 
remains above its maximum sustainable 
level, labour shortages have started 
to ease more materially in the second 
half of 2023. Labour demand appears 
to be declining, with online job ads 
now below pre-COVID-19 levels. The 
unemployment rate has continued to 
increase, rising to 3.9 percent in the 
September 2023 quarter and above the 
record lows seen in late 2021 and early 
2022. The underutilisation rate also 
increased further. The participation rate 
eased slightly from record highs amidst a 
reduction in employment. Consequently, 
wage inflation has started to ease 
gradually, although it remains elevated. 
•	 Restrictive interest rates are needed to 
further restrain demand relative to the 
economy’s ability to supply goods and 
services sustainably. Weaker demand 
relative to supply reduces inflationary 
pressure over the medium term. Subdued 
economic growth is expected over the 
coming year. 
•	 While there is significant uncertainty about 
its effect, high net immigration may lead 
to a stronger rebound in the housing 
market and spending via the wealth effect, 
which would provide some offset to the 
effects of higher interest rates. With a new 
Government settling in, the fiscal outlook 
is also highly uncertain. 
•	 Notwithstanding pervasive uncertainty, 
relative to the August Statement, factors 
adding to inflationary pressure include 
higher starting-point growth momentum, 
a stronger recovery in house prices, 
increases in projected government 
investment, higher global interest rates 
and an upward revision to the neutral 
OCR. These are partially offset by lower 
import and export prices. On balance, 
depending on how the data evolve over 
coming months, there is some chance 
that the OCR may need to increase from 
its current level. In any case, it is likely 
that the OCR will remain contractionary 
for longer than assumed in the August 
Statement for the MPC to meet its inflation 
and employment objectives.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
9
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
Current economic assessment
Demand is easing gradually 
Economic activity in New Zealand, as 
measured by the production measure of 
GDP, increased by 0.9 percent in the June 
2023 quarter (figure 2.1). This was higher 
than expected in the August Statement. 
This growth was accounted for by strength 
in manufacturing, business services and 
public administration, partially offset by a 
decline in primary industries and wholesale 
and retail trade.
On the expenditure GDP side, growth was 
accounted for by household consumption 
and government spending. High population 
growth from net immigration has been 
an important driver of strong near-term 
aggregate household consumption 
expenditure. However, per-person spending 
slowed in the first half of 2023, consistent 
with tighter monetary conditions since late 
2021 (figure 2.2). Exports also increased, 
partially due to a run-down of inventories 
as agricultural production was reduced by 
damage sustained in the North Island severe 
weather events of early 2023. 
Higher interest rates and the higher cost of 
living have contributed to slower domestic 
demand growth in recent quarters. Since the 
second half of 2022, lower house prices and 
housing activity have also been contributing 
to lower domestic demand. Further, real 
government consumption has decreased 
slightly over the last year as COVID-19-
related spending has been largely phased 
out. Lower export volumes overall since 
the second half of 2021 are consistent with 
moderating global demand growth over this 
period.
Despite the easing in domestic spending, 
demand continues to exceed the economy’s 
ability to supply goods and services 
sustainably. In addition, the easing in demand 
has been more gradual than anticipated. 
The output gap – an estimate of the extent 
to which demand is matched by the level of 
production that the economy can sustainably 
supply – has been highly positive over the 
last two years, contributing to high inflation.
Figure 2.1
Production GDP
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.2
Total private consumption and private 
consumption per capita
(seasonally adjusted)


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
10
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
As higher interest rates have reduced 
domestic demand, the output gap is 
estimated to have declined significantly 
since its peak in 2022 and is expected 
to become negative by the end of 2023. 
Much higher-than-expected net immigration 
over the past year has been associated 
with a fast narrowing of the output gap. 
High net immigration has alleviated acute 
labour shortages caused by tight border 
restrictions during the COVID-19 period. 
However, there are signs that a stronger 
demand impulse from high population 
growth is emerging, contributing to an 
upward revision of our outlook for capacity 
pressure (figure 2.3).
High-frequency activity indicators suggest 
GDP growth eased over the September 
2023 quarter, but remained positive, with 
mixed performance across industries (figure 
2.4). In particular, merchandise trade data 
suggest goods exports have fallen since 
mid-2023, led by weaker dairy exports to 
China. By contrast, the high level of visitor 
arrivals – after accounting for seasonal 
patterns – suggests a continued recovery 
in service exports.
Overall, we expect low economic growth 
over the coming year as additional 
spending from high net immigration and 
a moderate housing market recovery are 
partially offset by ongoing tight domestic 
monetary conditions and slowing global 
demand for our goods exports.
Figure 2.3
Output gap
(share of potential GDP, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.4
Top-down indicators for production GDP 
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: ANZ, BusinessNZ, NZIER, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area indicates the range between the maximum and minimum values 
of the GDP top-down and nowcasting indicators. The GDP top-down indicators comprise 
the Performance of Services Index (activity/sales), Performance of Manufacturing Index 
(production), Quarterly Survey of Business Opinion (domestic trading activity, past quarter), 
New Zealand activity index, ANZ Truckometer (heavy traffic), ANZ Business Opinion 
(capacity utilisation), QES (total paid hours). The GDP top-down indicators were created 
through linear regressions for each indicator with GDP in quarterly or annual percentage 
changes. In addition, a GDP nowcasting indicator is included that is based on a dynamic 
factor model and uses Kalman filtering techniques. This nowcasting indicator is based on 
the Nowcasting Report from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The fitted values 
were transformed back into GDP levels. To avoid statistical bias, for most top-down 
indicators the nationwide COVID-19 lockdowns in 2020 and 2021 were captured through 
dummy variables in the regressions, as these indicators were unlikely to accurately capture 
the impact of lockdowns on GDP.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
11
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
Interest rate sensitive spending is 
ebbing, but supported by strong 
population growth
The influence of higher interest rates has 
recently been most visible in retail sales and 
construction. Higher mortgage rates have 
increased debt servicing costs for households, 
reducing the amount of household income 
available for other spending. Spending on 
large discretionary items, such as durables, 
is well below its peak in early 2022. Higher 
interest rates have also made borrowing 
for housing more expensive. In conjunction 
with lower house prices since late 2021 and 
ongoing high construction costs, this has 
made housing development less attractive. 
New residential building consents have fallen 
over the past year (figure 2.5), indicating a 
substantial slowdown in residential building 
activity ahead.
The impact of recent increases in mortgage 
rates is yet to be fully reflected in aggregate 
households’ cash flows. The average 
mortgage rate paid by existing borrowers is 
expected to increase by approximately one 
percentage point over the coming 12 months, 
as borrowers roll onto higher interest rates.  
New mortgage lending rates have also 
continued to increase in recent quarters, 
despite a steady OCR (see chapter 5).
Although activity in interest rate sensitive 
parts of the economy is slowing, activity in 
other parts of the economy is mixed. In part, 
this is driven by strong population growth 
via net immigration, and the ongoing tourism 
recovery since borders reopened in mid-
2022. New orders in service industries have 
stabilised recently, after falling along with 
goods demand in recent quarters (figure 
2.6). Mixed signals are also apparent in 
diverging employment intentions by industry, 
with higher services and manufacturing 
employment intentions contrasting with 
ongoing weakness in the construction sector 
in particular (figure 2.7).
Figure 2.5
Residential consents by type
(3-month moving average, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 2.6
Surveyed new orders 
(3-month moving average, seasonally adjusted)
Source: BusinessNZ.
Figure 2.7
Surveyed employment intentions by industry 
(3-month moving average, seasonally adjusted)
Source: ANZ.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
12
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
Overall, lower demand also reflects slower 
rates of business investment growth, 
although investment has generally held 
up more than signalled by intentions in 
recent quarters (figure 2.8). This slowdown 
has been particularly acute in agriculture. 
Farmers have come under pressure from 
weakening global demand, as well as high 
cost inflation and interest rates. Weaker 
agriculture investment can already be seen 
in weak credit growth to the agriculture 
sector. The El Niño weather pattern may 
yet result in dry growing conditions over 
the next year, putting further pressure on 
farmers. Other sectors have subdued but 
still positive investment intentions, including 
manufacturing and service industries.
Factors less sensitive to interest 
rates are adding to demand
Several factors that are less sensitive to 
higher interest rates continue to add to 
demand and inflationary pressure, with 
some of these showing early signs of being 
stronger than has been assumed over recent 
quarters. 
International visitor numbers have increased 
in the second half of 2023, after adjusting 
for seasonal patterns, amidst the ongoing 
tourism recovery since the border reopened. 
However, numbers are yet to return to pre-
COVID-19 levels. The FIFA Women’s World 
Cup in the September 2023 quarter has 
helped reinforce this ongoing recovery in 
the near term. Strong net immigration has 
been associated with some easing in acute 
labour constraints, although some shortages 
persist. International flight capacity has also 
recovered substantially, although is still 
below pre-COVID-19 levels. 
Net immigration increased substantially 
following the border reopening in mid-
2022, reaching historic highs in early 2023. 
A substantial net outflow of New Zealand 
citizens has been more than offset by a 
greater net inflow of non-citizens, primarily 
on work visas. In recent months, the rate 
of inflow has decreased, but remains 
high relative to history. Current high net 
immigration is mainly the result of acute 
labour shortages that built up over the 
COVID-19 period, when GDP growth was 
strong but tight border restrictions limited 
access to labour from overseas. It may 
also reflect pent-up demand to migrate to 
New Zealand and an easing in immigration 
rules for some jobs in sectors with acute 
labour shortages, given the particularly 
strong increase in work visa arrivals recently 
(figure 2.9).
Figure 2.8
Investment intentions – next 12 months, 
and business investment 
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, NZIER, RBNZ estimates.
Note: ‘Net %’ refers to net percentage of respondents planning to increase or decrease 
investment in the next 12 months compared to the previous 12 months.
Figure 2.9
Migrant arrivals by visa type
(12-month moving average, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ.
Note: Arrivals from March 2020 to December 2022 are not seasonally adjusted, because 
border restrictions and reopening disrupted regular seasonal patterns. Seasonal 
adjustment was resumed from January 2023.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
13
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
Figure 2.10
House prices
(nominal, seasonally adjusted)
Source: CoreLogic, REINZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The REINZ house price index is indexed to the CoreLogic house price index in the 
March 2007 quarter.
Figure 2.11
Government spending 
(share of potential GDP)
Source: Stats NZ, Treasury, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.12
Exports 
(share of potential GDP)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Ongoing high levels of net immigration have 
coincided with higher house prices and 
rents. High net immigration was initially more 
clearly associated with an easing in supply 
constraints in the labour market. The outlook 
for house prices has been revised higher 
over the past year, as the trough in prices has 
been reached earlier and the subsequent 
recovery looks stronger than initially 
assumed (figure 2.10). However, the outlook 
for house prices is highly uncertain. Strong 
population growth is also underpinning 
aggregate domestic spending levels, even 
as spending per household has started to 
decrease (figure 2.2).
The outlook for fiscal policy is uncertain, 
as the specific nature of policy changes 
that may be implemented by the incoming 
Government is currently unknown. 
However, the central projection assumes 
that government consumption and 
investment evolve as outlined in PREFU 
2023. Government spending is assumed 
to decline as a share of potential GDP over 
coming years but remain above levels seen 
immediately prior to the COVID-19 pandemic 
(figure 2.11). Government consumption is 
expected to remain relatively steady in real 
terms, while the rest of the economy grows. 
By contrast, real government investment 
is expected to continue to grow strongly, 
underpinned by activity in civil construction 
and related industries for an extended 
period. This impact will be spread out over 
several years, with infrastructure repairs 
following the severe weather events in the 
North Island earlier this year assumed to take 
a long time.
New Zealand’s goods export 
growth is slowing
New Zealand’s exports have increased from 
their pandemic lows but are not expected 
to return to pre-COVID-19 levels in real 
terms until late 2024. Exports of services 
have increased strongly with the recovery 
in international visitors since the border 
reopened. By contrast, real goods export 
levels have been comparatively steady since 
the beginning of the pandemic (figure 2.12).


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
14
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
In early 2023, goods exports were lower, 
partly because of storms disrupting farms, 
orchards and ports, and labour shortages 
affecting New Zealand’s ability to produce 
commodity exports. However, growth in 
global demand for our goods exports has 
been easing. This has been reflected in 
declines in a variety of New Zealand’s 
commodity export prices (figure 2.13). Dairy 
prices have stabilised in recent weeks, likely 
due to concerns about supply disruptions 
associated with the emerging El Niño 
weather pattern, and as inventories in some 
key export markets such as China have been 
run down. Economic growth is expected 
to remain below trend for most of our key 
trading partners for at least the next year 
(see chapter 3).
The New Zealand dollar trade-weighted 
index (TWI) is currently slightly below the 
level assumed in the August Statement 
(figure 2.14). Downward influences include a 
narrower differential between interest rates 
here and abroad, and ongoing lower key 
commodity export prices (see chapter 3).  
Supply constraints have 
continued to ease 
Global supply-chain bottlenecks continue to 
ease. Surveyed global backlogs of work in 
manufacturing are declining, and shipping 
costs to New Zealand have fallen further in 
recent months. These price falls have been 
widespread across air and sea freight as 
international capacity has been rebuilt and 
connections have been restored (figure 2.15).
Global commodity input prices – particularly 
oil prices – have held relatively steady in 
recent months after falling sharply from 
peaks in 2022. However, there is an ongoing 
risk that the Israel-Hamas war spills over 
into wider regional conflict, which would 
likely push oil prices higher. Previous OPEC 
supply cuts and Russia’s war against Ukraine 
also continue to support oil prices via lower 
supply. More recently, slowing global oil 
demand, and increased production from 
some non-OPEC countries, have helped 
offset some of these supply concerns.
Figure 2.13
Commodity prices 
(nominal)
Source: ANZ.
Figure 2.14
New Zealand dollar TWI
(nominal)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.15
Shipping costs for consumer goods imports
(share of import value for duty)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: These series are estimated by taking the value of consumer merchandise imports 
including freight and insurance costs (CIF) and subtracting the reported value for duty 
(VFD), which excludes these costs. They are expressed as a percentage of the VFD figure.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
15
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
Figure 2.16
Global Purchasing Managers’ Index  
– output prices
Source: JP Morgan.
Note: A level above 50 indicates an increase in prices, while a number below 50 indicates 
a decrease.
Figure 2.17
QSBO difficulty in finding labour
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: NZIER.
Global output prices have continued to 
decline from recent peaks, although the 
pace of normalisation has been relatively 
slow in service industries compared to 
manufacturing (figure 2.16). Strong goods 
demand in the early stages of the COVID-19 
pandemic, combined with high input cost 
inflation and supply-chain bottlenecks, saw 
an initial surge in prices of manufactured 
goods in 2020 and 2021. This started to 
unwind in mid-2022 as global consumer 
spending switched back to services, global 
supply chains began to normalise, and 
commodity input prices began to drop. In 
contrast, services inflation has remained 
strong compared to pre-COVID-19 rates. 
Price rises in services are contributing 
to elevated ongoing overall inflationary 
pressure in many countries.
Domestically, labour shortages have eased 
according to surveyed difficulties finding 
labour, although some shortages of specialised 
skills persist (figure 2.17). This is supported by 
our recent discussions with businesses and 
the Quarterly Survey of Business Opinion 
(QSBO), which suggest that although the 
overall choice of job candidates has improved, 
pockets of shortages remain, especially in 
some specialist areas. The aggregate number 
of job vacancies has also declined and is now 
below pre-COVID-19 levels. 
Additional labour supply is coming from 
exceptionally strong net immigration. In 
addition, a relatively high share of the 
population is participating in the labour force. 
This share dropped slightly to 72 percent in 
the September 2023 quarter as employment 
declined, but remains well above the 10-year 
average of just over 70 percent.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
16
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
Headline inflation is easing, but 
domestic pressures persist
Inflation remains too high and well above the 
MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target band. However, 
inflationary pressures in the economy have 
continued to reduce due to easing demand 
growth and improved supply. Annual 
headline inflation declined by more than 
expected to 5.6 percent in the September 
2023 quarter. Much of this decline was 
accounted for by lower-than-expected food 
prices. Non-tradables inflation continued 
to ease gradually as expected in the third 
quarter of 2023, reflecting persistence in 
services inflation as consumer spending has 
shifted from goods to services over the past 
year (figure 2.18).
Annual tradables inflation fell from 5.2 to 
4.7 percent in the September 2023 quarter, 
significantly below its peak of 8.7 percent 
in 2022. Food prices in particular fell by 
more than expected in the September 2023 
quarter, led by fruit and vegetables. This may 
partly reflect a delayed pass-through of lower 
global agricultural commodity prices over the 
past year. This was partially offset by a large 
increase in transport prices, caused by OPEC 
and Russian oil production cuts. 
Annual non-tradables inflation – which 
measures price changes for goods and 
services that are less exposed to international 
competition – eased more slowly from 
6.6 to 6.3 percent in the September 2023 
quarter. Resilience in non-tradables inflation 
reflects ongoing capacity constraints, even 
as demand moderates, including a degree 
of residual labour market tightness. High net 
immigration is also coinciding with recent 
increases in rents. Annual construction price 
inflation remains elevated but is easing as 
residential investment has started to slow 
since late 2022.
Figure 2.18
Contributions to CPI inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.19
Headline and core inflation measures
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for inflation over 
the medium term.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
17
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
While headline inflation decreased more than 
expected in the September 2023 quarter, it 
remains too high. In addition, most measures 
of ‘core’ inflation have remained elevated, 
albeit below recent peaks (figure 2.19). 
Elevated core inflation indicates that inflation 
will take some time to return to the mid-point 
of the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range. 
Within the ex-food and fuel measure of 
core inflation, a wider range of components 
have been contributing to high inflation in 
recent years (figure 2.20). In annual terms, 
housing-related costs continue to account 
for the largest share of sustained inflationary 
pressure. But this factor has increasingly 
been reinforced by price increases in 
transport, recreation and culture, and 
household contents and services. Relatively 
broad-based inflationary pressure is 
consistent with some ongoing tightness in 
the labour market and still elevated inflation 
expectations.
Following the recent decline in headline CPI 
inflation, household and business expectations 
for inflation one year ahead have continued 
to fall (figure 2.21). At the two-year-ahead 
horizon, inflation expectations have remained 
at elevated levels. However, expectations for 
inflation five and ten years ahead have edged 
higher in recent data, posing some upside risk 
to the inflation outlook.
Figure 2.20
Core inflation ex-food and fuel by group 
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.21
Inflation expectations
(annual, years ahead)
Source: RBNZ Survey of Expectations (Business).
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI 
inflation over the medium term.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
18
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
A tight labour market continues to 
support inflationary pressure, but 
to a diminishing extent
Inflationary pressure from the labour market 
continues to ease, although some labour 
market stretch remains. A variety of lagging 
indicators from the September 2023 quarter 
suggest that the labour market remains 
strong overall, but has started to ease 
relative to early last year when the labour 
market was particularly tight (figure 2.22). 
The unemployment rate increased from 3.6 
percent to 3.9 percent in the September 2023 
quarter (figure 2.23). Broader measures of 
labour utilisation have also eased further, such 
as an increase in the underutilisation rate. 
More contemporaneous and forward-looking 
business surveys of conditions, such as the 
difficulty finding labour in the QSBO, also 
suggest that labour shortages have begun 
to ease significantly. This has coincided 
with the recent spike in net immigration, 
underpinned by a large increase in work 
visas. The increase in work visas coincides 
with streamlined processing of visas for 
some sectors with acute shortages. Domestic 
labour supply has also been supported by 
ongoing high levels of participation. Labour 
market participation and employment as 
a share of the working-age population 
both reached new record highs in mid-
2023, although they declined slightly in the 
September 2023 quarter. Forward-looking 
indicators of the labour market suggest 
further easing is likely at the end of 2023, 
although demand for labour is mixed 
across industries. 
Figure 2.22
Maximum sustainable employment 
(MSE) indicator suite
Source: NZIER, Stats NZ, MBIE, ANZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The Reserve Bank uses a range of indicators when assessing MSE, consistent with 
clause 2.1b of the Remit. The vertical lines on the left-hand and right-hand sides represent 
the weakest and strongest data outcomes since 2000, respectively. For example, a lower 
unemployment rate is considered to be stronger. An orange dot to the left of a black dot 
means that the latest data outcome was weaker than in the March 2022 quarter, when the 
labour market was particularly tight.
Figure 2.23
Unemployment rate
(unemployed people as a share of the labour force, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
19
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
Inflation-adjusted same-job wages – the 
real unit cost of labour most directly relevant 
for inflationary pressure after adjusting 
for productivity – continued to increase 
below CPI inflation in the September 2023 
quarter. However, broader wage and 
income measures are better indicators of 
growth in household income, and these 
grew at a faster pace than CPI inflation, 
continuing a trend from the past two years 
(figure 2.24).1 Very high employment, strong 
household income growth and accumulated 
savings continue to put upward pressure 
on household spending, and inflationary 
pressure, in the near term. 
Restrictive interest rates are 
required to return inflation
to 2 percent
Restrictive interest rates are required 
to further slow demand relative to the 
economy’s ability to supply goods and 
services sustainably. Lower demand will 
result in less pressure on available labour 
and capital resources in the economy. This 
will help reduce pressure on prices, leading 
to lower domestic inflation. Slower global 
growth is also expected to contribute to 
falling inflationary pressure through declining 
import price inflation and lower demand for 
our goods exports. Overall, we expect slow 
growth in GDP until at least the end of 2024.
Labour market tightness is expected to 
decrease further over coming quarters, 
reducing pressure on wages. Easing labour 
market tightness is assumed to reflect 
slow growth in economic activity over the 
coming year and further growth in labour 
supply. One measure of labour market slack 
– the unemployment rate – is expected to 
increase from currently low levels. Keeping 
the unemployment rate near current levels 
without experiencing unsustainably high 
wage and inflation pressures would require 
structural changes in the labour market that 
are beyond the control of the Reserve Bank.
1	
 For more information on real wages see chapter 4.2 in the November 2022 Statement.
Slower demand growth in New Zealand and 
overseas is expected to lead to declines in 
non-tradables and tradables inflation over the 
medium term. Annual headline CPI inflation is 
assumed to return to within the 1 to 3 percent 
target range in the second half of 2024, and 
to 2 percent by the second half of 2025 
(figure 2.25).
Figure 2.24
Wage measures and headline CPI
(index=100 in Q4 2019)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Same-job wage measure: The adjusted labour cost index (LCI) measures wage 
inflation for a fixed quantity and quality of labour. 
Broad same-job wage measure: The unadjusted LCI measures the same as adjusted LCI but 
includes any wage changes due to quality changes within an occupation (as reported by 
employers). 
Broad wage measure: The Quarterly Enterprise Survey (QES) average hourly earnings 
measure the average hourly earnings across the economy. It is affected by opportunities 
that arise in a tight labour market, eg from promotions or shifts from low-paying industries to 
high-paying industries. 
Income per worker measure: The QES total gross earnings per filled job measures the total 
income per job. In addition to the influence of the above, the QES income measure also 
takes into account employees working extra hours.
Figure 2.25
CPI inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI 
inflation over the medium term.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
20
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
Monetary policy outlook
The outlook for inflationary pressure is 
highly uncertain. However, it appears that 
inflationary pressures are higher than in the 
August Statement, even as employment 
is easing broadly as expected. Capacity 
pressures have started to ease, with supply 
increasing and spending by households and 
firms reducing from post-COVID-19 peaks. 
However, capacity pressures are assumed to 
decline by less than in the August Statement 
over the projection, supported by strong 
net immigration, a higher outlook for house 
prices, and stronger government investment 
over the medium term. World interest rates 
have also increased, placing downward 
pressure on the New Zealand dollar 
exchange rate and, all else equal, boosting 
inflationary pressure within the economy. 
As discussed below and in chapter 6, the 
nominal neutral OCR has also been revised 
higher. These factors more than offset a 
lower outlook for export and import prices. 
We have revised our assumption of the 
long-run nominal neutral OCR in the current 
projections from 2.25 percent up to 2.5 
percent from Q4 2023 onwards. The neutral 
OCR is the rate that, on average over 
time, would be consistent with no over- or 
under-utilisation of resources and stable 
inflation (see chapter 6). The OCR remains 
significantly contractionary at its current level 
based on this revised assumption. Taken on 
its own, the upward revision to the neutral 
OCR would create slightly more upward 
pressure on the OCR over time.
Conditional on our central economic outlook, 
it is assumed that the OCR will need to follow 
a higher path than assumed in the August 
Statement in order for the MPC to meet 
its inflation and employment objectives 
(figure 2.26).
Figure 2.26
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
21
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
3.	 Global developments and outlook
Mount Aspiring National Park. Photo: Kate Poskitt 
CHAPTER 
03
Global 
developments 
and outlook


Chapter 3 Global developments and outlook
22
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
CHAPTER 3
Global developments
and outlook
Global economic growth remains below 
its longer-term trend. While growth has 
been stronger than economic forecasters 
predicted at the start of 2023, it is expected 
to slow further in 2024. This is particularly so 
in developed economies as higher interest 
rates reduce demand. 
Economic growth in the US exceeded 
expectations this year, despite higher 
interest rates and a tightening in credit 
conditions following the period of banking 
stress earlier in 2023. Growth has slowed 
more significantly in Europe, as household 
consumption has weakened due to high 
energy prices and tighter monetary policy. 
Economic growth in China has recovered 
slightly following a weak period in the middle 
of the year.
Global headline inflation has continued to 
decline in recent months, although core 
inflation has declined more gradually across 
economies. Labour markets in developed 
economies remain tight, with relatively low 
unemployment, but worker shortages are 
showing signs of easing in some regions.
Long-term interest rates have increased 
since the August Statement, contributing 
to steeper sovereign yield curves. Despite 
higher interest rates, global equity prices 
have been fairly robust. Several major central 
banks have kept policy rates on hold but 
continue to express willingness to tighten 
further, should it be required. Financial 
market pricing for policy rates suggests that 
market participants expect little or no further 
tightening by most major central banks, and 
that policy rates will begin to decline from 
around the middle of 2024.
Global economic growth 
has been resilient
Global economic growth remained resilient in 
the September 2023 quarter. New Zealand’s 
trading partners’ GDP is expected to grow 
by 3 percent in 2023, the same pace of 
growth as in 2022. Global growth forecasts 
have been revised up over the course of 
the year but have remained lower than the 
pre-COVID-19 (2014-2019) average of 3.6 
percent. Trading partner growth has been 
supported by stronger activity levels in China 
this year following the removal of COVID-19 
restrictions in December 2022. Growth in 
most other economies has slowed compared 
to 2022 in response to higher central bank 
policy interest rates.
Figure 3.1
Key trading partner GDP forecasts
(index=100 in Q4 2019)
Source: Consensus Economics, Haver Analytics, RBNZ estimates.
Note: GDP forecasts are based on Consensus Economics estimates, except New Zealand’s 
which is based on our current projection.


Chapter 3 Global developments and outlook
23
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
Figure 3.2
Chinese property market growth indicators
(annual)
Source: Bloomberg.
The US economy expanded 2.9 percent in 
the year to the September 2023 quarter, 
largely accounted for by strong household 
consumption. The strength has come 
despite tighter credit conditions following 
the banking stress in the first half of the 
year. However, declining credit availability is 
expected to reduce aggregate demand over 
the coming year. Labour market pressures in 
the US continue to ease from historically tight 
levels, with job vacancies and wage growth 
declining.
In contrast, economic growth in Europe has 
been weak. Euro area GDP growth slowed 
to 0.1 percent in the year to the September 
2023 quarter, as household consumption 
and export demand remained weak. Higher 
interest rates and high inflation are weighing 
on real household incomes. Despite slower 
GDP growth, conditions in the labour market 
remain tight, and wage inflation remains high.
In high-income Asian economies, tighter 
financial conditions have constrained 
domestic demand growth, although an 
easing of supply-chain disruptions and lower 
commodity prices have provided a partial 
offset. For developing Asian economies, 
relatively accommodative financial conditions 
have been supporting domestic demand, 
while the weak outlook for external demand 
remains a headwind for growth.
In Australia, some parts of the economy 
have remained resilient to monetary policy 
tightening to date, with annual GDP growth 
slowing but expected to reach 1.8 percent 
in 2023. Slower household consumption 
growth is being offset by strong public and 
private investment and an improvement in 
net exports. Strong net immigration has been 
boosting labour supply but also adding to 
demand, particularly for housing.
Growth in China has stabilised, but 
structural challenges remain
The Chinese economy expanded 4.9 percent 
in the year to the September 2023 quarter, 
consistent with the Government’s target of 
around 5 percent for this year but stronger 
than Consensus Economics expectations. 
Monthly activity indicators suggest that 
growth has stabilised following a period of 
weakness in the middle of the year. Chinese 
authorities have taken a number of policy 
actions to support the economy in recent 
months, although policy support has been 
gradual compared to previous periods of 
slowing growth.
China’s economy faces several structural 
challenges that pose downside risks to the 
near-term outlook, and are expected to weigh 
on potential growth over the longer term. Debt 
levels for corporates and local governments 
are high. Financial stress remains acute in 
the highly leveraged property development 
sector. Policy support for the housing sector 
appears to have had a limited effect so far, 
and real estate investment has continued to 
decline (figure 3.2). Given the importance of 
the property sector for the Chinese economy, 
and its linkages with the broader financial 
system, continued weakness in the property 
market remains a significant downside risk 
to growth in China and global growth more 
broadly. From a longer-term perspective, 
China’s ageing and declining population and 
the need to gradually rebalance the economy 
away from debt-financed investment and 
towards services are expected to reduce 
potential growth.


Chapter 3 Global developments and outlook
24
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
Global inflation is declining 
gradually
Headline and core inflation have gradually 
decreased in recent months across advanced 
economies (figure 3.3). Increases in energy 
prices since the middle of the year have 
placed some upward pressure on headline 
inflation over recent months, but this has been 
more than offset by moderating core inflation 
(figure 3.4). Services inflation remains elevated 
and has been slow to ease this year in most 
advanced economies. However, goods 
inflation has declined more materially and 
in some economies is now close to, or even 
below, its pre-COVID-19 level. 
Despite different starting points, core inflation 
rates – excluding food and energy – have 
converged to a relatively narrow range of 
4 to 5 percent in the US, euro area and 
Australia (figure 3.4). Core inflation has fallen 
sooner in the US than in most economies. 
This is partly due to an earlier increase 
in prices. Headline and core inflation are 
forecast to continue declining in advanced 
economies. Previous monetary policy 
tightening is expected to hold growth below 
trend, resulting in a further easing of capacity 
pressures.
Inflation in China has been lower than both 
its pre-COVID-19 (2014-2019) average and 
inflation in other major economies. Headline 
inflation fell to negative 0.2 percent in the 
year to October 2023 and core inflation 
was 0.6 percent over the same period. 
Low inflation in China has reflected weak 
domestic demand, slack in the labour 
market, and falling prices for some global 
commodities. 
Figure 3.3
Headline inflation for key trading partners 
(annual)
Source: Haver Analytics.
Note: Data are monthly, except for Australia and New Zealand, which only publish official 
inflation data quarterly.
Figure 3.4
Inflation excluding food and energy 
for key trading partners 
(annual)
Source: Haver Analytics.
Note: Data are monthly, except for Australia and New Zealand, which only publish official 
inflation data quarterly.


Chapter 3 Global developments and outlook
25
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
Figure 3.5
Market-implied path of policy rates
Source: Bloomberg.
Figure 3.6
10-year government bond yields
Source: Bloomberg.
Most major central banks 
remain on hold
Several major central banks have left 
their policy rates unchanged since the 
August Statement, but continue to express 
willingness to tighten policy further if needed. 
The Reserve Bank of Australia increased its 
policy rate by 25 basis points to have more 
confidence in lowering inflation to its target 
within a reasonable period. Some global 
policymakers have noted that the increase in 
long-term interest rates in recent months – 
such as on government bonds –  may reduce 
their need to tighten monetary policy further. 
Financial market participants expect central 
banks to leave policy rates unchanged until 
around the middle of 2024, before slowly 
reducing them toward more neutral levels 
(figure 3.5).
Long-term interest rates 
have increased
Long-term interest rates have increased 
since the August Statement with the yield 
on 10-year US government bonds increasing 
20 basis points. Fixed income market pricing 
has become increasingly sensitive to new 
information, leading to higher volatility. 
The increase in long-term interest rates 
over the past two years has reflected both 
cyclical economic strength – resulting in 
expectations of higher central bank policy 
rates – and market participants having 
revised up their expectations for neutral 
interest rates. Over the past few months, a 
sharp increase in the supply of long-term 
government bonds, particularly in the US, has 
also pushed long-term interest rates higher. 
Meanwhile, market-implied expectations for 
inflation, based on inflation-indexed bond 
yields, have remained stable and close to 
central bank targets. This means increases 
in long-term interest rates are not due to 
investors requiring more compensation for 
expected inflation. 
Global equity markets are higher since the 
August Statement. Global equity prices fell 
by as much as 7 percent over this period 
before recovering in recent weeks. Higher 
long-term government bond yields have 
placed downward pressure on equity prices 
over recent months. However, improving 
global risk sentiment and stronger corporate 
earnings have supported their recent 
recovery. Commodity prices are slightly lower 
since the August Statement. Oil prices have 
fluctuated on news related to supply and the 
war between Israel and Hamas, but have 
eased recently. 


Chapter 4 Special topic
26
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
4.	 Special topic
Waipunga Falls. Photo: India Power
CHAPTER 
04
Special topic


Chapter 4 Special topic
27
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
CHAPTER 4 
Special topic 
Before the publication of each Statement, the MPC is provided 
with analyses of some topical issues. 
A topic for the November Statement was monetary policy transmission lags.	 
Special topics in the past 12 months
Topic
Date/publication
The inflationary impact of recent migration
August 2023 Statement (Chapter 4)
Factors contributing to New Zealand’s current account 
deficit and outlook
August 2023 Statement (Chapter 4)
The recovery in international tourism over the 
2022/23 summer
May 2023 Statement (Chapter 4)
Have inflation expectations become more sensitive 
to higher inflation?
May 2023 Statement (Chapter 4)
The international dimension of non-tradables inflation
February 2023 Statement (Chapter 4)
Monitoring the labour market for inflationary
pressures with high-frequency microdata
February 2023 Statement (Chapter 4)
The neutral interest rate
November 2022 Statement (Chapter 4)
Developments in real wages
November 2022 Statement (Chapter 4)


Chapter 4 Special topic
28
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
Figure 4.1 
OCR forecasts from the past two years
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Monetary policy transmission lags
Summary
•	 Monetary policy takes time to impact 
inflation and employment as changes in 
the official cash rate (OCR) work through 
several transmission channels. 
•	 The magnitude and duration of pass-
through via each transmission channel 
is different, and can depend on the state 
of the economy. Therefore, changes to 
the OCR take a long and variable amount 
of time to have their peak effect on our 
economic objectives. 
•	 We have updated our estimates of the 
time it takes for changes in the OCR to 
have their peak impact on inflation. The 
updated estimates suggest that the OCR 
typically takes six to nine quarters to reach 
its peak impulse on annual inflation. These 
empirical estimates are in line with those 
assumed in our primary forecasting model 
that underpins our economic projections.
•	 Much of the Reserve Bank’s recent 
monetary policy tightening has been 
priced into wholesale market interest 
rates for more than six to nine quarters. 
Therefore, it is likely that past increases 
in the OCR are close to having their peak 
effect on the economy. 
•	 The OCR remains contractionary – 
above the neutral interest rate – and will 
continue to have a dampening impulse 
on economic activity, employment and 
inflation over time. 
OCR decisions take time to affect 
the economy
The Monetary Policy Committee sets interest 
rates to meet its inflation and employment 
objectives. However, this is complicated by 
the fact that changes to the OCR do not affect 
inflation and employment instantaneously, 
but instead take time to work through several 
channels. Monetary policy settings that 
are too loose today would make it more 
likely for inflation expectations to become 
unanchored, and therefore allow high 
inflation to persist in the future. In contrast, 
when monetary policy is too restrictive today, 
the economy may experience unnecessary 
losses to output and employment later.
The MPC began tightening monetary policy 
from July 2021 when large scale asset 
purchases ceased. The OCR was increased 
from 0.25 percent to 5.50 percent between 
October 2021 and May 2023. However, 
by February 2022, more than half of this 
increase in the OCR was built into our 
published OCR forecast and priced into 
wholesale interest rates. Our published 
forecast and market pricing increased over 
2022, and the OCR forecast peaked at 5.50 
percent in the November 2022 Statement 
(figure 4.1). This has meant our tightening to 
date was reflected in wholesale interest rates 
at least 12 months ago, with most of it priced 
in closer to two years ago. 


Chapter 4 Special topic
29
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
The higher OCR transmits to the real economy and price-setting behaviours via five key 
transmission channels (see the Monetary Policy Handbook for more detail):
Table 4.1
Monetary policy transmission channels
Transmission channel
Description
1.	Savings and 
investment
Higher interest rates encourage households and businesses to save, 
and discourage borrowing and investment. Together, this leads to lower 
spending and demand.
2.	Cash flow
Indebted households facing low disposable income and credit constraints 
may find increases in their debt repayment obligations force them to 
reduce their spending, beyond how they would from the savings and 
investment channel alone. The opposite effect would be true of net 
savers, whose interest income is boosted by higher interest rates. Overall, 
New Zealanders are net borrowers, so the reduction in spending tends 
to dominate.
3.	House prices and 
housing wealth
Higher interest rates make it more difficult to finance the purchase of 
a home, leading to downward pressure on house prices. When house 
prices are lower, households can borrow less against the value of their 
homes and feel less wealthy, leading to lower spending. 
4.	Exchange rate
When the New Zealand dollar exchange rate appreciates, the cost 
of imports falls in New Zealand dollar terms, feeding directly to lower 
tradables inflation. Also, more spending on imports relative to domestic 
goods and services dampens economic activity and inflation.
A higher exchange rate also reduces export incomes. When exports are 
priced in foreign currency, such as dairy exports priced in US dollars, 
incomes will be lower in New Zealand dollars. On the other hand, when 
prices are set in New Zealand dollars, they become less competitive 
internationally, and the quantity demanded will fall, also reducing incomes.
5.	Inflation expectations
Higher interest rates tend to make households and businesses expect 
lower inflation in the future. When households do not expect prices to 
rise as much, they are more comfortable to hold off their consumption 
until later, and workers do not demand such large wage increases. When 
businesses have lower inflation expectations, they feel less pressure 
to increase prices. All these factors lead to less inflationary pressure in 
the economy.
The time taken for a higher OCR to transmit 
through each of these channels is different. 
For example, for the savings and investment 
channel, it may take time for a higher OCR to 
be reflected in term deposit and mortgage 
rates (see chapter 5). Once the higher OCR 
has been reflected in higher fixed mortgage 
rates, it takes time before mortgaged 
households roll onto higher mortgage rates, 
slowing transmission via the cash flow 
channel. This means that households only 
adjust consumption to higher interest rates 
with a lag. Because businesses set their 
prices infrequently, it may also take time for 
firms’ price-setting to respond to slowing 
consumer demand.
Although a higher OCR tends to be reflected 
in the exchange rate almost immediately, 
it can take time for a higher exchange rate 
to flow through to pricing decisions. Many 
businesses hedge against exchange rate 
fluctuations, and so are insulated from 
changes for a certain period. Even without 
hedging, businesses selling imported goods 
often make pricing decisions well in advance 
of sales. 


Chapter 4 Special topic
30
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
The time taken for monetary policy to work 
through each of these channels will depend 
on the state of the economy. For example, 
transmission via the cash flow channel is 
slower when existing mortgages are fixed at 
longer terms. Transmission via the housing 
market will depend on current supply and 
demand conditions, as well as overall 
confidence in the market. We estimate that 
inflation expectations adjust more quickly to 
recent inflation in high-inflation environments 
than in low-inflation environments. The way 
consumers and businesses make decisions 
is influenced by the economic environment.
While these are simplified examples of 
transmission lags, they show that monetary 
policy transmission to the real economy and 
inflation is complex. It can depend on the 
state of the economy, and can change over 
time. This is why it is important to regularly 
reassess the lags of monetary policy 
transmission.
2	
See Atkin & Cava (2017), Mann (2023), Lane (2022), Macklem (2023).
3	
The first approach uses the central bank information set (see Bachmann, Gödl-Hanisch, & Sims (2022)). This assumes that imperfect 
information set at the time of central bank decision-making helps to isolate part of the variation in the monetary policy interest rate. 
The second is the narrative approach (see Romer & Romer (2004)). It shows changes in the intended policy rate that are not taken in 
response to information about current or likely future economic developments. The third approach uses high-frequency financial market 
data around the time of monetary policy decisions to estimate the unanticipated part of monetary policy (see Gertler & Karadi (2015) 
and Kuttner (2001)).
Reviewing our estimate of the 
length of monetary policy lags
There is no simple way to summarise 
how long it takes for monetary policy to 
work its way through the economy. Most 
research focuses on estimating the time of 
peak impact, which is the time between a 
change in interest rates and the maximum 
effect on inflation. Evidence from these 
studies is diverse, with results dependent 
on the country, time period considered, and 
methodology used. Despite this diversity in 
results, many empirical studies indicate that 
it takes about eight quarters for monetary 
policy to have its peak impact on inflation 
(figure 4.2). These studies include work 
published by other central banks, including 
the Reserve Bank of Australia, Bank of 
England, European Central Bank and Bank 
of Canada.2
We recently conducted some empirical 
exercises to estimate how long it takes for 
the inflationary impact to reach its peak 
when there is a change in the OCR. It is 
challenging to measure monetary policy’s 
impact on inflation, because our monetary 
policy is set in response to changes in the 
inflation outlook. Without controlling for 
this, we may find the misleading result that 
inflation increases in periods after interest 
rates increase, when in contrast, interest 
rates were increased in anticipation of higher 
inflation. This issue is called ‘endogeneity’ 
in the academic literature and has been 
dealt with in our estimation by attempting 
to identify monetary policy ‘shocks’. Shocks 
refer to changes in monetary policy that are 
independent of other changes to the inflation 
outlook. We use three different approaches 
from the literature to identify these shocks.3
Figure 4.2
Quarter of peak impact of a monetary 
policy shock on annual CPI inflation
Source: See Havranek & Rusnak (2013), Cloyne & Hürtgen (2016), Drew, Karagedikli, Sethi,  
& Smith (2008), Sethi (2008), Choi, Willems, & Seung Yong (2023), Doh & Foerster (2022).
Note: Each line represents the range of transmission lags in the selected empirical studies, 
while the red dots denote the average impact derived from these studies.


Chapter 4 Special topic
31
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
Once the monetary policy shocks are 
identified, we estimate the current and 
future responses of key macroeconomic 
variables and inflation to a monetary policy 
shock. We find that the peak response of 
GDP to monetary policy shocks varies quite 
widely, depending on which shock we 
use. However, we find more consistently 
that the impulse on inflation grows and 
dissipates gradually, with peak transmission 
occurring six to nine quarters after the shock 
(table 4.2), depending on the estimation 
approach. This affirms the assumption in 
our primary forecasting model (NZSIM) that 
the OCR takes eight quarters to reach peak 
transmission. 
Table 4.2
Number of quarters taken for the 
peak impact of a monetary policy 
shock on annual CPI inflation
Estimation approach
Quarters
Central bank information
set approach
6
Narrative approach
8
High-frequency identification
9
NZSIM
8
Implications for monetary policy 
formulation today
Given this, we believe most of the recent 
monetary tightening is already having 
its peak effect on inflation. This does not 
mean that transmission is complete, only 
that the impacts are unlikely to get much 
larger over time. Past monetary policy 
tightening continues to play out through 
various channels. For example, transmission 
continues through the cash flow channel, 
with some households continuing to 
transition to higher mortgage rates. Even 
after transmission reaches its peak, the OCR 
will continue to constrain the economy and 
reduce inflation as long as it remains above 
the neutral rate. 
When setting monetary policy in this 
environment, we will continue to weigh up 
the headwind of restrictive monetary policy 
against the other headwinds and tailwinds 
acting on the economy (see chapters 2 
and 6).


Chapter 5 Domestic financial conditions
32
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
5.	 Domestic financial conditions
New Brighton Pier. Photo: Maui Brennan
CHAPTER 
05
Domestic 
financial 
conditions


Chapter 5 Domestic financial conditions
33
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
CHAPTER 5
Domestic financial conditions
Monetary policy affects economic activity by influencing 
financial conditions in New Zealand. These include the interest 
rates at which households and businesses save and borrow, the 
exchange rate, and other factors such as credit availability. 
Financial conditions have become slightly more restrictive since the August 
Statement. Retail interest rates, such as mortgage and term deposit rates, have 
increased, especially at terms of two to five years. Wholesale interest rates 
have decreased when compared to immediately before the August Statement, 
particularly at horizons of up to two years. Despite the higher interest rate 
environment, New Zealand’s financial system remains sound and is in a 
good position to face looming challenges (see the Financial Stability Report 
November 2023). 
Market participants’ near-term expectations 
for the OCR increased immediately following 
the August Statement and continued to 
increase in the lead-up to the October 
Review, reflecting increases in global interest 
rates. However, market expectations for 
future OCR decisions have fallen in the past 
month following the release of inflation and 
labour market data for the third quarter, and 
as global interest rates have moved lower. As 
of 23 November 2023, market expectations 
are for OCR cuts to begin by July 2024. 
Overall, market expectations for upcoming 
decisions are lower than at the time of the 
August Statement (figure 5.1).
Figure 5.1
Market expectations for the OCR
Source: Bloomberg.
Note: Each data point represents market expectations of the level of the OCR at a given 
point in the future, as measured by overnight indexed swap pricing. 


Chapter 5 Domestic financial conditions
34
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
Domestic wholesale rates such as interest 
rate swaps have decreased at all horizons 
since the August Statement (figure 5.2). The 
2-year swap rate has decreased around 30 
basis points, consistent with lower near-term 
OCR expectations, and the 10-year swap 
rate has decreased around 5 basis points as 
global interest rates have decreased. The 
interest rate swap curve is less inverted than 
at the time of the August Statement. Short-
term rates are still higher than long-term 
rates, but not as much as three months ago. 
Changes in New Zealand government bond 
(NZGB) yields have been similar to those in 
swap rates over recent months. 
The New Zealand dollar exchange rate is 
broadly unchanged on a trade-weighted 
basis since the August Statement (figure 5.3). 
Global interest rates have increased by more 
than comparable domestic rates, resulting 
in a narrowing of interest rate differentials 
between New Zealand and its key trading 
partners. This narrowing in interest rate 
differentials has put downward pressure on 
the New Zealand dollar. However, global risk 
sentiment has improved recently, supporting 
the exchange rate.
Interest rates on term deposits, which make 
up a large share of banks’ core funding, have 
continued to increase. This has increased 
the spread between term deposit rates and 
comparable wholesale rates (figure 5.4). 
However, this spread remains significantly 
lower than pre-COVID-19 averages, holding 
down the cost of bank funding. A large 
share of customer deposits are transaction 
accounts. As these pay a very low interest 
rate compared to wholesale rates, they are 
holding bank funding costs down. Bank 
funding costs are likely to increase over 
the medium term, with banks expected to 
compete more aggressively for customer 
deposits as accommodative funding 
conditions for banks continue to fade.
Source: RBNZ.
Figure 5.3
New Zealand dollar TWI
(nominal)
Source: Bloomberg, interest.co.nz.
Note: The term deposit rates shown are the average of the latest fixed-term rates on offer 
from ANZ, ASB, BNZ and Westpac. Bank Bill rates represent the rates at which banks are 
willing to borrow from, or lend to, one another for terms of 1 to 6 months.
Figure 5.4
Spread between 6-month term deposit 
rate and 6-month bank bill rate
Source: Bloomberg.
Note: Swap rates are wholesale interest rates often used as a benchmark by financial 
institutions in setting other interest rates in the economy. They represent the fixed interest 
rate that one party to the swap agreement receives in exchange for paying a floating rate 
to the other party over the period of the agreement.  
Figure 5.2
New Zealand swap rates
(terms in years)


Chapter 5 Domestic financial conditions
35
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
Mortgage rates have also increased since 
the August Statement. Banks have been 
passing on higher term deposit costs to 
mortgage rates (figure 5.5). The spread 
between mortgage rates and wholesale 
rates remains low by historical standards 
but has increased over the past year (figure 
5.6). Mortgage rates are likely to continue to 
increase relative to swap rates over the next 
few years, as banks’ cost of deposit funding 
increases.
Figure 5.5
New Zealand mortgage rates
Source: interest.co.nz.
Note: The mortgage rates shown are the average of the latest fixed-term rates on offer 
from ANZ, ASB, BNZ and Westpac. 
Source: Bloomberg, interest.co.nz.
Figure 5.6
New Zealand 1- and 2-year mortgage rates 
as a spread to equivalent swap rates


Chapter 5 Domestic financial conditions
36
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
Table 5.1 
Developments in domestic financial conditions as at 23 November 2023
Wholesale interest rates 
Market pricing 
for the OCR
•	 The August Statement contributed to an upward shift in market participants’ expectations for 
the OCR over 2023. This was primarily due to the higher-than-anticipated OCR forecast, which 
peaked at 5.59 percent. However, market pricing for the OCR has since shifted lower following 
the release of Q3 domestic inflation and labour market data, and declining global interest rates. 
•	 Market pricing for the OCR is currently slightly lower than at the time of the August Statement. 
Financial market expectations for the peak OCR in this cycle, as measured by overnight indexed 
swap pricing, have decreased by 10 basis points to 5.50 percent. Expectations for the level of the 
OCR in 2024 are also lower than at the time of the August Statement, with a first OCR cut priced 
to occur by mid-2024. The current and expected OCR settings are contractionary, sitting above 
our estimates for the neutral OCR (see figure 7.4).
Interest rate 
swaps
•	 Short- and long-term New Zealand swap rates have fallen since the August Statement, with the 
2-year and 10-year swap rates 30 and 5 basis points lower respectively. Consequently, the degree 
of inversion in the interest rate swap curve has reduced, with the difference between the 2- and 10-
year swap rates narrowing from about minus 70 basis points to about minus 40 basis points.
•	 Longer-term global interest rate swaps increased during August and September in response 
to stronger-than-expected economic data, and potential further monetary policy tightening by 
central banks. However, this increase has since reversed following recent global economic data. 
Global interest rates continue to be a key influence on longer-term interest rate movements in 
New Zealand.
New Zealand 
government 
bonds
•	 Short-term NZGB yields have decreased since the August Statement, reflecting lower 
expectations for the OCR. Long-term NZGB yields are roughly unchanged.
•	 Bid-ask spreads, which are how far apart buyers and sellers are from reaching an agreed price to 
trade, have narrowed slightly since the August Statement. In contrast, the intra-day trading range 
for bonds has widened at times. Demand for NZGBs at New Zealand Debt Management tenders, 
as measured by bid-cover ratios, has fluctuated around its long-term weighted average of 3 times 
bid-cover since the August Statement, with recent tenders receiving strong demand. 
•	 NZGB yields have moved broadly in line with swap rates over recent months. The difference between 
NZGB yields and swap rates remains at a relatively high level, reflecting increased supply of NZGBs.
New Zealand dollar
Interest rate 
differentials
•	 The difference between interest rates in New Zealand and our advanced trading partner 
economies such as Australia, the United States, and euro area has narrowed since the August 
Statement. For example, the difference between the 2-year NZGB yield and the 2-year Australian 
government bond yield has decreased from around 170 basis points to around 105 basis points 
since the August Statement, as Australian yields increased by more than New Zealand yields.
•	 Declines in New Zealand interest rates relative to key trading partners are often associated with 
a depreciation in the New Zealand dollar. However, overall, the New Zealand dollar is broadly 
unchanged on a trade-weighted basis since the August Statement. 
Risk sentiment
•	 During periods of higher uncertainty or volatility, financial market participants’ willingness to take on 
additional risk decreases, and demand for safe haven currencies, such as the US dollar, increases.
•	 Market risk sentiment deteriorated in October, largely reflecting market concerns about the Israel-
Hamas war. Risk sentiment has since improved, supported by a partial unwind of earlier increases 
in long-term global bond yields. The improvement in risk sentiment is likely to have provided 
upward pressure on the New Zealand dollar. 
Commodity 
prices
•	 Increases in New Zealand’s key export commodity prices tend to be associated with an 
appreciation in the New Zealand dollar, all else equal. 
•	 Prices of key export commodities in New Zealand are broadly unchanged since the August Statement. 


Chapter 5 Domestic financial conditions
37
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
Retail interest rates
Mortgage rates
•	 The mortgage rate curve has become less inverted in recent months. The 1-year mortgage 
rate has increased by around 20 basis points since the August Statement, while 2- to 5-year 
mortgage rates have increased by around 30 to 40 basis points.
•	 The spread between mortgage rates and comparable wholesale rates has increased over the 
past year but remains well below pre-COVID-19 levels. Mortgage rates are likely to increase 
relative to wholesale rates over coming years, as banks’ deposit funding costs increase.
Deposit rates
•	 Term deposit rates have increased since the August Statement. The 6-month rate has increased 
by nearly 30 basis points. Term deposit spreads to wholesale rates have continued to increase 
and are likely to continue towards pre-COVID-19 levels over the coming years, as banks compete 
more aggressively for deposit funding.
•	 Rates on other types of deposits, including bonus saver and transaction accounts, remain very 
low compared to wholesale interest rates, holding down the cost of bank funding.
Bank funding conditions
Funding 
composition
•	 Term deposit volumes have continued to increase since the August Statement. Depositors have 
continued to switch from on-call accounts as the spread between term and on-call deposit rates 
has continued to increase. Term deposit volumes grew by around $5 billion across August and 
September, while on-call account volumes fell by around $4.5 billion. 
•	 Banks remain well funded and have strong liquidity buffers. Lower-cost deposit types such as 
transaction accounts remain a larger share of bank funding compared to pre-COVID-19 averages, 
which has contributed to lower average bank funding costs. Bank core funding ratios remain 
relatively high at 90.3 percent in September.
Credit spreads
•	 The cost of raising long-term wholesale bank funding relative to benchmark wholesale rates has 
been stable since the August Statement. 
•	 Domestic bank credit spreads are marginally higher than at the time of the August Statement.


Chapter 6 Economic projections
38
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
6.	 Economic projections
CHAPTER 
06
Economic 
projections
Abel Tasman. Photo: Lydia Dudson


Chapter 6 Economic projections
39
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
CHAPTER 6
Economic projections
This chapter summarises the baseline economic projections that 
MPC members considered when making their policy assessment. 
The projections were finalised on 23 November 2023 based on 
existing government policies.
These projections rely on a set of key 
assumptions about the global and domestic 
factors influencing the economy. These 
include:
•	 the speed at which labour market and 
wage pressures ease, and the impact of 
these factors on household spending and 
core inflation;
•	 the outlook for net immigration, and 
to what extent high net immigration 
contributes relatively more to aggregate 
demand or labour supply;
•	 the extent to which the net decline 
in house prices since late 2021, on 
balance, contributes to lower residential 
construction activity and household 
consumption;
•	 the extent to which activity and inflation 
in our key trading partners slows over the 
coming year and the consequences for 
domestic financial conditions, demand 
for New Zealand’s goods and services 
exports, and export and import prices;
•	 the extent to which business investment 
weakens as a result of lower export prices 
and declining capacity pressures in the 
economy;
•	 how businesses, consumers, and workers 
respond to ongoing cost pressures and 
high interest rates in New Zealand; and
•	 that government consumption and 
investment evolve in line with the 
macroeconomic and fiscal forecasts in 
the Pre-election Economic and Fiscal 
Update (PREFU) 2023. The specific 
nature of policy changes which may 
be implemented by the incoming 
Government were not known at the time 
these projections were finalised.
Uncertainty around these assumptions is 
high, as there are several large and partially 
offsetting factors influencing the economic 
environment. These factors include: the 
impact of higher interest rates on demand 
and inflation globally; the ongoing impact of 
regional wars; and a return to more normal 
fiscal spending from high levels during 
the COVID-19 pandemic. The change of 
Government may also materially change the 
outlook for fiscal spending, revenue and 
broader economic policy.
While GDP grew by more than expected in 
the June 2023 quarter, employment and 
headline CPI inflation in the September 2023 
quarter declined by more than expected 
in the August Statement. The latest data 
suggest that economic growth has slowed 
in the September 2023 quarter. However, 
the high level of net immigration and the 
recovery in house prices point to capacity 
pressures softening less than expected in 
the August Statement. The output gap is the 
extent that demand outstrips the economy’s 
current ability to supply goods and services 
sustainably. Although lower, the output gap 
is estimated to have remained positive and is 
therefore adding to inflation.


Chapter 6 Economic projections
40
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
The output gap is forecast to remain higher 
over the medium term than forecast in 
the August Statement, but still decline 
substantially as economic growth continues 
to slow. Several factors are expected to 
reduce economic growth: subdued global 
goods demand, higher interest rates and 
their dampening effect on house prices, 
private consumption and investment, as well 
as declining government spending as a share 
of the economy.
This moderation in domestic capacity 
pressure is projected to contribute to lower 
inflation over the medium term. In addition, 
global inflationary pressures are easing, 
which is expected to result in lower imported 
inflation in New Zealand. High interest rates 
in most of New Zealand’s trading partners 
are reducing demand. In addition, a return 
to more normal global supply chains and 
falls in global food and energy commodity 
prices over the past 18 months are reducing 
imported cost pressures. As a result, 
New Zealand’s import prices have fallen in 
recent months, and we expect this trend to 
continue over the medium term.
Core inflation measures and shorter-term 
inflation expectation measures have eased 
over recent quarters but are still high. This is 
consistent with an increase in labour supply 
resulting from the reopened border and 
declining wage inflation. As these factors 
continue to ease and capacity pressures 
decline, non-tradables inflation is expected to 
gradually decrease over the medium term.
Overall, annual consumer price inflation is 
expected to return to its 2 percent target 
midpoint towards the latter half of 2025. 
Given the expected slowing in domestic 
demand, unemployment is likely to rise, and 
employment is expected to fall below its 
maximum sustainable level for a time.
4	
 For more information on the neutral interest rate and our indicator suite see chapter 4.1 in the November 2022 Statement.
Relative to the August Statement, the output 
gap is higher at the starting point and over 
the forecast horizon. This is consistent with 
the more inflationary pressure caused by 
high net immigration and, consequently, 
stronger house prices and more robust 
domestic demand in the economy. Based on 
PREFU 2023, higher government spending 
also adds more to domestic demand. The 
nominal neutral OCR has been revised 
higher, but only increases the OCR projection 
gradually over a number of years. Lower 
forecast export and import prices provide 
only a small offset. Conditional on our central 
economic outlook, the OCR is expected 
to be somewhat higher than in the August 
Statement, in order for the MPC to meet its 
inflation and employment objectives.
The neutral OCR is the rate that, on average 
over time, would neither stimulate nor 
constrain the economy, and be consistent 
with no over- or under-utilisation of resources 
and stable inflation in the economy. Based 
on our neutral OCR indicator suite, we 
have revised our estimate of the long-run 
nominal neutral OCR from 2.25 percent up 
to 2.5 percent from the December 2023 
quarter onwards.4 The increase in our 
neutral indicator suite primarily reflects that 
long-term interest rates have increased 
substantially since the end of 2021. The OCR 
remains contractionary at its current level 
based on this revised assumption. Taken on 
its own, the upward revision to the neutral 
OCR creates gradual upward pressure on the 
OCR over time.


Chapter 6 Economic projections
41
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
Table 6.1 
Key projection assumptions
Key factors
Global factors
•	 Over recent quarters, economic strength has been mixed among New Zealand’s key trading 
partners. Economic growth in the US and Australia has remained resilient despite higher interest 
rates. By contrast, growth in Europe and China has been slower than forecasters’ expectations 
since the start of the year.
•	 Regional wars have had limited effects on commodity markets recently. In particular, economic 
disruptions from Russia’s war against Ukraine have been subsiding. However, potential for wider 
conflict continues to add to global economic uncertainty.
•	 On balance, global economic growth is expected to slow further over coming years, similar 
to what was anticipated in the August Statement. Globally, higher interest rates and the 
normalisation of government spending as a share of GDP from high levels reached during the 
COVID-19 pandemic are expected to further reduce demand. 
•	 Overall, slowing global demand is reducing capacity and inflationary pressures. Consequently, we 
expect that lower global inflation will result in lower imported inflation in New Zealand over time.
•	 Expected global policy interest rates are higher than assumed in the August Statement, 
reflecting more resilience in activity, particularly in the US and Australia. This has narrowed 
the difference in the interest rates between New Zealand and its trading partners, creating 
downward pressure on the TWI. However, the TWI has depreciated only slightly since the August 
Statement.
•	 The TWI is assumed to remain at 70.7 over the projection.
International 
tourism
•	 Services exports, particularly tourism and education, have recovered rapidly since the border 
reopened in 2022. We maintain a strong growth projection for services exports. The FIFA 
Women’s World Cup in July and August 2023 is expected to have added noticeably to exports 
of tourism services in an otherwise seasonally quiet time of the year. Additional spending by 
overseas tourists is contributing to capacity pressures across the transport, accommodation, and 
hospitality sectors.
•	 We assume that tourism exports will have recovered to around 90 percent of their pre-COVID-19 
levels in inflation-adjusted terms over the 2023/24 summer and will surpass pre-COVID-19 levels 
by the end of the projection.


Chapter 6 Economic projections
42
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
Migration and 
house prices
•	 Net immigration since the border reopened has been exceptionally strong and much higher than 
anticipated in previous Statements. 
•	 Robust economic activity during the COVID-19 period with constrained labour supply caused by 
tight border restrictions contributed to strong wage inflation. Since the border reopened, many 
businesses have been able to fill vacant jobs with migrants. This has contributed to easing wage 
pressures. To this extent, high net immigration has been disinflationary.
•	 Immigrants add to the supply of labour but also add to aggregate demand. Immigrants need to 
establish new homes in New Zealand, which increases demand for housing and housing-related 
goods and services. Over recent months the inflationary impacts from high net immigration have 
become more evident.
•	 As the supply of housing is not as flexible as the rapid increase in demand from high net 
immigration, rents for housing and prices for existing houses have increased by more than 
anticipated in previous Statements. 
•	 Monthly REINZ house prices fell around 15 percent in seasonally adjusted terms from their peak in 
November 2021 to March 2023. House prices have since risen 2.4 percent up to October 2023.
•	 High net immigration is a significant contributor to the recent recovery in house prices. However, 
other contributing factors are an increase in the number of residents due to the one-off 2021 
resident visa, strong employment and nominal wage growth, and a relatively low number of 
houses available for sale.
•	 Consequently, we project stronger house price inflation over the medium term than in the 
August Statement. We assume house prices will increase at an annual rate of 4 to 6 percent over 
the forecast.
•	 Although house prices have started to recover, they are forecast to remain significantly below 
their previous peak for the next two years. This lower level of house prices is expected to flow 
through to less household spending over the projection, as aggregate household wealth has 
fallen substantially since its peak in late 2021. However, this effect is much weaker than in the 
August Statement, due to the higher outlook for house prices.
Economic growth
Production
•	 We assume that production GDP grew by 0.3 percent in the September 2023 quarter. However, 
private consumption and investment are expected to decline. The continued strong recovery in 
services exports, lower imports and increasing government investment are factors supporting 
GDP growth. The stock of produced goods (inventories) is also expected to fall by less than in 
the previous quarter.
•	 Stronger-than-expected GDP in the June 2023 quarter and the stronger demand impulse from 
high net immigration have translated into a higher estimate of capacity pressures at the start of 
the forecast than assumed in the August Statement. We estimate that the output gap peaked at 
3.6 percent of potential GDP in the September 2022 quarter and has reduced to 0.8 percent of 
potential GDP in the September 2023 quarter.
•	 In these projections, we expect close to zero quarterly GDP growth in the December 2023 and 
March 2024 quarters, as global growth slows and high interest rates dampen domestic demand. 
However, quarterly changes in GDP are highly uncertain. For the March 2024 year, annual GDP 
growth is projected to slow to 1.2 percent.
•	 Over the medium term, the productive capacity of the economy is expected to grow, increasing 
economic activity. In large part, this is supported by strong population growth through net 
immigration that adds to labour supply.
•	 We expect the output gap to close and become negative from late 2023, with actual production 
below the economy’s potential. An extended period of below-trend growth is expected to be 
necessary to see our employment and inflation objectives met sustainably over the medium term.


Chapter 6 Economic projections
43
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
Consumption
•	 Consumption remained more robust and broad-based in the June 2023 quarter than expected 
in the August Statement. However, recent card spending data suggest a decline in consumption 
in the September 2023 quarter. 
•	 Consumption is expected to decline further in the December 2023 quarter and to grow only 
slightly in early 2024, as households with mortgages move onto higher interest rates and the 
effect of lower house prices continues to pass through to lower spending. In addition, the 
labour market is expected to weaken further, and wage inflation is expected to fall, reducing 
aggregate labour income. However, high net immigration is expected to provide some support 
for aggregate consumption and house prices. Consumption on a per capita basis is expected to 
decline by around 3 percent from the March 2023 to the March 2024 quarter.
•	 Consumption is expected to gradually recover from mid-2024, supported by lower interest rates 
later in the projection and increasing house prices.
Investment
•	 Significant pressure on available resources has supported high levels of business investment 
over the last few years.
•	 Business investment is expected to decline over coming quarters, due to high interest rates, 
declining export prices and easing capacity pressures. The global economic slowdown and 
regional wars are also likely to reduce business investment further by adding to uncertainty 
about future global demand.
•	 Residential investment has fallen only slightly in recent quarters despite a rapid fall in the number 
of dwelling consents. This may be due to the long pipeline of work still to be worked through. 
Our projected decline in residential investment is consistent with current high mortgage interest 
rates, high construction costs, and lower house prices relative to their peak in November 2021. 
•	 The impact from high net immigration on housing demand and house prices is expected to result 
in a smaller decline in residential investment over the medium term than assumed in the August 
Statement. We project the share of residential investment to potential GDP to return to around 
pre-COVID-19 levels by the end of the forecast.
Government
•	 We assume that government consumption and investment evolve in line with the 
macroeconomic and fiscal forecasts in PREFU 2023.
•	 Government investment, particularly in infrastructure, is projected to increase considerably as 
rebuild and repair work associated with the severe weather events in the North Island in early 
2023 continues. Government investment is forecast to be significantly higher over the later part 
of the forecast horizon than assumed in the August Statement. 
•	 Over the medium term, real government consumption and investment as a share of potential 
GDP is expected to continue to decline gradually from high levels during the height of the 
COVID-19 pandemic. Overall, this means that government spending will be adding less to 
inflationary pressures over the forecast than it has in recent years, albeit more than assumed in 
the August Statement.
•	 The projections for government consumption, government investment, and the impact of taxation 
on spending by private households and businesses may change as a result of new policies. 
Exports and 
imports
•	 Overall, prices of New Zealand’s commodity exports have been declining since early 2022, in 
particular for dairy, meat and forestry products. The global economic slowdown has reduced 
demand for our goods exports, and this is expected to persist into 2024. 
•	 Goods export volumes are expected to remain around current levels in the near term before 
gradually increasing over the medium term, as global economic growth recovers from early 2024.
•	 International travel is recovering broadly as expected. By the end of the projection, services 
exports are assumed to have surpassed pre-COVID-19 levels.
•	 Non-oil import prices increased strongly over 2021 and 2022. However, recent GDP data and 
other indicators suggest that non-oil import prices fell over the first half of 2023 by more than 
anticipated in the August Statement. This is in line with declining global goods demand and 
falling shipping costs. We assume this lower price level will persist and that non-oil import prices 
will decline only slightly further over the medium term.
•	 Oil prices are at lower levels than assumed in the August Statement. Concerns around oil supply 
caused by ongoing regional wars have been contained, and the expectation of further subdued 
global economic growth has dampened prices. In line with futures pricing, the price for Dubai oil is 
assumed to decline from around US$82 currently to around US$77 by the end of the projection.


Chapter 6 Economic projections
44
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
Labour market
Employment and 
wages 
•	 The New Zealand labour market has been easing. The unemployment rate increased from 3.6 to 
3.9 percent and employment fell in the September 2023 quarter. The labour force continued to 
grow in the September 2023 quarter but by much less than the working-age population. Overall, 
our suite of labour market indicators provides consistent evidence that labour market pressures 
have been easing relative to last year. Still, employment remains above its maximum sustainable 
level.
•	 Over coming quarters, employment growth is expected to remain low in line with slowing 
economic activity. Employment may fall below its maximum sustainable level for a time. The 
slowing in economic growth, together with gradual growth in the labour force, is expected to 
further relieve labour market pressures. The unemployment rate is assumed to increase to 
around 5.2 percent in the first half of 2025, in line with the declining output gap.
•	 Strong net immigration has been alleviating labour shortages. The number of job vacancies 
has been falling as immigrants fill existing job vacancies and high interest rates reduce new 
labour demand. These factors have better balanced labour supply and demand. This reduces 
inflationary pressures, at least in the near term, without a rapid increase in unemployment. In line 
with this, annual same-job wage inflation decreased from 4.3 to 4.1 percent in the September 
2023 quarter, as expected in the August Statement. To this extent, high net immigration has 
been disinflationary. However, over recent months net immigration has added to demand more 
substantially – in particular for housing.
•	 On balance, we expect same-job wage inflation to decline gradually over the medium term, as 
labour market pressures continue to ease. However, wage inflation is assumed to stay above 
pre-COVID-19 levels as nominal same-job wages catch up to some extent with lost purchasing 
power because of high consumer price inflation in recent years.
Inflation
Headline
•	 Annual headline CPI inflation has continued to decline from its peak and is projected to 
decrease to 5.0 percent in the December 2023 quarter.
•	 Annual headline CPI inflation is projected to return to within the 1 to 3 percent target band in the 
second half of 2024, reaching the 2 percent target midpoint towards the latter half of 2025.
Tradables
•	 Annual tradables inflation has continued to decline from its peak and is projected to decrease 
over the forecast horizon, as global inflationary pressures ease further. Petrol prices and non-
oil import prices are forecast to gradually decline over the forecast, contributing to the fall in 
tradables inflation. 
Non-tradables
•	 Annual non-tradables inflation is assumed to have peaked but is still supported by ongoing 
domestic capacity pressures and strong wage growth.
•	 Starting-point capacity pressures are assessed to be higher than assumed in the August 
Statement. However, high interest rates are expected to reduce domestic demand. At the same 
time, the productive capacity of the economy is expected to increase, mainly because of high 
net immigration. On balance, non-tradables inflation is assumed to decrease only slowly, as 
capacity pressures ease and core inflation and inflation expectations decline.


Chapter 6 Economic projections
45
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
Figure 6.3
Unemployment rate
(unemployed people as a share of the labour force, 
seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Charts
Figure 6.1
Inflation components
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Dotted lines show the projections from the August Statement. The 
shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI 
inflation over the medium term.
Figure 6.2
Private sector LCI wage inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.4
House price growth
(annual)
Source: CoreLogic, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.5
Production GDP
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.6
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 6 Economic projections
46
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
Figure 6.9
Business investment
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.7
Private consumption
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.8
Residential investment
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.10
Government consumption
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.11
Total exports
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.12
Total imports
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 6 Economic projections
47
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
7.	 Appendices
CHAPTER 
07
Appendices
Makara. Photo: Brandon Kengmana


Chapter 7 Appendices
48
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
CHAPTER 7
Appendices
Appendix 1: 
Statistical tables
Table 7.1
Key forecast variables
GDP growth 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Annual
Unemployment 
rate
TWI
OCR
2021
Mar
2.3
0.8
1.5
4.6
74.9
0.3
 
Jun
1.7
1.3
3.3
4.0
74.7
0.3
 
Sep
-4.1
2.2
4.9
3.3
74.4
0.3
 
Dec
3.6
1.4
5.9
3.2
74.3
0.6
2022
Mar
0.1
1.8
6.9
3.2
72.6
0.9
 
Jun
1.3
1.7
7.3
3.3
72.1
1.6
 
Sep
1.5
2.2
7.2
3.2
70.6
2.7
 
Dec
-0.5
1.4
7.2
3.4
70.8
3.8
2023
Mar
0.0
1.2
6.7
3.4
71.3
4.5
Jun
0.9
1.1
6.0
3.6
71.0
5.3
Sep
0.3
1.8
5.6
3.9
70.6
5.5
Dec
0.0
0.8
5.0
4.2
70.4
5.6
2024
Mar
0.1
0.6
4.3
4.6
70.7
5.6
Jun
0.5
0.5
3.7
4.9
70.7
5.7
Sep
0.5
1.0
2.9
5.0
70.7
5.7
Dec
0.5
0.4
2.5
5.1
70.7
5.7
2025
Mar
0.6
0.5
2.4
5.1
70.7
5.6
Jun
0.7
0.3
2.2
5.2
70.7
5.4
Sep
0.8
0.8
2.0
5.1
70.7
5.2
Dec
0.9
0.4
2.0
5.0
70.7
4.9
2026
Mar
0.8
0.5
2.0
4.9
70.7
4.6
Jun
0.7
0.3
2.0
4.9
70.7
4.3
Sep
0.7
0.8
2.0
4.8
70.7
3.9
Dec
0.8
0.4
2.0
4.8
70.7
3.6


Chapter 7 Appendices
49
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
Table 7.2
Measures of inflation, inflation expectations, and asset prices
2022
2023
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Inflation (annual rates)
CPI
6.9
7.3
7.2
7.2
6.7
6.0
5.6
CPI non-tradables
6.0
6.3
6.6
6.6
6.8
6.6
6.3
CPI tradables
8.5
8.7
8.1
8.2
6.4
5.2
4.7
Sectoral factor model
estimate of core inflation
4.7
5.1
5.5
5.7
5.7
5.7
5.2
CPI trimmed mean
(30% measure)
5.2
5.8
6.4
6.1
6.1
6.0
5.5
CPI weighted median
3.9
4.8
5.0
5.0
5.6
6.6
5.0
GDP deflator (expenditure)
6.2
6.0
4.6
5.0
5.6
6.2
Inflation expectations
ANZ Business Outlook – inflation 
1 year ahead (quarterly average to date)
5.4
6.0
6.1
6.3
5.9
5.5
5.1
4.9
RBNZ Survey of Expectations – 
inflation 2 years ahead
3.3
3.3
3.1
3.6
3.3
2.8
2.8
2.8
RBNZ Survey of Expectations – 
inflation 5 years ahead
2.3
2.4
2.3
2.4
2.4
2.4
2.3
2.4
RBNZ Survey of Expectations – 
inflation 10 years ahead
2.1
2.1
2.1
2.2
2.2
2.3
2.2
2.3
Asset prices (annual percent changes)
Quarterly house price index 
(CoreLogic NZ)
13.8
5.3
-4.2
-11.2
-12.1
-9.1
REINZ Farm Price Index (quarterly 
average to date)
29.4
28.1
12.2
5.0
-3.2
-5.7
-11.8
NZX 50 (quarterly average to date)
-3.9
-9.0
-11.3
-12.8
-3.5
3.8
1.9
-1.5


Chapter 7 Appendices
50
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
Table 7.3
Measures of labour market conditions	
(seasonally adjusted, changes expressed in annual percent terms, unless specified otherwise)	
2022
2023
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Household Labour Force Survey
Unemployment rate
3.2
3.3
3.2
3.4
3.4
3.6
3.9
Underutilisation rate
9.4
9.3
8.9
9.4
9.1
9.9
10.4
Labour force participation rate
70.9
70.9
71.6
71.8
72.1
72.4
72.0
Employment rate (% of working-age 
population)
68.6
68.6
69.3
69.4
69.6
69.8
69.1
Employment growth
2.5
1.3
1.2
1.7
2.9
4.1
2.4
Average weekly hours worked
33.3
33.7
33.8
34.0
33.6
33.4
33.5
Number unemployed
(thousand people)
95
97
95
100
103
110
118
Number employed (million people)
2.82
2.81
2.85
2.87
2.90
2.93
2.92
Labour force (million people)
2.91
2.91
2.95
2.97
3.00
3.04
3.04
Extended labour force
(million people)
3.00
2.99
3.02
3.05
3.09
3.13
3.13
Working-age population
(million people, age 15 years+)
4.10
4.10
4.11
4.13
4.16
4.19
4.22
Quarterly Employment Survey – QES
Filled jobs growth
4.2
1.5
1.5
1.3
2.2
6.5
6.2
Average hourly earnings growth 
(private sector, ordinary time)
5.4
7.0
8.6
8.1
8.2
7.7
7.1
Other data sources
Labour cost index growth,
private sector, adjusted
3.1
3.4
3.9
4.3
4.5
4.3
4.1
Labour cost index growth,
private sector, unadjusted
5.0
5.2
5.6
6.1
6.1
6.1
5.7
Estimated net working-age 
immigration (thousands, quarterly)
-7.1
-3.2
7.7
19.1
25.3
37.5
18.7
Change in All Vacancies Index
21.0
3.5
8.8
-3.3
-15.6
-22.0
-26.5
Note: The All Vacancies Index is produced by MBIE as part of the monthly Jobs Online report, which shows changes in job vacancies advertised by businesses on 
internet job boards. The unadjusted labour cost index (LCI) is an analytical index that reflects quality change in addition to price change (whereas the official LCI 
measures price changes only). For definitions of underutilisation, the extended labour force, and related concepts, see Statistics New Zealand (2016) ‘Introducing 
underutilisation in the labour market’. Estimated net working-age immigration is the Stats NZ outcomes-based measure.


Chapter 7 Appendices
51
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
Table 7.4
Composition of real GDP growth
(annual average percent change, seasonally adjusted, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
Final consumption expenditure
Private
4.2
6.4
4.8
4.5
2.4
-0.2
6.1
2.6
0.9
1.3
2.7
Public authority
2.1
2.1
3.9
3.4
5.5
7.6
8.1
1.9
-0.9
-2.0
0.3
Total
3.7
5.4
4.6
4.3
3.1
1.6
6.6
2.4
0.4
0.5
2.2
Gross fixed capital formation
Residential
7.1
8.8
-1.8
-0.1
2.7
2.1
2.6
2.6
-6.3
-8.5
4.3
Other
2.2
0.0
10.1
7.2
2.8
-2.8
13.0
3.8
1.6
-2.1
4.0
Total
3.4
2.3
6.8
5.3
2.8
-1.6
10.4
3.5
-0.2
-3.5
4.1
Final domestic 
expenditure
3.6
4.7
5.1
4.5
3.0
0.8
7.4
2.7
0.3
-0.5
2.6
Stockbuilding*
-0.3
0.1
0.2
-0.2
-0.2
-0.3
0.6
-0.2
-1.1
1.0
0.0
Gross national 
expenditure
3.2
4.8
5.6
4.3
2.7
-0.4
8.7
2.7
-0.6
0.4
2.6
Exports of goods and 
services
7.0
2.0
3.8
3.3
0.2
-17.9
2.4
6.1
6.3
6.1
5.8
Imports of goods and 
services
3.1
5.1
7.8
4.8
1.3
-15.9
17.2
4.7
-1.3
2.2
4.6
Expenditure on GDP
4.3
3.9
4.3
3.9
2.5
0.0
4.8
2.9
1.2
1.3
2.8
GDP (production)
3.8
3.7
3.5
3.5
2.5
-0.7
5.2
2.9
1.2
1.4
2.8
GDP (production, 
March qtr to March qtr)
4.0
3.3
3.6
3.5
1.0
4.2
1.1
2.2
1.2
2.1
3.3
* Percentage point contribution to the growth rate of GDP.


Chapter 7 Appendices
52
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
Table 7.5
Summary of economic projections
(annual percent change, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
Price measures
CPI 
0.4
2.2
1.1
1.5
2.5
1.5
6.9
6.7
4.3
2.4
2.0
Labour costs
1.8
1.5
1.9
2.0
2.4
1.6
3.1
4.5
3.6
3.5
3.4
Export prices
(in New Zealand dollars) 
0.7
4.1
3.2
1.1
6.8
-6.0
20.9
1.1
-3.6
3.3
3.8
Import prices
(in New Zealand dollars) 
0.5
1.2
1.6
4.1
2.4
-2.4
18.9
7.0
-2.4
-0.5
-0.4
Monetary conditions
OCR (year average)
2.9
2.0
1.8
1.8
1.2
0.3
0.5
3.1
5.5
5.6
5.1
TWI (year average)
72.6
76.5
75.6
73.4
71.7
72.4
74.0
71.2
70.7
70.7
70.7
Output
GDP (production, annual 
average % change)
3.8
3.7
3.5
3.5
2.5
-0.7
5.2
2.9
1.2
1.4
2.8
Potential output (annual 
average % change)
3.2
3.3
3.3
3.2
2.9
-0.3
2.9
2.7
3.3
3.0
2.8
Output gap (% of potential 
GDP, year average)
-0.2
0.3
0.5
0.8
0.3
-0.1
2.2
2.5
0.3
-1.3
-1.2
Labour market
Total employment 
(seasonally adjusted)
2.3
5.9
2.9
1.5
2.6
0.1
2.5
2.9
1.0
1.2
2.1
Unemployment rate 
(March qtr, seasonally 
adjusted)
5.3
4.9
4.4
4.2
4.2
4.6
3.2
3.4
4.6
5.1
4.9
Trend labour productivity 
0.7
0.6
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.8
0.7
0.5
0.4
0.5
0.7
Key balances
Government operating 
balance* (% of GDP, 
year to June)
0.7
1.5
1.9
2.4
-7.3
-1.3
-2.6
-2.4
-3.0
-1.5
-0.2
Current account balance 
(% of GDP)
-2.4
-2.5
-3.1
-3.8
-2.3
-2.5
-6.4
-8.1
-6.6
-5.9
-4.5
Terms of trade
(SNA measure, annual 
average % change)
-2.6
2.1
4.4
-2.1
2.0
-1.0
0.4
-4.8
-1.4
0.2
4.9
Household saving rate 
(% of disposable income)
-1.8
-1.8
-2.0
-1.3
1.4
7.6
2.7
1.7
0.8
-0.2
0.2
World economy
Trading-partner GDP 
(annual average % change)
3.4
3.5
4.0
3.5
1.8
-0.4
6.0
2.7
2.9
2.6
2.9
Trading-partner CPI 
(TWI-weighted)
1.2
1.9
1.9
1.4
2.4
0.8
4.0
4.8
2.6
2.2
2.1
* Government operating balance is a model-based estimate of OBEGAL divided by nominal GDP in the projection. The estimate is partial because it relies 
on projections for some components from the Pre-Election Economic and Fiscal Update 2023.


Chapter 7 Appendices
53
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
Appendix 2: Chart pack
Figure 7.1
Composition of CPI inflation
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 7.2
Output gap and output gap indicators
(share of potential)
Source: NZIER, MBIE, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The output gap indicators based on information about the labour market 
are shown separately from the other indicators. For each group of indicators, the 
shaded area shows the range of values and the line shows the mean value.
Figure 7.3
Unemployment and underutilisation rates
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 7.4
OCR and nominal neutral OCR indicator suite
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area indicates the range between the maximum and minimum 
values from our suite of long-run nominal neutral OCR indicators. See chapter 4.1 
of the November 2022 Statement for more information.
Figure 7.5
GDP and potential GDP
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 7.6
Measures of core inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Core inflation measures exclude the GST increase in 2010. The shaded 
area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI inflation 
over the medium term.


Chapter 7 Appendices
54
Monetary Policy Statement  November 2023
Figure 7.7
Inflation expectations
(annual, years ahead) 
Source: RBNZ Survey of Expectations (Business).
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for 
annual CPI inflation over the medium term.
Figure 7.9
House price inflation
(annual, nominal) 
Source: REINZ.
Source: Stats NZ, Global Dairy Trade, Refinitiv, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 7.12
Terms of trade, dairy and oil price indices
(index=100 in Q3 2008)
Figure 7.10
Mortgage interest rates
Source: interest.co.nz, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The rates shown for the fixed terms are the average of the advertised 
rates from ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac, shown as weekly data. The floating 
rate represents the monthly yield on floating housing debt from the RBNZ 
Income Statement survey.
Figure 7.8
Private sector wage growth
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Private sector wage growth is measured by the labour cost index, all 
salary and wage rates, private sector. Real labour cost index is deflated with 
headline CPI inflation.
Figure 7.11
New Zealand dollar exchange rates
(quarterly average) 
Source: NZFMA, RBNZ.
