BANK: RBNZ
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: Monetary Policy Statement August 2023
DATE: 15/08/2023
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/monetary-policy-statements/2023/august/mpsaug23.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

08/2023
Monetary Policy
STATEMENT


ii
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Figure i.1
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
POLICY ASSESSMENT
Official Cash Rate remains at 5.50%
The Monetary Policy Committee 
today agreed to maintain the Official 
Cash Rate (OCR) at 5.50%. 
The current level of interest rates is constraining 
spending and hence inflation pressure, as anticipated 
and required. The Committee agreed that the OCR 
needs to stay at restrictive levels for the foreseeable 
future to ensure annual consumer price inflation 
returns to the 1 to 3% target range, while supporting 
maximum sustainable employment.
The New Zealand economy is evolving broadly 
as anticipated. Activity continues to slow in 
parts of the economy that are more sensitive to 
interest rates. Labour shortages are easing as 
overall demand softens and immigration adds to 
labour resources. Headline inflation and inflation 
expectations have declined, but measures of core 
inflation remain too high.
Globally, economic growth remains below trend 
and headline inflation has eased for most of our 
trading partners. Core inflation remains high in 
many countries. Weakening global economic 
growth is putting downward pressure on New 
Zealand export prices. 
The imbalance between demand and supply 
is moderating in the New Zealand economy. 
However, a prolonged period of subdued 
spending growth is still required to better match 
the supply capacity of the economy and reduce 
inflation pressure. 
In the near term, there is a risk that activity and 
inflation measures do not slow as much as 
expected. Over the medium term, a greater 
slowdown in global economic demand, particularly 
in China, could weigh more on commodity prices 
and overall New Zealand export revenue.  
The Committee is confident that with interest 
rates remaining at a restrictive level for some time, 
consumer price inflation will return to within its 
target range of 1 to 3% per annum, while supporting 
maximum sustainable employment.
Meitaki, thanks.
Adrian Orr 
Governor 


REPORT AND SUPPORTING NOTES PUBLISHED AT:
www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/monetary-policy-statement
Subscribe online: www.rbnz.govt.nz/email-updates
Copyright © 2023 Reserve Bank of New Zealand
This report is published pursuant to section 129 
of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 2021. 
ISSN 1770-4829
rbnz.govt.nz
Cover image: Milford Sound. Photo: Lucas Chen
Thank you to RBNZ staff for photography in this report.
Monetary Policy Framework
The Monetary Policy Committee operates and makes 
decisions under the monetary policy framework that 
comprises the following key components:
•	 the Remit;
•	 the Charter;
•	 the Code of Conduct; and
•	 the monetary policy strategy.
The corresponding documents to these components and 
additional information can be accessed on our website 
under the monetary policy framework.


The projections were finalised on 10 August 2023. The official cash rate (OCR) 
projection incorporates an outlook for monetary policy that is consistent with the 
MPC’s monetary policy assessment, which was finalised on 16 August 2023. 
08/2023
Monetary Policy
STATEMENT
Contents
Policy assessment	
ii
1.	 Summary record of meeting	
2
2.	 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook	
6
3.	 Global developments and outlook	
22
4.	 Special topics	
28
	
4.1		
The inflationary impact of recent migration	
30
	
4.2	 Factors contributing to New Zealand’s current 	
	
	
	
	
account deficit and outlook	
35
5.	 Domestic financial conditions	
39
6.	 Economic projections	
45
7.	 Appendices	
54
	
Appendix 1: Statistical tables	
55
	
Appendix 2: Chart pack	
60


Chapter 1 Policy assessment
2
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
1.	 Summary record of meeting
Kepler Track. Photo: Nele McHattie
Summary  
record of 
meeting
CHAPTER 
01


Chapter 1 Policy assessment
3
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
CHAPTER 1 
Summary record of meeting 
The Monetary Policy 
Committee discussed  
recent developments in the  
New Zealand economy. 
The Committee agreed that 
monetary conditions are 
restricting spending and 
reducing inflationary pressure 
as anticipated. While supply 
constraints in the economy 
continue to ease, inflation 
remains too high. Spending 
needs to remain subdued to 
better match the economy’s 
ability to supply goods and 
services, so that consumer 
price inflation returns to its 
target range. 
Global economic growth remains below 
trend for most of our trading partners. 
While global growth was resilient across 
the first half of the year this is beginning 
to fade, particularly in China. Globally, 
headline inflation has declined but core 
inflation remains high in many countries. The 
Committee noted that regional divergences 
in the moderation of core inflation are 
beginning to emerge.
New Zealand’s export volumes over the last 
quarter were more resilient than expected 
due to favourable agricultural growing 
conditions in some regions. However, export 
revenues are expected to ease, in line with 
weakening global demand. A decline in 
global commodity prices has seen prices for 
New Zealand’s exports moderate.
The Committee noted that tight monetary 
conditions continue to constrain domestic 
spending. The slowdown in economic activity 
is most notable in the parts of the economy 
that are more sensitive to interest rates. 
The Committee judged that with monetary 
conditions remaining restrictive, they expect 
to see further declines in consumption per 
capita and for GDP growth to be subdued 
over coming quarters.
Annual CPI inflation declined to 6.0% in 
the June quarter, with tradables inflation 
declining more than non-tradables inflation. 
Most measures of inflation expectations 
have declined alongside the fall in headline 
inflation. However, measures of core inflation 
remain near their recent highs. 
The Committee discussed the labour market 
and agreed that capacity pressures have 
begun to ease. Recent net immigration has 
increased labour supply, helping to alleviate 
some labour market shortages. Employment 
growth remains resilient. The Committee 
noted that most measures of annual wage 
inflation have begun to ease. 
The Committee noted that the estimate of 
the nominal neutral OCR has increased by 25 
basis points to 2.25% within the projections, 
consistent with the Reserve Bank’s indicator 
suite. The Committee agreed that the current 
level of the OCR remains contractionary and is 
constraining domestic spending as needed.
The Committee discussed the increase in the 
current account deficit and noted that this 
is primarily due to reduced services exports 
stemming from the COVID-19 pandemic 
as well as excess domestic demand. The 
current account deficit is expected to steadily 
narrow. Members noted that net foreign 
liabilities have declined over recent years 
and that risks associated with funding the 
deficit were low, as most foreign debt is 
hedged against foreign exchange risk.


Chapter 1 Policy assessment
4
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
The Committee discussed the recent strong 
growth in net immigration. The overall 
impact on demand and inflation pressure 
remains uncertain. Members noted that the 
current increase in net immigration may be 
less inflationary than previous increases, 
due to both changes to the composition 
of migrants and in the context of a tight 
domestic labour market. 
The Committee noted that house prices 
appear to have stabilised. Members agreed 
that the current projection for house prices 
was reasonably balanced, remaining 
around estimates of sustainable levels. The 
Committee agreed that house price changes 
have an impact on household wealth. 
However, members agreed the willingness 
to consume out of wealth can vary and may 
be lower in the current context of high debt 
servicing costs.
The Committee discussed the balance of 
risks for inflation, output, and employment. 
Members noted that current projections are 
for subdued GDP growth, rather than a sharp 
downturn. 
In discussing near-term risks, members 
considered upside risks to activity and 
inflation. Members discussed the impact 
of recent administered price increases – 
for example, council rates and excise tax 
– on headline inflation for the September 
quarter and noted that this could pose a 
risk to inflation expectations. Members also 
discussed risks around a slower easing in 
the labour market resulting in wage inflation 
taking longer to decline. 
The Committee noted that the projections 
for government expenditure and revenue 
are predicated on Budget 2023 forecasts. 
Overall, real government consumption and 
investment spending as a share of potential 
GDP is projected to decline over the 
forecast horizon.
Over the medium term, the Committee 
discussed risks around the outlook for 
global growth and judged that these 
were skewed to the downside. A greater 
slowdown in global growth would likely see 
a fall in import prices. Members noted that 
weaker global demand, particularly from 
China, could weigh further on commodity 
prices and therefore on export revenues.
Members also discussed the risks around 
the lagged effect of previous monetary 
tightening on households and businesses. 
The average mortgage rate on outstanding 
loans is expected to rise from around 
5% to near 6% by early 2024, and debt 
servicing costs as a share of income are still 
increasing. 
Members discussed the risk to those parts 
of the economy most exposed to lower 
commodity or asset prices. The Committee 
agreed that the slowdown in economic 
activity will not be even across sectors of the 
economy, due to global factors and the varied 
impact of high domestic interest rates. In 
particular, the Committee noted that pockets 
of stress were beginning to emerge for some 
households, and the commercial property, 
agriculture, and construction sectors.
The Committee agreed that in the current 
circumstances, there is no material trade-off 
between meeting the Committee’s inflation 
and employment objectives and maintaining 
the stability of the financial system. Members 
noted that debt levels are high in some parts 
of the economy and debt servicing costs 
have increased. While broad indicators of 
stress have increased, non-performing loans 
remain at low levels. 
In discussing their Remit objectives, the 
Committee noted inflation is still expected 
to decline within the target band by the 
second half of 2024. The Committee agreed 
that the risks around the inflation projection 
remain balanced. Employment is above 
its maximum sustainable level, however, 
recent indicators show that labour market 
pressures continue to ease.
The Monetary Policy Committee discussed 
the appropriate stance of monetary policy. 
The Committee agreed that interest rates 
still need to remain at a restrictive level for 
the foreseeable future, to ensure annual 
consumer price inflation returns to the 1 to 
3% target range while supporting maximum 
sustainable employment.


Chapter 1 Policy assessment
5
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
On Wednesday 16 August the Committee 
reached a consensus to maintain the Official 
Cash Rate at 5.50%.
Attendees:
Reserve Bank members  
of MPC: 
Adrian Orr, Karen Silk, 
Christian Hawkesby, 
Paul Conway
External MPC members: 
Bob Buckle, Peter Harris, 
Caroline Saunders
Treasury Observer: 
Dominick Stephens
MPC Secretary: 
Kate Poskitt


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
6
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
2.	 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
Whakarewarewa. Photo: Lydia Dudson
CHAPTER 
02
Current 
economic 
assessment 
and monetary 
policy outlook


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
7
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
CHAPTER 2
Current economic assessment 
and monetary policy outlook
Key points
•	 The New Zealand economy contracted 
slightly in the first quarter of 2023, 
with Gross Domestic Product (GDP) 
weaker than expected at the time of the 
May Statement. This was the second 
consecutive quarterly decline in output. 
As this reflects a reduction in demand 
relative to the economy’s ability to supply 
goods and services sustainably, it means 
that inflationary pressure decreased. 
Recent indicators suggest that activity in 
most sectors has plateaued, consistent 
with our outlook for low growth in overall 
economic activity over the coming year. 
•	 The slowdown in demand has broadened 
across a variety of interest-rate-sensitive 
parts of the economy. Business service 
activity started to fall from early 2023. 
Although house prices stabilised over the 
June 2023 quarter, they are substantially 
below their peak in late 2021. The lower 
level of activity in the housing market has 
been associated with lower spending 
on housing-related goods and services 
over recent quarters. However, this is 
somewhat offset by the earlier-than-
expected stabilisation in house prices, 
which is assumed to support household 
consumption over the next three years. 
•	 Less interest-rate-sensitive factors 
continue to add to demand. These 
factors include high net immigration and 
a continuing rebound in international 
tourism. Government spending levels 
continue to support demand, but to a 
lesser extent than over the COVID-19 
pandemic. 
•	 However, global goods demand has been 
slowing, and export revenues continue 
to moderate. This moderation reflects 
ongoing falls in global commodity prices, 
such as those for dairy and meat. Slowing 
global growth, particularly slower than 
expected growth in China, is expected to 
restrain overall export demand and prices 
over the coming three years.
•	 Financial market volatility has declined 
from elevated levels as previous 
banking stress in the United States and 
Europe have subsided, and as the US 
government debt ceiling has been lifted. 
Lower market volatility has helped offset 
the downward influence of other factors 
on the New Zealand dollar, including 
rising offshore interest rates relative to 
those in New Zealand and declining 
global commodity export prices. The 
New Zealand dollar is slightly lower than 
at the time of the May Statement.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
8
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
•	 Global supply-chain bottlenecks 
have continued to ease. Surveyed 
manufacturing prices are declining in 
key markets such as the US and China, 
and international shipping costs to 
New Zealand have continued to fall in 
recent months. Domestically, ongoing 
high levels of net immigration have 
helped to ease some labour shortages. 
However, higher net immigration also 
supports demand – including for housing. 
The net impact on inflationary pressure 
is uncertain and may vary across time 
horizons. High net immigration, in times 
of acute labour shortages, may be less 
inflationary than in the period before the 
COVID-19 pandemic. 
•	 Overall, inflation remains too high, and 
well above the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target 
band. In total, inflationary pressures in 
the economy have continued to ease 
due to weaker demand and improved 
supply, to a similar degree as expected in 
the May Statement. As headline inflation 
has eased, most measures of inflation 
expectations have fallen from recent 
highs. Recent declines in annual headline 
inflation have been accounted for by 
faster-than-expected falls in tradables 
inflation, particularly transport-related 
prices such as oil prices and international 
airfares. But domestically-generated 
inflation has been marginally higher than 
expected in the May Statement, reflecting 
persistence in services inflation as 
consumer spending has shifted back from 
goods to services over the past year. Most 
measures of core inflation have remained 
near recent highs. 
•	 Inflationary pressure continues to be 
underpinned by a tight labour market, 
with employment remaining above its 
maximum sustainable level. However, 
according to a range of indicators, labour 
market pressures have eased since last 
year. For example, the unemployment 
rate was 3.6 percent in the June 2023 
quarter, up from the previous quarter and 
the record lows seen in late 2021 and 
early 2022. The underutilisation rate – a 
wider measure of slack in the labour 
market – also increased from recent 
lows. Although participation in the labour 
market increased to record highs in the 
June 2023 quarter, robust employment 
growth was mainly driven by a high 
number of immigrants filling job vacancies. 
Excess labour demand is declining, with 
the number of online job ads being well 
below its recent peak. Consequently, 
private sector wage inflation appears to 
have peaked and has started to ease.
•	 High interest rates are still required to 
further lower spending relative to the 
economy’s ability to supply goods and 
services sustainably. Lower demand 
relative to supply will reduce inflationary 
pressure over the medium term. An 
extended period of low economic 
growth is expected over the coming 
year. However, volatility in quarterly GDP 
growth may be high as post-border-
reopening effects continue to be seen 
in economic data. The level of GDP is 
assumed to remain relatively steady over 
2023, similar to what was expected in the 
May Statement.
•	 Conditional on our central economic 
outlook, it is expected that the OCR will 
need to remain near its current level for 
slightly longer than assumed in the May 
Statement for the MPC to meet its inflation 
and employment objectives. Relative to 
the May Statement, stronger supply-led 
export volumes in the near term, an earlier 
stabilisation in house prices, and a slight 
upward revision to the nominal neutral 
OCR are partially offset by lower overall 
domestic activity at the start of 2023 and 
lower import and export prices.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
9
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Current economic assessment 
1 	
GDP can be calculated through different approaches. “The production approach to GDP measures the total value of goods and services 
produced in New Zealand, after deducting the cost of goods and services used in the production process. This is also known as the value-
added approach. The expenditure approach to GDP (also known as gross domestic expenditure or GDE) measures the final purchases 
of goods and services produced in New Zealand. Exports are added to domestic consumption, as they represent goods and services 
produced in New Zealand. Imports are subtracted, as they represent goods and services produced by other economies.” See Stats NZ – 
Gross domestic product.
Demand has eased further but 
continues to exceed supply
Economic activity in New Zealand, as 
measured by the production approach to 
GDP, fell by 0.1 percent in the March 2023 
quarter.1 This was lower than expected in 
the May Statement. Weaker-than-expected 
output reflected broad-based slowing across 
most industries, led by declining activity in the 
services sector (services GDP line, figure 2.1). 
On the expenditure GDP side, much of the 
weakness was accounted for by a rundown 
in inventories. This likely reflects the fact that 
businesses have experienced lower demand 
and expect that demand will remain subdued 
over coming quarters, meaning that they have 
chosen to meet sales through existing stocks 
rather than new production or new orders. 
However, there may also be a degree of 
normalisation in stock levels as global supply-
chain bottlenecks have unwound. 
Higher interest rates, lower house prices and 
the higher cost of living have contributed to 
lower overall domestic demand across recent 
quarters. Real government consumption 
has also trended down as COVID-19-related 
spending has been largely phased out. Lower 
export volumes overall since the second half 
of 2021 are consistent with moderating global 
demand growth over this period. Slow global 
growth is expected to restrain overall export 
demand and prices over the coming three 
years.
Despite the easing in domestic spending, 
demand continues to exceed the economy’s 
ability to supply goods and services 
sustainably. The output gap – a measure of 
the extent to which demand is matched by 
the level of production that the economy can 
supply sustainably – has been significantly 
positive over the past two years, consistent 
with the highly inflationary environment. 
However, as higher interest rates have 
reduced domestic demand, the output gap 
is estimated to have been declining since 
its peak in 2022 (figure 2.2). Consequently, 
domestic inflationary pressure in the economy 
has started to ease.
Figure 2.1
Production GDP
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.2
GDP, potential GDP and the output gap
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
10
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Activity indicators suggest that GDP 
recovered slightly over the June 2023 
quarter (figure 2.3). For the same period, 
merchandise trade data suggest a strong 
increase in goods exports. The high level of 
visitor arrivals after accounting for seasonal 
patterns suggests a continued recovery in 
service exports. Additionally, employment 
data have been strong. Looking through 
quarterly volatility, we expect that further 
economic growth will be limited by ongoing 
tight domestic monetary conditions and 
slowing global demand for our goods 
exports.
High interest rates are reducing 
demand across much of the 
economy
The constraining impact of high interest 
rates has been most visible in spending and 
economic activity related to housing over 
the past year. Higher interest rates have 
contributed to lower demand for housing, 
with house prices falling 15 percent from 
their peak in November 2021 to March 
2023. Stronger net immigration, alongside 
a peak in interest rate expectations, has 
occurred at the same time as house prices 
have started to stabilise in recent months. 
While the outlook for house prices is highly 
uncertain, they are now assumed to have 
reached a trough earlier than was assumed 
in the May Statement (figure 2.4).
Figure 2.4
House prices
(nominal, seasonally adjusted)
Source: CoreLogic, REINZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The REINZ house price index is indexed to the CoreLogic house price index in the 
March 2007 quarter.
Figure 2.3
Top-down indicators for production GDP
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: ANZ, BusinessNZ, NZIER, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area indicates the range between the maximum and minimum values 
of the GDP top-down and nowcasting indicators. The GDP top-down indicators comprise 
the Performance of Services Index (activity/sales), Performance of Manufacturing Index 
(production), Quarterly Survey of Business Opinion (domestic trading activity, past quarter), 
New Zealand activity index, ANZ Truckometer (heavy traffic), ANZ Business Opinion 
(capacity utilisation), QES (total paid hours). The GDP top-down indicators were created 
through linear regressions for each indicator with GDP in quarterly or annual percentage 
changes. In addition, a GDP nowcasting indicator is included that is based on a dynamic 
factor model and uses Kalman filtering techniques. This nowcasting indicator is based on 
the Nowcasting Report from the Federal Reserve Bank of New York. The fitted values were 
transformed back into GDP levels. To avoid statistical bias, for most top-down indicators 
the nationwide COVID-19 lockdowns in 2020 and 2021 were captured through dummy 
variables in the regressions as these indicators were likely unable to sufficiently capture 
the lockdown impacts on GDP.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
11
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Higher mortgage rates have increased debt-
servicing costs for households, reducing 
the amount of household income available 
for other spending. The lagged impact of 
recent increases in mortgage rates has yet to 
impact household cash flow fully. This reflects 
that the yield on total mortgage lending is 
expected to increase by 1 percentage point 
over the coming 12 months as borrowers roll 
onto higher interest rates (figure 2.5). Lower 
house prices also tend to lead to reduced 
spending by households as they feel less 
wealthy and have less borrowing power, 
contributing to lower discretionary spending 
on durable goods such as household 
appliances over recent quarters. However, 
the earlier-than-expected stabilisation 
in house prices is assumed to support 
household consumption over the next three 
years, somewhat offsetting the dampening 
impact of overall lower house prices.
Lower housing demand has also reduced 
home building over the past year. Higher 
interest rates have made borrowing for 
housing more expensive, and lower house 
prices – particularly when construction costs 
are high – have made residential housing 
development less attractive. The number of 
new residential building consents has fallen 
over recent quarters (figure 2.6), indicating a 
substantial slowdown in residential building 
activity ahead.
Beyond housing-related spending, higher 
interest rates have been associated with a 
broadening slowdown across a variety of 
sectors in the economy. Orders were the 
factor most limiting output for a majority of 
firms according to the Quarterly Survey of 
Business Opinion (QSBO) for the June 2023 
quarter, eclipsing labour since the start of 
2023. New orders have declined for the 
majority of manufacturers since late 2022, 
joined by a falling majority of businesses in 
the services sector reporting increases in 
new orders since early 2023 (figure 2.7).
Figure 2.5
Yield on total mortgage lending 
and key new lending rates 
Source: interest.co.nz, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The projected yield on total mortgage lending is based on market pricing for the OCR 
as at 10 August 2023.
Figure 2.6
Residential consents by type
(3-month moving average, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 2.7
Surveyed new orders 
(3-month moving average, seasonally adjusted)
Source: BusinessNZ.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
12
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Higher interest rates and the weakening 
demand outlook have contributed to a weak 
outlook for business investment. Firms’ 
investment intentions have fallen sharply 
since late 2021 and are below historical 
averages across a variety of industries and 
types of investment (figure 2.8). Bank lending 
to non-agricultural businesses has also been 
trending lower since late 2022, suggesting 
that firms are more pessimistic about the 
demand outlook and are hesitant to invest. 
Business investment is expected to fall over 
coming quarters, particularly given the recent 
decline in export prices and anticipated fall in 
capacity pressures in the economy.
Factors less sensitive to interest 
rates continue to add to demand
Several factors that are less sensitive to 
higher interest rates continue to add to 
demand and inflationary pressure. When 
accounting for seasonality, international 
visitor numbers have remained elevated 
into mid-2023 amidst the ongoing tourism 
recovery. However, numbers have yet to 
return to pre-COVID-19 levels. Temporary 
factors such as the FIFA Women’s World 
Cup in mid-2023 could help reinforce this 
ongoing recovery in the near term. Labour, 
accommodation and transport shortages 
continue to act as a constraint to the extent 
of the recovery. This underpins inflationary 
pressure in some services industries. 
Timely indicators suggest easing in some of 
these constraints more recently, including 
the gradual rebuild of international flight 
capacity.
The border reopening has been associated 
with an increase in net immigration since 
2022. Recent data suggest that some of this 
strength was a short-term spike in arrivals. 
This may reflect pent-up demand to migrate 
to New Zealand and an easing in immigration 
rules for some jobs in sectors with acute 
labour shortages. In line with this, arrivals 
on work visas increased recently (figure 
2.9).  However, higher net immigration also 
supports demand – including for housing. 
The net impact on inflationary pressure is 
uncertain and may vary across time horizons. 
Preliminary Reserve Bank research suggests 
that the net positive impact of immigration on 
inflation may be less than previously thought, 
especially as high net immigration has been 
alleviating acute labour shortages (see 
chapter 4.1).
Figure 2.8
New investment intentions – next 12 months  
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: NZIER.
Note: ‘Net %’ refers to net percentage of respondents planning to increase or decrease 
investment in the next 12 months compared to the previous 12 months.
Figure 2.9
Migrant arrivals by visa type
(12-month moving average, seasonally adjusted*)
Source: Stats NZ.
*Note: Stats NZ does not seasonally adjust migration data from April 2020 due to the 
disruption of regular seasonal patterns caused by changing border restrictions.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
13
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Government spending – the sum of 
government consumption and investment 
– as outlined in Budget 2023 is assumed 
to add relatively less to demand than has 
been the case over the past three years. 
Government spending in inflation-adjusted 
terms is expected to decline as a share of 
potential GDP over coming years, although 
remain above levels seen immediately prior 
to COVID-19 (figure 2.10). 
Real (inflation-adjusted) government 
investment is expected to continue to 
grow strongly, underpinning activity in civil 
construction and related industries for an 
extended period. This largely reflects the 
repair and rebuild work in the aftermath of 
severe weather events at the start of 2023. 
However, this impact will be spread out over 
several years, with infrastructure repairs 
in particular assumed to take a long time. 
In contrast, government consumption is 
expected to decline gradually in real terms 
over the coming years as most COVID-19 
and other support measures have been 
phased out since early 2022. 
New Zealand’s goods exports are 
growing more slowly
New Zealand’s exports have made a 
moderate recovery from their COVID-19 
lows, but the sector is not expected to 
return to pre-COVID-19 levels for some time. 
Exports of services have increased strongly 
with the recovery in international visitors 
since the border reopened. In contrast, 
goods exports have grown very little since 
early 2020 (figure 2.11). In the March 2023 
quarter this was particularly due to storm 
disruptions and labour shortages that mainly 
affected our commodity exports. 
Figure 2.10
Government consumption and investment
(real, share of potential GDP)
Source: Stats NZ, New Zealand Treasury, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.11
Exports 
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
14
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
An easing in some of these supply factors, 
especially more favourable growing 
conditions in agriculture, is expected to 
have supported a temporary recovery in 
goods exports in the June 2023 quarter. 
However, demand for our goods exports 
has been easing as global growth eases 
to below trend. This has been reflected 
in ongoing declines in prices for our key 
commodities, such as dairy and meat 
(figure 2.12).  Economic growth is expected 
to remain below trend for most of our key 
trading partners over 2023. The growth 
outlook for China has moderated since the 
May Statement, as the momentum following 
the country’s reopening in late 2022 has 
been weaker than expected. This has been 
partially offset by ongoing resilience in 
activity in the US (see chapter 3). 
The New Zealand dollar trade-weighted 
index (TWI) has remained relatively steady 
over the past few months, and is only 
slightly below its level assumed in the May 
Statement (figure 2.13). The New Zealand 
dollar has held relatively steady despite a 
number of downward influences, including 
greater expected increases in global interest 
rates than in New Zealand interest rates. 
This is narrowing the differential between 
interest rates here and abroad. Prices for our 
key commodity exports have also declined. 
One factor supporting the New Zealand 
dollar has been declines in market volatility 
from elevated levels as previous banking 
stress in the US and Europe have subsided. 
The successful resolution of government 
debt ceiling negotiations in the US has 
also contributed to falling levels of market 
volatility globally (see chapter 3).  
Figure 2.12
Dairy prices
(nominal)
Source: ANZ, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.13
New Zealand dollar TWI
(nominal)
Source: NZFMA, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
15
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Supply constraints have 
continued to ease 
Global supply-chain bottlenecks have 
continued to ease. Shipping costs for 
consumer goods imports into New Zealand 
have declined sharply over recent months. 
These price falls have been widespread 
across air and sea freight as international 
capacity has been rebuilt and connections 
have been restored (figure 2.14). The 
reopening of China in late 2022 also 
contributed to an increase in global supply 
and logistics activity. 
The disruptions to commodity demand 
and supply due to Russia invading Ukraine 
in early 2022 have largely unwound and 
some commodity prices are close to their 
pre-war levels. However, global grain 
prices increased steeply in late July after 
Russia withdrew from the Black Sea Grain 
Initiative that had provided a humanitarian 
corridor through which Ukraine could 
deliver grains to global markets. Oil prices 
have retraced some of their recent falls 
following supply cuts by OPEC and some 
weather-related disruptions to production 
in the US. The reopening of China has 
not coincided with a substantial rise in 
global commodity prices, as China’s 
post-reopening growth momentum has 
undershot expectations.  
Global manufacturing output prices 
and activity have declined (figure 2.15), 
coinciding with a decline in New Zealand’s 
non-oil import prices in the March 2023 
quarter. Strong goods demand in the 
early stages of the COVID-19 pandemic, 
coupled with high input cost inflation 
and production bottlenecks, saw a surge 
in manufactured goods prices in 2021. 
This started to unwind in mid-2022 as 
global consumer spending switched 
back to services, global supply chains 
recovered, and commodity input prices 
began to decline. In contrast, increases in 
services prices have remained relatively 
strong compared to before the COVID-19 
pandemic. Price rises in services are 
contributing to elevated overall price 
pressure. 
Figure 2.14
Shipping costs for consumer goods imports
(share of import value for duty)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: These series are estimated by taking the value of consumer merchandise imports 
including freight and insurance costs (CIF) and subtracting the reported value for duty 
(VFD), which excludes these costs. They are expressed as a percentage of the VFD figure.
Figure 2.15
Global Purchasing Managers’ Index – output prices
Source: JPMorgan.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
16
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Domestically, discussions with businesses 
suggest that labour shortages have 
continued to ease but remain elevated. This 
is consistent with successively lower shares 
of firms reporting difficulty finding skilled 
and unskilled labour over recent quarters 
(figure 2.16). The number of job vacancies 
has declined across a range of industries 
in recent months, as employment has 
increased. This indicates that businesses 
have been able to fill some open positions 
and that labour demand is not adding to  
new vacancies to the same degree as it did 
in 2022. 
The additional labour supply is coming from 
a rising share of the population participating 
in the labour force. This share increased to a 
record high of 72.4 percent of the working-
age population in the June 2023 quarter. 
In addition, net immigration has increased 
rapidly since the full border reopening in the 
latter half of 2022.
Inflation is easing as expected but 
domestic pressures are persistent
Inflation remains too high and well above 
the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target band. 
However, aggregate inflationary pressures 
in the economy have continued to ease 
due to weaker demand and improved 
supply, to a similar degree as expected in 
the May Statement. Inflation expectations 
have declined from recent highs as 
headline inflation has eased, particularly at 
the one-year horizon. Declines in annual 
headline inflation have been led by faster-
than-expected falls in imported inflation, 
particularly transport-related prices such as 
oil and international airfares. But declines in 
domestically-generated inflation have been 
slower than expected in the May Statement. 
This reflects persistence in services inflation 
caused by consumer spending shifting 
back from goods to services over the past 
year. Most measures of core inflation have 
remained high.  
Inflationary pressure in the economy has 
begun to reduce due to weaker demand and 
increasing supply. Annual headline inflation 
has eased back from its peak of 7.3 percent 
in June 2022 to 6.0 percent in June 2023.
Prices for some goods and services that tend 
to be volatile – such as petrol prices and 
airfares – have declined particularly sharply. 
The most recent decline in headline inflation 
was accounted for by a large fall in tradables 
inflation, which measures price changes for 
goods and services that are more exposed 
to international competition (figure 2.17). 
Annual tradables inflation fell from 6.4 to 5.2 
percent in the June 2023 quarter, following 
a similar-sized fall in the previous quarter. 
The decline was partly due to a steep drop in 
international airfares over the quarter, given 
improving global supply chains and flight 
connectivity. Petrol prices also contributed 
to lower annual tradables inflation, falling 
15 percent from a year ago. These declines 
more than offset the ongoing strength in food 
prices, which increased a further 3.7 percent 
in the June 2023 quarter. 
Figure 2.16
QSBO difficulty in finding labour
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: NZIER.
Figure 2.17
Contributions to CPI inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
17
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Figure 2.18
Headline and core inflation measures
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for inflation over 
the medium term.
Annual non-tradables inflation – which 
measures price changes for goods 
and services that are less exposed to 
international competition – eased more 
slowly from 6.8 to 6.6 percent in the June 
2023 quarter. Resilience in non-tradables 
inflation reflects ongoing capacity constraints 
even as demand moderates, including 
ongoing labour market tightness. Higher 
prices for construction, rents, and restaurant 
meals and ready-to-eat food contributed to 
ongoing strength in non-tradables inflation. 
The increase in the minimum wage from 1 
April 2023 likely contributed to some of the 
strength in services inflation in the June 2023 
quarter. 
While headline inflation decreased marginally 
more than expected in the June 2023 
quarter, it remains too high. In addition, most 
measures of core inflation have remained 
near their recent peaks (figure 2.18), 
indicating that inflation will take some time to 
return back to the mid-point of the MPC’s 1 to 
3 percent target range. 
A wider range of sectors has been 
contributing to high inflation in recent years, 
based on measures such as CPI ex-food 
and fuel (figure 2.19). This measure indicates 
that housing and household utilities remain 
the most significant contributor to headline 
inflation, although its contribution has been 
declining. However, inflation has become 
more widespread and the contribution 
from other groups has increased, including 
transport, recreation and culture, and 
alcoholic beverages and tobacco. This 
broadening is consistent with tightness in 
the labour market and elevated inflation 
expectations.
Following lower inflation in the latest CPI data 
release, inflation expectations have declined 
from recent highs across most time horizons 
(figure 2.20). The fall in inflation expectations 
is in line with falling pricing and cost pressure 
indicators in business sentiment surveys, 
although these remain at high levels.
Figure 2.19
Core inflation ex-food and fuel by group 
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.20
Inflation expectations
(annual, years ahead)
Source: RBNZ Survey of Expectations (Business).
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI 
inflation over the medium term.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
18
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
The decline in inflation in New Zealand 
is similar to the overall decline in our key 
trading partners. For most of our key trading 
partners headline inflation seems to have 
peaked and has started to decline, mainly 
due to falling energy prices and more stable 
food prices. But regional divergences are 
emerging as core inflation is moderating 
at different speeds across countries (see 
chapter 3). Overall, inflation is still well above 
the inflation targets of central banks.
The tight labour market continues 
to support inflation pressure, but 
to a diminishing extent
Inflationary pressure from the labour market 
has eased slightly, although some labour 
market stretch remains. 
A variety of indicators that tend to lag overall 
labour market pressures suggest that the 
labour market remains strong. However, 
labour market pressures have eased since 
early 2022 (figure 2.21). The unemployment 
rate increased from 3.4 to 3.6 percent in the 
June 2023 quarter, from its recent historical 
low (figure 2.22). Broader measures of labour 
market pressure have also eased, such as an 
increase in the underutilisation rate. 
More contemporaneous business surveys 
of current conditions, such as difficulties 
in finding labour, also suggest that labour 
shortages have eased. This decline in labour 
market capacity pressure has coincided 
with the recent increase in net immigration. 
Arrivals by visa type have been led by a 
sharp rise in work visas, in line with the 
Government easing visa conditions for 
some sectors with acute labour shortages. 
Domestic labour supply has also been 
supported by ongoing high levels of 
participation, with labour market participation 
and employment as a share of the working-
age population both reaching new record 
highs in the June 2023 quarter. 
Forward looking indicators of the labour 
market suggest further easing is likely 
heading into the second half of 2023. The 
number of job ads has declined across most 
industries. However, monthly filled jobs and 
employment levels continued to grow over 
the June 2023 quarter.
Figure 2.21
Maximum sustainable employment (MSE)
indicator suite
Source: ANZ, MBIE, NZIER, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The Reserve Bank uses a range of indicators when assessing MSE, consistent with 
clause (1)(ii) of the Remit. The vertical lines on the left-hand and right-hand sides represent 
the weakest and strongest data outcomes since 2000, respectively. For example, a lower 
unemployment rate is considered to be stronger. An orange dot to the left of a black dot 
means that the latest data outcome was weaker than in the March 2022 quarter, when the 
labour market was particularly tight.
Figure 2.22
Unemployment rate
(unemployed people as a share of the labour force, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
19
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Same-job wages – the unit cost of labour 
most directly relevant for inflationary pressure 
after adjusting for productivity – continued to 
increase below CPI inflation in the June 2023 
quarter. This increase was slightly lower than 
expected in the May Statement. However, 
broader wage and income measures – which 
are better indicators of growth in household 
income – continued to increase at a faster 
pace than CPI inflation, continuing a trend 
from the past two years (figure 2.23).2 
Very high employment, strong household 
income growth and accumulated savings 
are supporting household spending, and 
inflationary pressure in the near term.
2	
For more information on real wages see chapter 4.2 in the November 2022 Statement.
Figure 2.23
Wage measures and headline CPI
(index=100 in Q4 2019)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Same-job wage measure: The adjusted labour cost index (LCI) measures wage 
inflation for a fixed quantity and quality of labour. 
Broad same-job wage measure: The unadjusted LCI measures the same as adjusted LCI 
but includes any wage changes due to quality changes within an occupation (as reported 
by employers). 
Broad wage measure: The Quarterly Enterprise Survey (QES) average hourly earnings 
measure the average hourly earnings across the economy. It is affected by opportunities 
that arise in a tight labour market, for example from promotions or shifts from low-paying 
industries to high-paying industries. 
Income per worker measure: The QES total gross earnings per filled job measures the total 
income per job. In addition to the influence of the above, the QES income measure also 
takes into account employees working extra hours.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
20
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
High interest rates are required to 
return annual inflation to 2 percent
High interest rates are required to further 
slow demand relative to the economy’s ability 
to supply goods and services sustainably. 
Lower demand will result in less pressure on 
available labour and capital resources in the 
economy. This will help reduce pressure on 
prices, leading to lower domestic inflation. 
Slower global growth is also expected to 
contribute to falling inflationary pressure 
through declining import price inflation and 
lower demand for our goods exports.
Labour market tightness is expected to 
decrease further over coming quarters, 
easing pressure on wages. Easing labour 
market tightness is assumed to reflect low 
or no growth in economic activity over 
the coming year and further growth in the 
economy’s ability to sustainably supply 
goods and services. One measure of labour 
market slack – the unemployment rate – is  
expected to increase from currently low 
levels. Keeping the unemployment rate 
near current levels without experiencing 
unsustainably high wage and inflation 
pressures would require structural changes 
in the labour market that are beyond the 
control of the Reserve Bank.
Economic growth in the first quarter of 2023 
was weaker than expected, and periods 
of further economic contraction over 2023 
remain possible. We continue to expect low 
or no growth in GDP overall until early 2024, 
similar to what was expected in the May 
Statement. However, significant quarter-to-
quarter volatility is likely. This may partially 
reflect the ongoing impacts of the border 
reopening, such as the re-establishment of 
regular seasonal patterns in activity data, and 
any temporary surge in migrant arrivals. The 
recovery from recent severe weather events 
at the start of 2023 may also add to near-
term economic volatility.
Weaker demand in New Zealand and 
overseas is expected to lead to declines in 
non-tradables and tradables inflation over 
the next three years. Annual headline CPI 
inflation is assumed to return to within the 1 to 
3 percent target range in the second half of 
2024, and to 2 percent by the second half of 
2025 (figure 2.24).
Figure 2.24
CPI inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI 
inflation over the medium term.


Chapter 2 Current economic assessment and monetary policy outlook
21
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Figure 2.25
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Monetary policy outlook
3	
 For more information on the neutral OCR see chapter 4.1 in the November 2022 Statement.
Overall, inflationary pressure in the 
economy is slightly higher than assumed 
in the May Statement. Measures of core 
inflation remain elevated, but some near-
term inflation expectations have declined 
slightly over the past three months. 
Employment remains above its maximum 
sustainable level, but labour capacity 
pressures are beginning to ease more 
materially.
We have also revised up our assumption 
of the long-run nominal neutral OCR in the 
current projections from 2.0 to 2.25 percent 
from the September 2023 quarter onwards. 
This increase is based on our neutral OCR 
indicator suite.3 The neutral OCR is the rate 
that over time would be consistent with 
no over- or under-utilisation of resources 
and stable inflation. The increase in our 
neutral indicator suite primarily reflects that 
long-term interest rates have increased 
substantially since the end of 2021. The 
neutral OCR is influenced by factors such 
as global and domestic demographics, 
productivity, savings behaviour and long-
run fiscal policy. 
However, the extent to which each of these 
and other factors have contributed to the 
recent increase, or will play out going 
forward, is uncertain. The OCR remains 
contractionary at its current level based on 
this revised assumption. Taken on its own, 
the upward revision to the neutral OCR 
would create slightly more upward pressure 
on the OCR over time.
Relative to the May Statement, this slight 
upward revision to the nominal neutral OCR, 
stronger supply-led export volumes in the 
near term, and an earlier trough in house 
prices are partially offset by lower overall 
domestic activity at the start of 2023 and 
lower import and export prices.
Conditional on our central economic 
outlook, it is assumed that the OCR will 
need to remain at around its current level 
for slightly longer than was assumed in the 
May Statement in order for the MPC to meet 
its inflation and employment objectives 
(figure 2.25).


Chapter 3 Global developments and outlook
22
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
3.	 Global developments and outlook
Lake Pukaki. Photo: Rebecca Williams
CHAPTER 
03
Global 
developments 
and outlook


Chapter 3 Global developments and outlook
23
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
CHAPTER 3
Global developments 
and outlook
Global economic activity in the first half 
of 2023 has been stronger than market 
participants had expected at the start of the 
year. However, global growth remains below 
trend (figure 3.1). After rebounding strongly 
once COVID-19 restrictions were removed 
at the end of last year, growth momentum in 
China has slowed over recent months. This 
slowing poses a potential headwind to global 
growth, although very low inflation in China is 
also likely to contribute to lower global prices 
for manufactured goods. The more subdued 
outlook for China is being partially offset by 
continuing strength in the US economy. 
Headline inflation has continued to decline 
across New Zealand’s major trading 
partners. However, regional divergences are 
emerging regarding the pace of moderation 
in underlying price pressures, with this 
occurring faster in the US than in other major 
economies. 
Central banks have continued to increase 
their policy rates since the May Statement, 
but little further tightening is expected from 
here. As risks related to the banking stress 
that emerged in the US and Europe in March 
2023 have reduced and global economic 
activity has remained resilient, global risk 
sentiment has improved and financial market 
volatility has declined. This has supported 
higher global equity prices in recent months. 
Figure 3.1
Key trading partner GDP forecasts
(index=100 in Q4 2019)
Source: Consensus Economics, Haver Analytics, RBNZ estimates.
Note: GDP forecasts are based on Consensus Economics estimates, except New Zealand’s 
which is based on our current projection. 


Chapter 3 Global developments and outlook
24
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Figure 3.2
Indicators for the Chinese property market
(annual)
Source: Bloomberg.
Global economic activity has been 
resilient this year
Although economic activity has been more 
resilient than expected in the first half of this 
year, global growth remains below trend 
as higher interest rates reduce demand. 
Trading partner GDP is forecast to increase 
2.8 percent in the year to December 2023. 
This is lower than its pre-pandemic (2010-
2019) average of 3.6 percent, but higher than 
Consensus Economics forecasts at the start 
of the year. Growth in most economies is 
expected to remain below trend in 2023 and 
2024, before recovering towards trend over 
the medium term as inflation declines and 
central banks begin to reduce interest rates 
towards more neutral levels.
The degree to which growth has slowed in 
recent months has diverged across regions, 
with economic growth remaining more 
resilient in the US than in New Zealand’s 
other key trading partners. US GDP 
increased 2.6 percent in the year to the June 
2023 quarter, with both consumer spending 
and business investment remaining robust. In 
contrast, growth in the euro area has slowed 
more sharply, with GDP increasing by 0.6 
percent in the year to the June 2023 quarter. 
GDP growth in China was also lower than 
expected in the June 2023 quarter, as the 
strength of the economic recovery following 
the removal of COVID-19 restrictions started 
to wane. 
Globally, growth in services sector activity 
is currently stronger than it is in the 
manufacturing sector. Services sector growth 
reflects a continuation of the post-pandemic 
shift in demand away from goods and back 
to services. Global demand for goods has 
weakened as higher interest rates have 
begun to reduce household and business 
spending. 
Labour markets remain tight globally, 
although there have been early signs 
of loosening in recent months in some 
economies. Unemployment rates remain 
close to cycle lows and wage growth 
remains elevated. However, job vacancies 
are declining from high levels in a range of 
key trading partners, and wage growth is 
moderating in the US and Canada. 
Momentum in China’s economic 
recovery has been slowing
The Chinese economy rebounded more 
rapidly than expected at the start of 
2023, following the removal of COVID-19 
restrictions at the end of last year. This 
rebound was led by the resumption of activity 
in previously restricted service sectors and 
extended across most industries. However, in 
recent months, economic growth has slowed 
by more than expected. 
Weakness in the property market continues 
to lead to lower growth in China. Activity in 
the property market increased at the start of 
the year, in line with the broader economic 
recovery. However, momentum has waned 
in recent months, with total real estate 
investment and new real estate construction 
activity declining (figure 3.2). 
Low consumer confidence appears to be 
restraining household spending in China. 
Retail sales increased sharply at the start of 
the year, but growth has slowed substantially 
in recent months. This has primarily been due 
to a decline in consumer goods spending. 
Spending on consumer services, such as 
tourism and travel, continues to grow, but at a 
more moderate pace than earlier in the year. 


Chapter 3 Global developments and outlook
25
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Export production was a key support for 
Chinese growth during the COVID-19 
pandemic, as global demand for goods 
increased strongly. However, demand for 
Chinese exports has begun to weaken, 
reflecting softer global goods demand. 
Chinese exports to many economies are now 
lower than in 2022.
Inflation in China has continued to decline, 
with annual headline inflation falling to -0.3 
percent in July from around 2 percent at the 
start of the year. Lower inflation has been 
due to a number of factors such as weak 
domestic demand, slack in the labour market, 
and declining energy and pork prices. 
Producer prices, which are more variable and 
closely tied to global commodity prices, have 
been declining for the last 12 months. 
Most global economic forecasters expect 
China’s economy to grow by slightly more 
than 5 percent this year, in line with Chinese 
authorities’ growth target of “around 5 
percent”. However, risks to China’s growth 
appear skewed to the downside. In particular, 
there is a risk that property market activity 
and consumer spending will weaken further. 
Chinese authorities have taken some 
steps to ease fiscal and monetary policy 
settings, and many analysts expect further 
policy easing measures this year. However, 
policy easing measures so far have been 
relatively limited in scale and scope. Chinese 
authorities remain cautious about the degree 
of policy easing, given high debt levels 
across a number of sectors.  
Global inflation continues to ease
Headline inflation has continued to decline 
in most advanced economies (figure 3.3). 
In particular, energy prices have fallen and 
food prices are beginning to stabilise, as 
global commodity prices have eased from 
the elevated levels they reached following 
the Russian invasion of Ukraine. Regional 
divergences are emerging in the pace at 
which core inflation measures are declining 
(figure 3.4). 
In the US, goods inflation is falling at a faster 
pace than elsewhere, and this is feeding 
through to lower core inflation. In contrast, 
services inflation in the US remains elevated. 
This is partly accounted for by high rent 
inflation, which recent data suggest will 
decline in the second half of this year. Similar 
trends are being observed in Canada. 
For New Zealand’s other major trading 
partners, such as Europe and Australia, core 
inflation has not moderated significantly. 
Goods inflation is declining, but at a slower 
pace than it is in North America. Services 
inflation has shown little sign of easing and 
in some cases continues to increase. These 
regional differences may in part reflect tighter 
labour markets and smaller relative declines 
in food and energy prices in regions outside 
of North America.
Figure 3.3
Headline inflation for key trading partners 
(annual)
Source: Haver Analytics.


Chapter 3 Global developments and outlook
26
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Figure 3.5
2-year sovereign bond yields
Source: Bloomberg.
Central banks continue to tighten 
monetary policy
Most major central banks have continued 
to raise their policy rates since the May 
Statement. Policy rates are currently above 
longer-run estimates of neutral across most 
major economies. Market pricing currently 
reflects an expectation that central banks 
have now reached, or are near, peak policy 
rates in this tightening cycle. The impact 
of past tightening is being observed in 
signs of moderating demand and declining 
headline inflation. 
Several major central banks have tightened 
monetary policy by more than financial 
markets were expecting at the time of the 
May Statement. This has been largely in 
response to more persistent core inflation 
than those central banks were anticipating. 
These actions have also resulted in an 
increase in medium- and long-term interest 
rates, such as on sovereign bonds. These 
interest rates are currently near their highs 
reached in early 2023, after declining in 
March this year in response to the banking 
stress in the US and Europe (figure 3.5). 
Market participants currently expect central 
banks to begin reducing policy rates from 
around the middle of 2024, as capacity 
pressures ease and inflation returns closer 
to target.
Figure 3.4
Inflation excluding food and energy 
for key trading partners 
(annual)
Source: Haver Analytics.


Chapter 3 Global developments and outlook
27
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Global risk sentiment has 
improved in recent months
Global financial market volatility has declined, 
and investor risk sentiment has improved 
since the May Statement. This has primarily 
been in response to reductions in the risks 
related to the US banking system and US 
government debt ceiling, as well as greater 
optimism regarding the outlook for the global 
economy. Deposit outflows have stabilised 
for US banks, and this has supported US 
bank equity prices since the May Statement. 
Measures of market-implied volatility for 
both fixed income and equity markets have 
declined materially in recent months. Some 
measures of US equity volatility are now 
at their lowest levels since early 2020. 
Investment-grade credit spreads have also 
declined over this period and are close to 
their levels prior to the banking stress in 
March 2023.
Improving global risk sentiment is 
supporting global equity prices. Since the 
May Statement, global equity prices have 
increased 5.7 percent, with a stronger 
increase of around 8.5 percent in US 
equity prices (figure 3.6). In Europe, equity 
prices have remained broadly flat over 
this period, as the recent improvement in 
global risk sentiment has been offset by the 
continuation of weaker economic data for the 
euro area. Global commodity prices, such as 
for oil, have also generally increased since 
the May Statement, although they remain 
lower than at the start of the year. The higher 
commodity prices reflect a combination 
of stronger global risk sentiment and 
idiosyncratic factors for certain commodities, 
such as the impacts of weather events on the 
supply of some agricultural commodities.
Figure 3.6
Global equity prices
(index=100 on 1 January 2020)
Source: Bloomberg.


Chapter 4 Special topics
28
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
4.	 Special topics
Tauranga. Photo: Rachael Grant
CHAPTER 
04
Special topics


Chapter 4 Special topics
29
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
CHAPTER 4 
Special topics 
Before the publication of each Statement, the MPC is provided 
with analyses of some topical issues. 
Topics for the August Statement included: 
1.	 The inflationary impact of recent migration
2.	 Factors contributing to New Zealand’s current account deficit and outlook 
Special topics in the past 12 months
Topic
Date/publication
The recovery in international tourism over the  
2022/23 summer
May 2023 Statement (Chapter 4)
Have inflation expectations become more sensitive  
to higher inflation?
May 2023 Statement (Chapter 4)
The international dimension of non-tradables inflation
February 2023 Statement (Chapter 4)
Monitoring the labour market for inflationary 
pressures with high-frequency microdata
February 2023 Statement (Chapter 4)
The neutral interest rate
November 2022 Statement (Chapter 4)
Developments in real wages
November 2022 Statement (Chapter 4)
Global inflation developments 
August 2022 Statement (Chapter 3)
Assessing recent inflation surprises
August 2022 Statement (Chapter 3)
Business conditions
August 2022 Statement (Chapter 3)


Chapter 4 Special topics
30
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
The inflationary impact  
of recent migration
4	
See Immigration - Fit for the future. Final report. (https://www.productivity.govt.nz/inquiries/immigration-settings/)
Summary
•	 Net immigration has increased sharply 
since travel restrictions put in place 
during the COVID-19 pandemic were 
removed and the border reopened.
•	 Previous research has shown that 
net immigration tends to put upward 
pressure on inflation. Changes in the 
ages, countries of origin and occupations 
of recent immigrants suggest that 
the current upswing could have a 
different inflationary impact from past 
immigration flows. It is possible that the 
net inflationary impact of migration is less 
than it was because of the tight labour 
market.
•	 In the projections, we assume that current 
immigration flows will have a low but 
positive impact on inflation, although 
there remains considerable uncertainty 
around this. We are doing additional 
research to investigate this further.
Migration has a large impact on 
the New Zealand economy
New Zealand has been growing its 
population through positive net migration for 
most of the past 150 years. From the 1970s 
to the 1990s, emigration from New Zealand 
increased, particularly to Australia. This was 
a result of incomes in New Zealand falling 
behind those of leading OECD countries, 
resulting in net outflows. To counter this 
trend, New Zealand’s immigration policies 
were changed over the 1980s and 1990s, 
with emphasis on attracting skilled migrants 
and migrants from a wider range of 
countries.4 
In general, net immigration in the past 
two decades has been strongly positive. 
From early 2010 to the start of 2020, 
New Zealand’s total population grew by 
around 17 percent, of which just under half 
came from net immigration. 
The pandemic and resulting border 
closures disrupted this trend. While arrivals 
of New Zealand citizens surged initially, 
these were outweighed by outflows of non-
New Zealand citizens from mid-2020 to 
early 2022. 
Since the border reopened in 2022, net 
immigration has rebounded strongly (figure 
4.1). While we expect net immigration to 
continue moderating from its recent peak, 
the annual net inflow of working-age 
immigrants is still projected to be around 
80,000 in the September 2023 quarter. 
New Zealand is on track to experience its 
largest annual net immigration of the last 
century. This would be equivalent to around 
1.9 percent of the projected working-age 
population, the highest proportion recorded 
since the start of the Household Labour 
Force Survey in 1986. 
Figure 4.1
Net working-age immigration
(annual, share of working-age population)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
1


Chapter 4 Special topics
31
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Existing research finds that net 
immigration adds to inflationary 
pressure, but the composition 
matters 
Net immigration increases both the supply 
of labour and demand in the economy. Past 
empirical research on the New Zealand 
economy has found that the demand impact 
is greater than the supply impact, particularly 
in the short term. For this reason, the Reserve 
Bank has tended to assume that positive net 
immigration adds more to aggregate demand 
than aggregate supply, and therefore 
increases inflationary pressure.
During the large net immigration increase 
from 2013, the Reserve Bank published three 
Analytical Notes investigating the economic 
impacts of net immigration. Collectively, these 
papers found that net immigration increases 
inflation and house prices. They also found 
that the composition of migrants influences 
the extent to which it increases inflation. 
•	 McDonald (2013)5 found that arrivals have 
larger upward effects on house prices 
than departures have downwards effects. 
The strength of this impact depends on 
the regions from which non-New Zealand 
citizens arrive. On average, arrivals from 
European countries and the UK tended to 
have a more inflationary effects on house 
prices than arrivals from Asia. 
•	 McDonald and Armstrong (2016)6 showed 
that the impact of immigration depends 
on the primary reason causing migration. 
In particular, a weaker Australian labour 
market that causes net immigration 
typically leads to relatively higher 
unemployment and a larger reduction in 
nominal wage inflation in New Zealand. 
5	
See McDonald (2013), ‘Migration and the housing market’, Analytical Note, Reserve Bank of New Zealand.
6	
See McDonald and Armstrong (2016), ‘Why the drivers of migration matter for the labour market’, Analytical Note, Reserve Bank of 
New Zealand.
7	
See Vehbi (2016), ‘The macroeconomic impact of the age composition of migration’, Analytical Note, Reserve Bank of New Zealand.”
•	 Lastly, Vehbi (2016)7 investigated 
the macroeconomic impact of net 
immigration by age group. An increase 
in net immigration was found to increase 
inflation, real house prices, residential 
investment and real rents. It also led to a 
decrease in the unemployment rate gap. 
Further, migrants aged 17-29 years had 
lower economic impacts than those aged 
30-49 years. 
Positive net immigration may be 
less inflationary than it was before 
the COVID-19 pandemic
Since the start of the COVID-19 pandemic, 
the New Zealand labour market has been 
tighter than it has been for several decades. 
In an environment of acute labour shortages, 
it is likely that net immigration contributes 
even more to the supply of labour than 
otherwise and is therefore less inflationary. 
As noted above, the composition of net 
immigration also influences the extent to 
which it is inflationary. Table 1 compares the 
composition of net immigration before and 
after the COVID-19 pandemic and assesses 
the likely inflationary impact. Figures 4.2 to 
4.5 provide supporting evidence.  


Chapter 4 Special topics
32
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Table 1
Key observations on the composition of migrants and links to research findings
Factor
Pre-COVID-19
Post-COVID-19
Implications for inflation
Country of 
origin
(figure 4.2)
The largest share of 
arrivals was from Australia, 
with similar shares from 
the UK, China and India.
The largest shares of arrivals are 
coming from India, China and the 
Philippines, and lower shares 
are arriving from Australia and 
the UK.
Less inflationary. McDonald (2013) 
found that arrivals from Europe and 
the UK have a greater impact on real 
house prices than arrivals from Asia. 
This implies a currently more subdued 
impact on house prices, and on 
demand generally, relative to before 
the COVID-19 pandemic.  
Age
(figure 4.3)
The largest share of 
arrivals was the 15- to 
29-year-old age bracket.
The largest share of arrivals 
is the 30- to 49-year-old age 
bracket.
More inflationary. Vehbi (2016) 
found that migrants in both the 17- to 
29-year-old and 30- to 49-year-old 
age groups have a significant positive 
impact on inflation and the housing 
market. However, the effect coming 
from the younger group is less. The 
growing share of the older group 
implies a larger effect of current 
migration on inflation compared to 
before the COVID-19 pandemic.
Occupation
(figure 4.4)
Of immigrants who 
stated their occupations 
on arrival cards, the 
greatest share comprised 
professionals, technicians 
and trade workers.
Of immigrants who stated their 
occupations on arrival cards, 
technicians and trade workers 
are now the largest share, 
followed by professionals. There 
has also been a significant 
increase in arrivals who stated 
their occupations as labourers 
and machinery operators and 
drivers.
Less inflationary. The mix of 
immigrant occupations is likely 
providing relief in a very tight labour 
market. Several policy changes have 
been introduced since the border 
reopened to target workers to fill 
labour shortages via the ‘Green List’. A 
better matching of immigrant skills to 
skills gaps in the labour market could 
alleviate wage pressure.
Arrivals and 
departures
(figure 4.5)
Net immigration was 
accounted for by arrivals 
fluctuating around 12,000, 
outweighing departures 
fluctuating around 7,000. 
High net immigration is 
accounted for by higher arrivals  
rather than lower departures 
compared to pre-COVID-19. 
More inflationary. McDonald (2013) 
found that arrivals have larger 
upward effects on house prices than 
decreased departures. As high net 
immigration since COVID-19 has been 
due to much higher arrivals and only 
somewhat higher departures, the 
impact on house prices is likely more 
inflationary than it was before the 
COVID-19 pandemic.


Chapter 4 Special topics
33
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Figure 4.2
Estimated migrant arrivals by country 
of last permanent residence 
(monthly, share of total arrivals)
Source: Stats NZ.
Note: The figure represents a selection of the largest country contributions to arrivals and 
therefore does not add up to 100 percent. Travel and border restrictions due to the COVID-19 
pandemic disrupted usual migration patterns. Sudden drops and sustained low levels in 
migration can distort values when applying seasonal adjustment factors and therefore we 
applied no seasonal factor in this figure.
Figure 4.3
Estimated migration arrivals by age group
(monthly, share of total arrivals)
Source: Stats NZ.
Note: Travel and border restrictions due to the COVID-19 pandemic disrupted usual 
migration patterns. Sudden drops and sustained low levels in migration can distort values 
when applying seasonal adjustment factors and therefore we applied no seasonal factor in 
this figure.


Chapter 4 Special topics
34
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
We are doing further research to investigate 
the degree to which the recent surge 
in immigration is inflationary and how 
persistent its impacts will be. An update of 
Vehbi (2016) using data to 2019 provides 
early tentative results suggesting that 
immigrants aged 30-49 years might no 
longer have greater inflationary impacts 
than 15- to 29-year-old immigrants. 
Overall, immigration may no longer have 
a statistically significant positive effect on 
inflation. 
This initial analysis indicates that we 
should be cautious about relying on our 
previous assumption that net immigration 
is net inflationary to the New Zealand 
economy. As noted in the May Statement , 
the inflationary impact of net immigration is 
highly uncertain at present. However, until 
the results of this work are confirmed, our 
central forecast continues to incorporate a 
low but positive impact of net immigration 
on inflation (see chapter 6).   
Figure 4.5
Estimated migration by direction 
(monthly)
Source: Stats NZ.
Note: Travel and border restrictions due to the COVID-19 pandemic disrupted usual 
migration patterns. Sudden drops and sustained low levels in migration can distort values 
when applying seasonal adjustment factors and therefore we applied no seasonal factor in 
this figure.
Figure 4.4
Permanent and long-term arrivals by occupation
(monthly, share of total arrivals)
Source: Stats NZ.
Note: Data sourced from the New Zealand Passenger arrival card. Approximately 50% of 
responses fall into the residual categories: ‘outside of scope’ (i.e. students), ‘not stated’ and 
‘response unidentifiable’. Travel and border restrictions due to the COVID-19 pandemic 
disrupted usual migration patterns. Sudden drops and sustained low levels in migration 
can distort values when applying seasonal adjustment factors and therefore we applied no 
seasonal factor in this figure.


Chapter 4 Special topics
35
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Factors contributing to New Zealand’s  
current account deficit and outlook 
Summary
•	 The current account is the nominal 
net sum of balances in the exports 
and imports of goods and services, 
and the balance of income paid to 
New Zealanders from overseas less 
income paid to foreigners. The current 
account surplus or deficit is often 
expressed as a share of nominal GDP. 
•	 New Zealand’s annual current account 
deficit has widened since 2021 and sat 
at 8.5 percent of GDP in the year to 
March 2023. Current account deficits are 
funded by non-residents, so persistently 
large deficits make New Zealand more 
vulnerable to changes in the availability 
or cost of that funding. 
•	 The recent widening of the current 
account deficit is primarily due to 
circumstances arising from the COVID-19 
pandemic, the subsequent strong 
recovery in domestic demand and a 
terms of trade shock partially due to the 
Ukraine war. Our projection assumes that 
the current account deficit will steadily 
narrow towards 4 percent over the next 
three years.
•	 Although New Zealand’s current account 
deficit is wider than it has been for 
several decades, New Zealand’s net 
financial position with the rest of the 
world is much stronger than it was during 
the global financial crisis (GFC).
•	 New Zealand’s net foreign liabilities – 
essentially, the difference between what 
New Zealand owes the rest of the world 
(liabilities) and what the rest of the world 
owes New Zealand (assets) – are at  
49 percent of GDP, much lower than 
the 84 percent peak in 2009. The 
composition of these liabilities is also 
more stable than it was at that time, 
largely reflecting a reduced banking 
system reliance on short-term offshore 
funding.
•	 There are several factors that financial 
market participants consider when 
assessing the sustainability of a large 
current account deficit. These factors 
include the stability of the financial 
system, whether the country has a 
floating exchange rate, and the country’s 
fiscal position. At this stage, the risk 
of a deterioration in the economic or 
financial stability outlook arising from 
the current account deficit is viewed as 
low, particularly because the deficit is 
expected to narrow steadily over the 
projection horizon.
2


Chapter 4 Special topics
36
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
New Zealand’s current account 
deficit is at levels last seen in the 
1980s
New Zealand has historically had a current 
account deficit, rather than a surplus. 
However, at 8.5 percent of GDP in the year 
to March 2023, the current account deficit 
is currently much wider than the 4 percent it 
has averaged since 2000. New Zealand also 
has a larger current account deficit than many 
of our trading partners (figure 4.6).
The current account is the nominal net sum 
of balances on the exports and imports 
of goods and services, and the balance 
of income paid to New Zealanders from 
overseas, less income paid to foreigners 
(figure 4.7). If the sum of these balances is 
in deficit, New Zealand is spending more 
on imports and/or servicing overseas 
obligations than it is earning through exports 
and/or returns on overseas assets. Since 
New Zealanders are spending more than we 
earn in aggregate, as a country we need to 
rely on non-residents to fund this difference.
Persistently large current account deficits 
could make New Zealand more vulnerable to 
changes in the availability or cost of funding 
from overseas. It is therefore important to 
understand the factors that have driven the 
widening of the current account deficit since 
2021 and assess how long these factors are 
likely to persist.
Services account for much of the 
widening since 2021
As seen in figure 4.7, the key factors that 
account for the widening of the deficit since 
2021 are: 
•	 Services trade moving from a surplus 
to a deficit. Since the mid-1990s, 
New Zealand has maintained a services 
surplus. However, COVID-19 and the 
border closure led to a sudden decrease 
in exports of services, particularly tourism 
and education. While the border re-
opening has led to a recovery, exports of 
travel services remain materially below 
pre-COVID-19 levels (figure 4.8). This 
accounts for much of the widening in the 
current account deficit;
Figure 4.6
Current account balances for key trading partners
(annual, share of nominal GDP)
Source: Bloomberg.
Figure 4.7
Current account decomposition
(March year, share of nominal GDP)
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 4.8
Exports of services decomposition
(annual, share of nominal GDP)
Source: Stats NZ.


Chapter 4 Special topics
37
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
•	 A wider deficit in goods trade. Strong 
domestic demand in recent years has 
contributed to a wider goods deficit (figure 
4.9). This was most clearly reflected in an 
increase in durable goods imports, which 
were also relatively more expensive in 
recent years. Export volume growth has 
been relatively more subdued; and
•	 A wider income deficit. The income 
deficit increased from 2 percent of 
GDP in 2021 to 3 percent in 2023. This 
reflects the increased cost of servicing 
New Zealand’s net foreign liability position 
due to higher global interest rates.
While the government sector 
contributed to the initial widening 
in the current account deficit, the 
household and business sectors 
have played an increasing role
The current account deficit means 
New Zealand is spending more than it is 
earning. We can look at the net international 
borrowing – the difference between gross 
saving and investment – of different sectors 
to see their contributions to the current 
account (figure 4.10). Government spending 
contributed to the initial widening of the 
current account deficit during the start of the 
COVID-19 pandemic, and more than offset 
the increase in private sector net saving. 
However, the subsequent fiscal consolidation 
has not been sufficient to offset the savings-
investment gaps that have re-emerged in the 
household and business sectors.
The recent widening in the current account 
deficit reflects that domestic savings have 
not been enough to fund government, 
household and business sector investments. 
The shortfall has been funded by non-
residents. Over the medium term, a sustained 
narrowing of the deficit will likely require 
some adjustment in each of these sectors. 
The Government’s plan to return the 
budget to surplus is part of that rebalancing. 
Higher interest rates are also encouraging 
households and businesses to save more 
and invest less.
Source: Stats NZ.
Note: Contributions shown here are annual net lending by sector. 
Figure 4.10
Sectoral contributions to the current account
(March year, share of nominal GDP)
Figure 4.9
Exports and imports of goods
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted, share of nominal GDP)
Source: Stats NZ.


Chapter 4 Special topics
38
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
We forecast the current account 
deficit will narrow in an orderly 
manner
In our central projection, the current account 
deficit narrows over the medium term towards a 
level more consistent with its long-term average 
(figure 4.11).
•	 The services deficit is expected to narrow, 
driven by a continued recovery in tourism. 
International visitor arrivals have continued 
to increase, supported in the near term by 
the FIFA Women’s World Cup. Arrivals are 
expected to be supported further by the return 
of Chinese tourists from this year onwards.
•	 The goods deficit is also expected to narrow 
as high interest rates weaken private demand 
for imports, and import prices ease further as 
global inflation declines. The outlook for goods 
exports is more mixed, but stronger in the 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 4.11
Current account balance
(annual, share of nominal GDP)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 4.12
Net foreign liabilities
(annual, share of nominal GDP)
June 2023 quarter due to exceptionally good 
pasture growth conditions.
The current account deficit poses 
limited risks to financial stability, 
especially when compared to the 
GFC
Because New Zealand’s current account deficit 
is funded by foreign borrowing, its recent 
widening could potentially have implications 
for financial stability. Key considerations are 
New Zealand’s ability to repay this debt and 
the risk that some of this funding for banks, 
especially short-term funding, is withdrawn. 
The risk of a deterioration in financial stability 
arising from the current account deficit is 
viewed as very low. Some of the key reasons 
for this are:
•	 New Zealand’s external debt position is 
relatively sustainable, with a significantly 
lower ratio of net foreign liabilities to GDP 
than during the GFC (figure 4.12);
•	 The share of bank funding that is core – 
such as longer-term wholesale funding and 
deposits – is high, and much higher than 
it was before the GFC.8 This minimises the 
risk of a sudden funding withdrawal or that 
a large share of debt will roll over at a time 
when funding conditions are stressed; 
•	 As was also the case before the GFC, the 
vast majority of New Zealand debt is either 
denominated in New Zealand dollars or is 
hedged; and
•	 With inflation currently well above target, 
the extent that the change in New Zealand’s 
foreign liabilities is accurately reflected by 
the current account deficit is less than it 
would be in a low inflation environment. This 
is because the current account records our 
nominal interest earnings and payments, 
rather than New Zealand’s real interest 
earnings and payments. Inflation erodes the 
real value of our foreign liabilities, meaning 
the current account deficit overstates the 
increase in our foreign liabilities.9
8	
From April 2010, banks had to comply with the core funding ratio as 
part of the Liquidity Policy. Prior to that the core funding ratio data 
has been backdated using other data sources.
9	
See Obstfeld and Rogoff (1996), Foundations of International 
Macroeconomics, Box 1.1 on Nominal vs Real Current Accounts.


Chapter 4 Special topics
39
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
5.	 Domestic financial conditions
Rangituhi. Photo: Matthew Brunt
CHAPTER 
05
Financial 
conditions


Chapter 5 Domestic financial conditions
40
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
CHAPTER 5
Domestic financial conditions
Monetary policy affects economic activity by influencing 
financial conditions in New Zealand. These include the interest 
rates at which households and businesses save and borrow, the 
exchange rate, and other factors such as credit availability.
Financial conditions are broadly similar to those at the time of the May 
Statement. Retail interest rates (such as mortgage and term deposit rates) have 
increased, especially at shorter horizons. Wholesale interest rates (such as swap 
rates) at shorter horizons have decreased when compared to immediately prior 
to the May Statement, while those at longer horizons have increased slightly. 
Market participants’ near-term expectations 
for the OCR fell immediately following 
the May Statement but have remained 
reasonably stable in the months since. 
Market expectations for upcoming OCR 
decisions have shifted to be lower and flatter 
– that is, fewer OCR increases are expected 
for meetings in 2023, and the policy rate 
is expected to remain on hold for longer  
beyond this. Market expectations for the 
peak in the OCR have fallen 24 basis points 
from 5.87 percent to 5.63 percent since the 
May Statement (figure 5.1).
Figure 5.1
Market expectations for the OCR
Source: Bloomberg.
Note: Each data point represents market expectations of the level of the OCR at a given 
point in the future, as measured by ICAP’s overnight indexed swap pricing. 


Chapter 5 Domestic financial conditions
41
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Domestic wholesale rates have increased 
over 2023 (figure 5.2). However, short-term 
domestic wholesale rates have declined slightly 
since the May Statement, consistent with lower 
near-term OCR expectations. In contrast, rates 
at longer horizons have continued to increase, 
supported by increasing global interest rates 
(figure 5.3). As a result, the interest rate swap 
curve is less inverted than it was at the time of 
the May Statement. New Zealand government 
bond (NZGB) yields have increased relative to 
swap yields, as the pace of new bond issuance 
and expectations for future issuance have 
increased.
The New Zealand dollar exchange rate has 
depreciated on a trade-weighted basis since 
the May Statement. Global interest rates have 
increased by more than comparable domestic 
rates, resulting in a narrowing of interest rate 
differentials between New Zealand and its 
key trading partners. This narrowing in interest 
rate differentials has put downward pressure 
on the New Zealand dollar (figure 5.4). 
Additionally, the recent slowdown in China’s 
economic recovery has weakened demand 
for New Zealand’s export commodities, putting 
downward pressure on dairy prices and the 
New Zealand dollar. In contrast, stronger 
global risk sentiment (see “Risk sentiment” in 
table 5.1) has provided some support to the 
New Zealand dollar over this period.
Source: Bloomberg.
Figure 5.3
Global 2-year swap rates
Source: NZFMA, RBNZ.
Figure 5.4
New Zealand dollar TWI
(nominal)
Source: Bloomberg. 
Note: Swap rates are a wholesale interest rate often used as a benchmark by financial 
institutions in setting other interest rates in the economy. They represent the fixed interest 
rate that one party to the swap agreement receives in exchange for paying a floating rate 
to the other party over the time period of the agreement.
Figure 5.2
Domestic swap rates


Chapter 5 Domestic financial conditions
42
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Retail interest rates have continued to 
increase since the May Statement. Increases 
have been most significant for 1-year 
mortgage rates, which are around 50 basis 
points higher than in May, while 2-year 
mortgage rates have increased by around 25 
basis points (figure 5.5).
Interest rates for term deposits, which make 
up a large percentage of banks’ core funding, 
have continued to increase. Since the May 
Statement, 6-month term deposit rates have 
increased by 28 basis points, while longer-
term rates are around 10 basis points higher 
(figure 5.6). The spread (difference) between 
6-month term deposit rates and comparable 
wholesale rates has continued to narrow 
slowly but remains negative. This is in contrast 
to typical pre-pandemic spreads of around 
positive 100 basis points.
Source: interest.co.nz.
Note: The mortgage rates shown are the average of the latest fixed-term rates on offer 
from ANZ, ASB, BNZ and Westpac.
Figure 5.5
New Zealand mortgage rates 
Source: interest.co.nz.
Note: The term deposit rates shown are the average of the latest fixed-term rates on offer 
from ANZ, ASB, BNZ and Westpac.
Figure 5.6
Term deposit rates 


Chapter 5 Domestic financial conditions
43
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Table 5.1 
Developments in domestic financial conditions as at 10 August 2023
Wholesale interest rates 
Market pricing 
for the OCR
•	 The May Statement contributed to a downward shift in market participants’ expectations for the 
OCR during this cycle. The main reason for this shift was the projected OCR track being lower 
than what market participants had anticipated. However, expectations for the level of the OCR 
next year have increased, with fewer cuts priced through 2024 than prior to the May Statement.
•	 Current market expectations for the OCR are lower over the near term than at the time of the 
May Statement. Financial market expectations for the peak OCR in this cycle, as measured by 
overnight indexed swap pricing, have decreased by 24 basis points to 5.63 percent. However, 
expectations for the level of the OCR in early 2024 are higher than at the time of the May 
Statement, with the OCR expected to be at around 5.63 percent after the February 2024 
meeting. The current and expected OCR settings are contractionary, sitting above our estimates 
for the neutral OCR (see figure 7.4). 
New Zealand 
government 
bonds
•	 NZGB yields have increased across the curve since the May Statement. The increase in 
NZGB yields has been influenced by higher global interest rates, and New Zealand Debt 
Management’s (NZDM’s) updated issuance schedule, which was announced at the May Budget. 
•	 At the May Budget, NZDM projected an additional $20 billion in NZGB issuance over the next 
four years. NZDM has increased weekly bond tender sizes by $100m to $500m.  
•	 Measures of volatility in the NZGB market have declined following the May Statement, with 
bid-ask spreads narrowing and the intra-day trading range for bonds remaining relatively low. 
Demand for NZGBs at NZDM tenders has remained relatively stable despite the increased 
weekly tender sizes. 
•	 NZGB yields have increased by more than swap rates since the May Statement, likely due to the 
increase in supply of NZGBs.
Interest rate 
swaps
•	 Moves in New Zealand interest rate swaps have been relatively small since the May Statement. 
The 1-year swap rate is around 10 basis points lower over this period, while rates beyond 2 years 
are around 10-20 basis points higher. As a consequence, the degree of inversion in the interest 
rate swap curve has reduced, with the difference between 10- and 2-year swap rates narrowing 
from minus 100 to minus 80 basis points.
•	 Global interest rate swaps have increased since May, in response to reduced concerns about 
the banking systems in the US and Europe, stronger than expected economic data, and further 
monetary policy tightening by central banks. Global interest rates continue to be a key influence 
on longer-term domestic interest rate movements. 
New Zealand dollar
Interest rate 
differentials
•	 The difference between interest rates in New Zealand and those of our advanced trading 
partner economies such as Australia, the US, and the UK has narrowed since May, particularly 
following the May Statement. For example, the difference between the 2-year NZGB yield and 
the 2-year US government bond yield has decreased by around 17 basis points since the May 
Statement, as US yields have increased by more than New Zealand yields.
•	 Declines in New Zealand interest rates relative to those of key trading partners are often 
associated with a depreciation in the New Zealand dollar. Narrowing interest rate differentials 
have been an important influence on the New Zealand dollar since the May Statement. On 
net, the New Zealand dollar has fallen 2.6 percent on a trade-weighted basis since the May 
Statement. 


Chapter 5 Domestic financial conditions
44
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Risk sentiment
•	 During periods of low uncertainty or volatility, financial market participants’ willingness to take 
on additional risks increases and demand for safe haven currencies, such as the US dollar, 
decreases. Typically, more positive risk sentiment is associated with an appreciation in the 
New Zealand dollar. 
•	 Market risk sentiment has broadly improved since the May Statement, in response to an easing 
of banking stress in the US and Europe, stronger-than-expected US economic data, and falling 
inflation. This has contributed to strength in US equity prices, with the S&P 500 up 8.56 percent 
since the May Statement. Improving risk sentiment has likely supported the New Zealand dollar, 
although this has been outweighed by other factors.
Commodity 
prices
•	 Prices of key export commodities in New Zealand have continued to fall since the May 
Statement, with one driver being weaker demand from China. 
•	 Declines in New Zealand’s key export commodity prices tend to be associated with a 
depreciation in the New Zealand dollar, all else equal.  
Retail interest rates
Mortgage rates
•	 The mortgage rate curve has continued to invert further in recent months. The average 1-year 
mortgage rate has increased by 48 basis points since the May Statement, while average 5-year 
mortgage rates have remained broadly unchanged. Despite this curve inversion, the majority 
of new lending is at 1- to 2-year horizons, although the volume of 3-year fixed-rate lending has 
increased in recent months.
Deposit rates
•	 Term deposit rates have increased since the May Statement. Rates for 6-month and 1-year terms 
have increased by around 28 basis points and 17 basis points respectively, resulting in a less 
negative spread to respective wholesale rates. However, these spreads have remained negative 
when they were positive prior to the COVID-19 pandemic. Bonus saver interest rates have also 
been slow to increase, and their spread to the OCR is also significantly below pre-COVID-19 
averages.
•	 The term deposit curve remains inverted, with the 1-year rate around 65 basis points higher than 
the 5-year term deposit rate.  
Bank funding conditions
Funding 
composition
•	 Term deposit volumes have continued to increase since the May Statement, particularly in the 
6-month and 1-year terms. Depositors have continued to switch from on-call accounts as the 
spread between term and on-call deposit rates has continued to increase. Term deposit volumes 
grew by around $4.5 billion in the two months after the May Statement, while on-call account 
volumes fell by around $4.6 billion.
•	 Banks remain well funded and have strong liquidity buffers. Lower-cost deposits remain a larger 
share of bank funding than before the COVID-19 pandemic. Bank core funding ratios remain 
relatively high, at 89.7 percent in May.
Credit spreads
•	 The cost of raising long-term wholesale bank funding relative to benchmark wholesale rates has 
been stable since the May Statement. 
•	 Domestic bank credit spreads are currently slightly lower than at the time of the May Statement. 
Offshore credit spreads have declined by more than domestic credit spreads over this period, as 
further easing in US and European banking stresses have filtered through to credit spreads. This 
is contributing to slightly lower average funding costs for the largest New Zealand banks, which 
obtain a large portion of their wholesale funding offshore.


Chapter 5 Domestic financial conditions
45
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
6.	 Economic projections
CHAPTER 
06
Economic 
projections
Tongariro Alpine Crossing. Photo: Thomas Bohm


Chapter 6 Economic projections
46
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
CHAPTER 6
Economic projections
This chapter summarises the baseline economic projections that 
MPC members considered when making their policy assessment. 
The projections were finalised on 10 August 2023.
These projections rely on a set of key 
assumptions about the global and  
domestic factors influencing the economy. 
They include:
•	 the extent to which activity and inflation 
in our key trading partners slows over 
coming years and the consequences for 
domestic financial conditions, demand 
for New Zealand’s goods and services 
exports, and export and import prices;
•	 the speed and strength of the recovery in 
international tourism in New Zealand;
•	 the persistence of labour market 
tightness and wage pressures, and the 
impacts of these factors on household 
spending and core inflation;
•	 the outlook for net immigration, and 
whether high net immigration contributes 
relatively more to labour supply or 
aggregate demand and over what period;
•	 the extent to which the decline in 
house prices since late 2021 and their 
recent stabilisation contribute to lower 
residential construction activity and 
household consumption;
•	 the extent to which business investment 
weakens on the back of lower export 
prices and declining capacity pressures 
in the economy;
•	 how businesses, consumers and workers 
respond to rising costs and higher 
interest rates in New Zealand; and
•	 the extent to which government 
consumption and investment contribute 
to the demand and inflation outlook.
Uncertainty around these assumptions is 
high, as there are several large and partially 
offsetting factors influencing the economic 
environment. These factors include: the 
normalisation in activity and supply chains 
after most COVID-19 restrictions were lifted; 
the rapid rise in global inflation, including 
the impact of Russia’s war against Ukraine; 
the rapid increase in interest rates globally 
and the speed with which inflation declines 
as a result; and the normalisation in fiscal 
spending from high levels during the height 
of the COVID-19 pandemic.  
The projections take into account recent 
data, which show that the economy 
contracted in the first quarter of 2023 
despite resilient employment growth. 
Although timely data suggest a modest 
expansion in the second quarter of 2023, 
we are seeing signs that broad economic 
activity is slowing. This has been seen 
particularly in parts of the economy 
more sensitive to interest rates. Capacity 
pressures are still inflationary but have 
reduced over the second quarter of 2023, 
roughly as anticipated in the May Statement. 
The factors underpinning this starting point 
are discussed in chapter 2.
Over the medium term, we assume that 
lower global goods demand, high interest 
rates and their dampening impact on house 
prices, consumption and investment, as 
well as a declining share of government 
spending in the economy will substantially 
temper economic growth.


Chapter 6 Economic projections
47
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
This moderation in economic activity 
is expected to further reduce capacity 
pressures and, hence, contribute to lower 
inflation over the medium term. In addition, 
global inflationary pressures are easing, 
which is expected to result in lower imported 
inflation in New Zealand. High interest rates 
in most of New Zealand’s trading partners 
are reducing demand. The normalisation 
of global supply chains and falls in global 
food and energy commodity prices over the 
past 18 months are reducing imported cost 
pressures. As a result, New Zealand’s import 
prices have decreased in recent months, and 
we expect this trend to continue over the 
medium term. 
Core inflation is still high. Measures of core 
inflation remained at elevated levels or 
increased further in the June 2023 quarter. 
In addition, non-tradables inflation was 
somewhat higher in the June 2023 quarter 
than expected in the May Statement. 
However, non-tradables and core inflation 
are materially affected by labour market 
pressures, and these have been easing over 
recent quarters. Consequently, non-tradables 
inflation is expected to decline slowly as 
capacity and labour market pressures 
continue to ease over the medium term.
Overall, annual consumer price inflation is 
expected to return to its 2 percent target 
midpoint towards the end of 2025. Given 
the expected slowing in domestic demand, 
a softening in the labour market is likely. 
Employment is expected to fall below its 
maximum sustainable level for a time.
10	
For more information on the neutral interest rate and our indicator suite see chapter 4.1 in the November 2022 Statement.
Relative to the May Statement, stronger 
supply-led export volumes in the near term, 
an earlier stabilisation in house prices, and a 
slight upward revision to the nominal neutral 
OCR are partially offset by lower overall 
domestic activity at the start of 2023 and 
lower import and export prices. Conditional 
on our central economic outlook, it is 
expected that the OCR will need to remain 
near its current level for slightly longer 
than assumed in the May Statement for the 
MPC to meet its inflation and employment 
objectives.
Based on our neutral OCR indicator suite, 
we have revised up our estimate of the 
long-run nominal neutral OCR from 2.0 
percent to 2.25 percent from the September 
2023 quarter onwards.10 The neutral OCR 
is the rate that, on average over time, 
would be consistent with no over- or 
underutilisation of resources and stable 
inflation in the economy. The increase in 
our neutral indicator suite primarily reflects 
that long-term interest rates have increased 
substantially since the end of 2021. The OCR 
remains contractionary at its current level 
based on this revised assumption. Taken on 
its own, the upward revision to the neutral 
OCR would create slightly more upward 
pressure on the OCR over time.


Chapter 6 Economic projections
48
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Table 6.1
Key projection assumptions
Key factors
Global factors
•	 The global economy is continuing to slow in response to monetary policy tightening by central 
banks around the world. However, economic momentum is mixed across New Zealand’s trading 
partners. Economic activity in the US is more resilient and the labour market has remained 
robust, supporting consumer spending. US banking stress in early 2023 has been contained and 
an agreement to increase the US government debt ceiling was reached. In contrast, economic 
growth in China after the removal of most COVID-19 restrictions has been lower than expected. 
Lower global goods demand, ongoing weakness in the highly indebted Chinese property 
market and other long-term structural issues – such as a worsening skills mismatch in the labour 
market for youth – are constraining economic activity in China.
•	 On balance, global economic growth is expected to remain below pre-COVID-19 levels over 
coming years, similar to what was anticipated in the May Statement. Several factors are assumed 
to dampen demand, including still-high inflation, high interest rates, and the normalisation of 
government spending from the high levels reached during the COVID-19 pandemic. A shift back 
towards services consumption given the removal of most COVID-19 restrictions reduces global 
demand for goods more than it does for services.
•	 Overall, slowing global demand is reducing capacity and inflationary pressures. In addition, 
supply chains have normalised and the impact on global inflation of Russia’s war against Ukraine 
has receded. Consequently, we expect that lower global inflation will result in lower imported 
inflation in New Zealand over time. 
•	 Expected future global monetary policy interest rates are significantly higher than assumed in 
the May Statement. This has narrowed the difference in interest rates between New Zealand 
and its trading partners, creating downward pressure on the TWI. However, the TWI has 
depreciated only slightly since the May Statement, supported by factors such as lower financial 
market volatility. 
•	 The TWI is assumed to remain at 71.0 over the projection.
International 
tourism
•	 Services exports, particularly tourism and education, have recovered rapidly since the border was 
reopened in 2022. We maintain a strong growth projection for service exports. The FIFA Women’s 
World Cup in July and August 2023 is expected to have added noticeably to exports of tourism 
services in an otherwise seasonally quiet time of year. Additional spending by overseas tourists is 
contributing to capacity pressures across the transport, accommodation, and hospitality sectors. 
•	 We assume that tourism exports will have recovered to around 90 percent of their pre-pandemic 
levels in inflation-adjusted terms over the 2023/2024 summer season and will surpass pre-
pandemic levels by the end of the projection.
House prices
•	 Monthly REINZ house prices fell around 15 percent in seasonally adjusted terms from their peak 
in November 2021 to March 2023. Since then, house prices have stabilised. 
•	 The stabilisation in house prices over the June 2023 quarter was earlier than anticipated in 
the May Statement. The rapid return of net immigration, an increase in the number of residents 
due to the one-off 2021 resident visa, strong employment and nominal wage growth, slower 
increases in retail mortgage interest rates and a relatively low number of houses available for 
sale have contributed to this recent stabilisation in house prices. 
•	 Consequently, we assume no further falls in house prices. We assume house prices grow 
gradually over the next year before increasing at a slightly faster pace in nominal terms over the 
remainder of the projection. 
•	 Although house prices have stabilised, they are significantly below their previous peak. This 
lower level of house prices is expected to flow through to less household spending over the 
projection, as aggregate household wealth has fallen substantially.


Chapter 6 Economic projections
49
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Economic growth
Production
•	 We assume that production GDP grew by 0.5 percent in the June 2023 quarter, supported by 
continued recovery in services exports and temporarily strong goods exports. In particular, 
exceptionally good pasture growth conditions over the first half of 2023 have supported dairy 
and meat production and, consequently, goods exports. 
•	 Capacity pressures have reduced broadly as expected in the May Statement. However, they are 
still at an inflationary level. We estimate that the output gap peaked at 3.2 percent of potential 
GDP in the September 2022 quarter and has reduced to 0.8 percent of potential GDP in the 
June 2023 quarter.
•	 These projections contain a shallow period of economic contraction. We project the economy 
to contract over the second half of 2023, as temporary supportive factors from the June 2023 
quarter unwind, global growth slows, and high interest rates keep domestic demand subdued. 
However, quarterly changes in GDP are highly uncertain. Annual GDP growth is projected to be 
0.0 percent in the December 2023 quarter. 
•	 Over the medium term, the productive capacity of the economy is expected to improve, 
increasing economic activity. In large part, this is supported by strong population growth through 
net immigration adding to labour supply. 
•	 We expect the output gap to close and become negative over the second half of 2023. 
An extended period of below-trend growth is expected to be necessary to see both our 
employment and inflation objectives met sustainably over the medium term.
Consumption
•	 Consumption is estimated to have slowed in the June 2023 quarter, reflecting weaker card 
spending data and changing seasonal factors related to international travel.
•	 Over coming quarters, consumption is expected to slow further as households with mortgages 
continue to roll onto higher interest rates, and the effect of lower house prices continues to 
pass through. In addition, employment growth and wage inflation are forecast to slow. However, 
stronger net immigration is likely to provide some support for aggregate consumption and 
house prices. Consumption is expected to decline on a per capita basis to trough at around pre-
pandemic levels by early 2024.
•	 Over the later part of the forecast horizon, consumption is expected to recover, supported by 
declining interest rates and increasing house price inflation.
Investment
•	 Significant pressure on available resources has supported high levels of business investment 
over the last few years.
•	 Business investment is expected to decline over coming quarters, due to high interest rates, 
declining export prices and easing capacity pressures. Global weakness is also likely to reduce 
business investment further by adding to uncertainty about future global demand.
•	 Residential construction has been higher than anticipated in the May Statement. However, 
dwelling consents have fallen rapidly this year. Our projected decline in residential construction 
is consistent with current high mortgage interest rates, high construction costs and lower house 
prices relative to their peak in November 2021. Business contacts have suggested that these 
factors have led to a large decline in development pre-sales, which will lead to a significant 
reduction in residential construction over the next year. 
•	 Increased net immigration is assumed to support a lagged recovery in residential construction 
activity over the later part of the forecast horizon.  We project the share of residential 
construction to potential GDP to return to pre-pandemic levels by the end of the forecast 
horizon.
Government
•	 We assume that government consumption and investment evolve in line with the macroeconomic 
and fiscal forecasts in the Budget 2023.
•	 Government investment, particularly in infrastructure, is projected to increase considerably as 
rebuild and repair work associated with the severe weather events in the North Island in early 
2023 continues.
•	 Over the medium term, the sum of real government consumption and investment as a share 
of potential GDP is expected to continue to decline gradually from high levels. This means that 
government spending will be adding less to inflationary pressures over the forecast horizon. 


Chapter 6 Economic projections
50
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Exports and 
imports
•	 Goods export prices have weakened, reflecting softening global demand and increased supply. 
In particular, the volume of dairy products exported has increased due to exceptionally good 
pasture growth conditions in parts of New Zealand over the first half of 2023. This is expected to 
increase goods export volumes substantially in the June 2023 quarter.
•	 The exceptionally good pasture growth conditions are not expected to persist. The global 
economic slowdown is also assumed to reduce demand for our goods exports. 
•	 In addition, many types of our goods exports have seen little or no volume growth for a number 
of years, even before the COVID-19 pandemic. This suggests that the industries producing these 
goods may have reached maturity and may not grow to the same extent as previously. This 
dynamic is visible for goods such as dairy; meat; metal products and machinery; wood and paper 
products; coal, petrol and ores; textiles and apparel. As a result, we expect goods exports to 
grow only modestly over the medium term and less than assumed in the May Statement.
•	 International travel is recovering as expected. By the end of the projection, services exports are 
assumed to have surpassed pre-COVID-19 levels.
•	 Non-oil import prices increased strongly over 2021 and 2022. However, recent GDP data 
and other indicators suggest that non-oil import prices fell over the first half of 2023 by more 
than anticipated in the May Statement. This is in line with slightly faster falls in global inflation, 
declining global goods demand and falling shipping costs. We assume this lower price level will 
persist and that non-oil import prices will decline only slightly more over the medium term.
•	 The lower forecast for non-oil import prices is partially offset by a stronger outlook for oil import 
prices than assumed in the May Statement. Stronger oil prices have mainly resulted from Saudi 
Arabia and Russia reducing oil supply. In line with futures pricing, the price for Dubai oil is 
assumed to decline from around US$83 currently to around US$77 by the end of the projection.
Labour market
Employment 
and wages 
•	 The New Zealand labour market remains tight but has shown clearer signs of easing recently. 
The unemployment rate increased from 3.4 to 3.6 percent in the June 2023 quarter, while the 
number of employed people and the size of the labour force continued to grow strongly. Overall, 
our suite of labour market indicators provides consistent evidence that labour market pressures 
have been easing relative to last year. Still, employment remains above its maximum sustainable 
level.
•	 Over the medium term, employment growth is projected to decline in line with slowing economic 
activity. Employment may fall below its maximum sustainable level for a time. These projections 
contain a modest decline in total employment, while the population continues to grow. The 
slowing in economic growth, together with gradual growth in the labour force, is expected to 
relieve labour market pressures. The unemployment rate is assumed to increase from low levels 
to around 5.3 percent in the first half of 2025, in line with the declining output gap.
•	 Strong net immigration has been alleviating labour shortages. While immigrants fill existing job 
vacancies – increasing the number of employed people in the economy – high interest rates 
reduce new labour demand. Consequently, the number of job vacancies has been falling. 
•	 We assume that these factors reduce the overall bargaining power of workers when negotiating 
new wages. This reduces inflationary pressures, at least in the near term, without a large 
increase in the unemployment rate. In line with this, annual same-job wage inflation decreased 
from 4.5 to 4.3 percent in the June 2023 quarter, which was slightly lower than assumed in the 
May Statement.
•	 Immigrants not only add to supply but also to demand. As a result, the net impact of immigration 
on inflation and over what period is uncertain (see chapter 4.1 for a more detailed discussion). 
•	 We expect same-job wage inflation to decline gradually over the medium term, as labour market 
pressures continue to ease. However, wage inflation is assumed to stay above pre-COVID-19 
levels as nominal same-job wages continue to catch up with lost purchasing power as a result of 
high consumer price inflation in recent years.


Chapter 6 Economic projections
51
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Inflation
Headline
•	 Annual headline CPI inflation is assumed to have peaked. It is assumed to remain at 6.0 percent 
in the September 2023 quarter, due primarily to higher fuel prices and local body rates, before 
declining further.
•	 Annual headline CPI inflation is projected to return to within the 1 to 3 percent target band in the 
second half of 2024, reaching the 2 percent target midpoint in 2025.
Tradables
•	 Annual tradables inflation is assumed to have peaked and is projected to decline over the 
projection. Generalised easing of global inflationary pressures is assumed to reduce imported 
inflation. While petrol prices are expected to be higher in the September 2023 quarter, they are 
projected to gradually decline over the medium term. Similarly, non-oil import prices – including 
food prices – are forecast to gradually decline over the forecast horizon, contributing to the fall 
in tradables inflation. 
•	 Temporary reductions in the fuel excise tax ended on 30 June 2023. This will boost tradables 
inflation in the September 2023 quarter.
Non-tradables
•	 Annual non-tradables inflation is assumed to have peaked, but is still supported by ongoing 
domestic capacity pressures and strong wage growth.
•	 Capacity pressures are expected to continue easing over 2023. High interest rates reduce 
domestic demand while the productive capacity of the economy improves, mainly because of 
strong net immigration. However, non-tradables inflation is assumed to decline only slowly, in 
light of only gradually reducing core inflation and inflation expectations.


Chapter 6 Economic projections
52
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Figure 6.3
Unemployment rate
(unemployed people as a share of the labour force, 
seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Charts
Figure 6.1
Inflation components
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Dotted lines show the projections from the May Statement. The shaded 
area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI inflation 
over the medium term.
Figure 6.2
Private sector LCI wage inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.4
House price growth
(annual)
Source: CoreLogic, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.5
Production GDP
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.6
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 6 Economic projections
53
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Figure 6.9
Business investment
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.7
Private consumption
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.8
Residential investment
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.10
Government consumption
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.11
Total exports
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.12
Total imports
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 6 Economic projections
54
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
7.	 Appendices
CHAPTER 
07
Appendices
Blue Springs. Photo: Jinny Leong


Chapter 7 Appendices
55
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
CHAPTER 7
Appendices
Appendix 1:  
Statistical tables
Table 7.1
Key forecast variables
GDP growth 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Annual
Unemployment 
rate
TWI
OCR
2021
Mar
2.3
0.8
1.5
4.6
74.9
0.3
 
Jun
1.9
1.3
3.3
4.0
74.7
0.3
 
Sep
-4.2
2.2
4.9
3.3
74.4
0.3
 
Dec
3.5
1.4
5.9
3.2
74.3
0.6
2022
Mar
0.1
1.8
6.9
3.2
72.6
0.9
 
Jun
1.5
1.7
7.3
3.3
72.1
1.6
 
Sep
1.4
2.2
7.2
3.3
70.6
2.7
 
Dec
-0.7
1.4
7.2
3.4
70.8
3.8
2023
Mar
-0.1
1.2
6.7
3.4
71.3
4.5
Jun
0.5
1.1
6.0
3.6
71.0
5.3
Sep
-0.3
2.1
6.0
3.8
71.0
5.5
Dec
-0.1
0.7
5.2
4.4
71.0
5.5
2024
Mar
0.2
0.6
4.5
4.8
71.0
5.6
Jun
0.4
0.5
3.9
5.1
71.0
5.6
Sep
0.5
0.9
2.7
5.2
71.0
5.6
Dec
0.5
0.4
2.4
5.3
71.0
5.5
2025
Mar
0.6
0.5
2.3
5.3
71.0
5.4
Jun
0.8
0.4
2.2
5.3
71.0
5.1
Sep
0.9
0.8
2.0
5.2
71.0
4.8
Dec
0.8
0.4
2.0
5.1
71.0
4.5
2026
Mar
0.7
0.5
2.0
5.0
71.0
4.1
Jun
0.7
0.4
2.0
5.0
71.0
3.8
Sep
0.7
0.8
2.0
5.0
71.0
3.4


Chapter 7 Appendices
56
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Table 7.2
Measures of inflation, inflation expectations, and asset prices
2021
2022
2023
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Inflation (annual rates)
CPI
5.9
6.9
7.3
7.2
7.2
6.7
6.0
CPI non-tradables
5.3
6.0
6.3
6.6
6.6
6.8
6.6
CPI tradables
6.9
8.5
8.7
8.1
8.2
6.4
5.2
Sectoral factor model 
estimate of core inflation
4.2
4.7
5.1
5.5
5.8
5.8
5.8
CPI trimmed mean 
(30 percent measure)
4.3
5.2
5.8
6.4
6.1
6.1
6.0
CPI weighted median
3.8
3.9
4.8
5.0
5.0
5.6
6.6
GDP deflator (expenditure)
5.3
6.1
5.8
5.2
4.9
5.7
Inflation expectations
ANZ Business Outlook – inflation  
1 year ahead (quarterly average to date)
4.0
5.4
6.0
6.1
6.3
5.9
5.5
5.1
RBNZ Survey of Expectations – 
inflation 2 years ahead
3.0
3.3
3.3
3.1
3.6
3.3
2.8
2.8
RBNZ Survey of Expectations – 
inflation 5 years ahead
2.2
2.3
2.4
2.3
2.4
2.4
2.4
2.3
RBNZ Survey of Expectations – 
inflation 10 years ahead
2.0
2.1
2.1
2.1
2.2
2.2
2.3
2.2
Asset prices (annual percent changes)
Quarterly house price index 
(CoreLogic NZ)
27.1
13.7
5.4
-4.2
-11.2
REINZ Farm Price Index (quarterly 
average to date)
20.5
25.6
31.0
5.9
0.6
-3.5
-7.5
NZX 50 (quarterly average to date)
3.0
-3.9
-9.0
-11.3
-12.8
-3.5
3.8
4.0


Chapter 7 Appendices
57
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Table 7.3
Measures of labour market conditions	
(seasonally adjusted, changes expressed in annual percent terms, unless specified otherwise)	
2021
2022
2023
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Household Labour Force Survey
Unemployment rate
3.2
3.2
3.3
3.3
3.4
3.4
3.6
Underutilisation rate
9.2
9.3
9.2
9.1
9.4
9.1
9.8
Labour force participation rate
71.0
70.9
71.0
71.6
71.8
72.0
72.4
Employment rate (percentage of 
working-age population)
68.7
68.6
68.6
69.3
69.4
69.6
69.8
Employment growth
3.3
2.5
1.3
1.2
1.7
2.9
4.0
Average weekly hours worked
33.3
33.4
33.7
33.8
34.0
33.6
33.4
Number unemployed 
(thousand people)
93
94
96
97
100
103
109
Number employed (million people)
2.82
2.82
2.81
2.85
2.87
2.90
2.93
Labour force (million people)
2.91
2.91
2.91
2.95
2.97
3.00
3.04
Extended labour force 
(million people)
2.99
3.00
3.00
3.02
3.05
3.09
3.13
Working-age population 
(million people, age 15 years+)
4.10
4.10
4.10
4.11
4.14
4.17
4.19
Quarterly Employment Survey – QES
Filled jobs growth
4.1
4.3
1.5
1.5
1.3
2.2
6.5
Average hourly earnings growth 
(private sector, ordinary time)
4.1
5.3
7.0
8.6
8.1
8.2
7.7
Other data sources
Labour cost index growth, 
private sector, adjusted
2.8
3.1
3.4
3.9
4.3
4.5
4.3
Labour cost index growth, 
private sector, unadjusted
4.5
5.0
5.2
5.6
6.1
6.1
6.1
Estimated net working-age 
immigration (thousands, quarterly)
-6.0
-7.1
-3.1
6.6
17.8
29.4
Change in All Vacancies Index
31.0
22.8
3.4
7.4
-2.2
-16.6
-22.0
Note: The All Vacancies Index is produced by MBIE as part of the monthly Jobs Online report, which shows changes in job vacancies advertised by businesses on 
internet job boards. The unadjusted labour cost index (LCI) is an analytical index that reflects quality change in addition to price change (whereas the official LCI 
measures price changes only). For definitions of underutilisation, the extended labour force, and related concepts, see Statistics New Zealand (2016), 
‘Introducing underutilisation in the labour market’. Estimated net working-age immigration is the Stats NZ outcomes-based measure.


Chapter 7 Appendices
58
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Table 7.4
Composition of real GDP growth
(annual average percent change, seasonally adjusted, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
Final consumption expenditure
Private
4.2
6.5
4.8
4.5
2.4
-0.2
6.1
2.3
-1.0
1.4
3.2
Public authority
2.1
2.1
3.9
3.4
5.5
7.6
8.1
1.9
-1.4
-1.5
0.3
Total
3.7
5.4
4.6
4.3
3.1
1.6
6.5
2.2
-1.1
0.7
2.5
Gross fixed capital formation
Residential
7.1
8.8
-1.8
-0.1
2.7
2.2
2.6
3.1
-8.2
-9.7
6.6
Other
2.2
0.0
10.1
7.2
2.8
-2.8
13.3
3.6
-1.0
-1.5
3.5
Total
3.4
2.3
6.8
5.3
2.8
-1.6
10.6
3.5
-2.7
-3.3
4.1
Final domestic 
expenditure
3.6
4.7
5.1
4.5
3.0
0.9
7.5
2.5
-1.5
-0.3
2.9
Stockbuilding*
-0.3
0.1
0.2
-0.2
-0.2
-0.3
0.6
-0.2
-0.6
0.5
0.0
Gross national 
expenditure
3.2
4.8
5.6
4.4
2.7
-0.3
8.7
2.6
-1.9
0.2
2.9
Exports of goods and 
services
6.9
2.0
3.8
3.3
0.2
-17.9
2.4
6.2
10.0
4.2
4.5
Imports of goods and 
services
3.1
5.2
7.8
4.8
1.2
-15.9
17.4
4.9
-0.7
0.3
4.3
Expenditure on GDP
4.3
3.9
4.4
3.9
2.5
0.0
4.8
2.6
0.5
1.2
2.9
GDP (production)
3.8
3.7
3.5
3.5
2.4
-0.7
5.2
2.9
0.2
1.2
2.9
GDP (production, 
March qtr to March qtr)
4.0
3.3
3.6
3.5
1.0
4.2
1.1
2.2
0.3
2.0
3.2
* Percentage point contribution to the growth rate of GDP.


Chapter 7 Appendices
59
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Table 7.5
Summary of economic projections
(annual percent change, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2016
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
Price measures
CPI 
0.4
2.2
1.1
1.5
2.5
1.5
6.9
6.7
4.5
2.3
2.0
Labour costs
1.8
1.5
1.9
2.0
2.4
1.6
3.1
4.5
3.8
3.8
3.8
Export prices 
(in New Zealand dollars) 
0.7
4.1
3.3
1.2
7.0
-5.9
21.0
1.1
-4.2
2.3
5.6
Import prices 
(in New Zealand dollars) 
0.5
1.3
1.7
4.1
2.5
-2.4
19.0
8.2
-1.6
-0.8
-0.5
Monetary conditions
OCR (year average)
2.9
2.0
1.8
1.8
1.2
0.3
0.5
3.1
5.5
5.5
4.7
TWI (year average)
72.6
76.5
75.6
73.4
71.7
72.4
74.0
71.2
71.0
71.0
71.0
Output
GDP (production, annual 
average % change)
3.8
3.7
3.5
3.5
2.4
-0.7
5.2
2.9
0.2
1.2
2.9
Potential output (annual 
average % change)
3.2
3.3
3.3
3.3
3.0
-0.7
3.2
2.9
2.8
2.6
2.5
Output gap (% of potential 
GDP, year average)
-0.2
0.2
0.4
0.7
0.1
0.1
2.1
2.1
-0.4
-1.8
-1.5
Labour market
Total employment 
(seasonally adjusted)
2.3
5.9
2.9
1.5
2.6
0.1
2.5
2.9
1.1
0.8
1.8
Unemployment rate 
(March qtr, seasonally 
adjusted)
5.3
4.9
4.4
4.2
4.2
4.6
3.2
3.4
4.8
5.3
5.0
Trend labour productivity 
0.7
0.6
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.7
0.5
0.3
0.2
0.4
0.6
Key balances
Government operating 
balance* (% of GDP,  
year to June)
0.7
1.5
1.9
2.4
-7.3
-1.3
-2.6
-1.7
-2.3
-1.3
0.0
Current account balance 
(% of GDP)
-2.4
-2.6
-3.1
-3.8
-2.3
-2.7
-6.6
-8.4
-6.8
-6.1
-4.6
Terms of trade 
(SNA measure, annual 
average % change)
-2.6
2.1
4.5
-2.1
2.0
-1.0
0.4
-4.9
-4.3
0.7
5.8
Household saving rate  
(% of disposable income)
-0.8
-0.4
-0.5
0.3
2.6
8.9
2.9
2.2
0.8
1.2
1.0
World economy
Trading-partner GDP 
(annual average % change)
3.4
3.5
3.9
3.5
1.7
-0.6
6.0
2.7
2.8
2.7
3.2
Trading-partner CPI  
(TWI weighted)
1.2
1.9
1.9
1.4
2.4
0.8
4.1
4.8
2.8
2.1
2.2
* Government operating balance is a model-based estimate of OBEGAL divided by nominal GDP in the projection. The estimate is partial because it relies 
on projections for some components from the Budget 2023.


Chapter 7 Appendices
60
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Appendix 2: Chart pack
Figure 7.1
Composition of CPI inflation
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 7.2
Output gap and output gap indicators
(share of potential)
Source: NZIER, MBIE, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The output gap indicators based on information about the labour market 
are shown separately from the other indicators. For each group of indicators, the 
shaded area shows the range of values and the line shows the mean value.
Figure 7.3
Unemployment and underutilisation rates
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 7.4
OCR and nominal neutral OCR indicator suite
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area indicates the range between the maximum and minimum 
values from our suite of long-run nominal neutral OCR indicators. See chapter 4.1 
of the November 2022 Statement for more information.
Figure 7.5
GDP and potential GDP
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 7.6
Measures of core inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Core inflation measures exclude the GST increase in 2010. The shaded 
area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI inflation 
over the medium term.


Chapter 7 Appendices
61
Monetary Policy Statement  August 2023
Figure 7.7
Inflation expectations
(annual, years ahead) 
Source: RBNZ Survey of Expectations (Business).
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for 
annual CPI inflation over the medium term.
Figure 7.9
House price inflation
(annual, nominal) 
Source: REINZ.
Source: Stats NZ, Global Dairy Trade, Refinitiv, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 7.12
Terms of trade, dairy and oil price indices
Figure 7.10
Mortgage interest rates
Source: interest.co.nz, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The rates shown for the fixed terms are the average of the advertised 
rates from ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac, shown as weekly data. The floating 
rate represents the monthly yield on floating housing debt from the RBNZ 
Income Statement survey.
Figure 7.8
Private sector wage growth
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Private sector wage growth is measured by the labour cost index, all 
salary and wage rates, private sector. Real labour cost index is deflated with 
headline CPI inflation.
Figure 7.11
New Zealand dollar exchange rates
(quarterly average) 
Source: NZFMA, RBNZ.
