BANK: RBNZ
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: Monetary Policy Statement August 2024
DATE: 13/08/2024
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/monetary-policy-statements/2024/aug-140824jvb/mps_report_aug2024.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Monetary Policy
Statement. 
August 2024
B.33


ii
Policy assessment. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Policy assessment.
OCR 5.25% – Monetary restraint 
tempered as inflation converges on target
OCR reduced by 25 basis 
points to 5.25%. 
New Zealand’s annual consumer price inflation 
is returning to within the Monetary Policy 
Committee’s 1 to 3 percent target band. Surveyed 
inflation expectations, firms’ pricing behaviour, 
headline inflation, and a variety of core inflation 
measures are moving consistent with low and 
stable inflation. 
Economic growth remains below trend and 
inflation is declining across advanced economies. 
Some central banks have begun reducing 
policy interest rates. Imported inflation into 
New Zealand has declined to be more consistent 
with pre-pandemic levels. 
Services inflation remains elevated but is 
also expected to continue to decline, both at 
home and abroad, in line with increased spare 
economic capacity. Consumer price inflation in 
New Zealand is expected to remain near the 
target mid-point over the foreseeable future. 
The Committee agreed to ease the level of 
monetary policy restraint by reducing the OCR 
to 5.25 percent. The pace of further easing 
will depend on the Committee’s confidence 
that pricing behaviour remains consistent with 
a low inflation environment, and that inflation 
expectations are anchored around the  
2 percent target.
Meitaki, thanks.
Adrian Orr 
Governor 
Figure i.1
Official Cash Rate (OCR)
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


iii
Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
REPORT AND SUPPORTING NOTES PUBLISHED AT:
www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/monetary-policy-statement
Subscribe online: www.rbnz.govt.nz/email-updates
Copyright © 2024 Reserve Bank of New Zealand
This report is published pursuant to section 129
of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 2021. 
ISSN 1770-4829
rbnz.govt.nz
Thank you to RBNZ staff for photography in this report. 
Cover: Wellington harbour. Photo: Rachael Grant
Monetary Policy Framework
The Monetary Policy Committee operates and makes 
decisions under the monetary policy framework that 
comprises the following key components:
•	 the Remit;
•	 the Charter;
•	 the Code of Conduct; and
•	 the monetary policy strategy.
The corresponding documents to these components 
and additional information can be accessed on our 
website under the monetary policy framework.


1
Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
The projections were finalised on 12 August 2024. The Official Cash Rate (OCR) projection 
incorporates an outlook for monetary policy that is consistent with the MPC’s monetary 
policy assessment, which was finalised on 14 August 2024. 
Contents
Policy assessment	
ii
1.	
Summary record of meeting	
2
2.	 Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook	
6
	
Box A: Timely indicators suggest weakening economic activity	
9
	
Box B: Fiscal policy	
12
3.	 Global developments and outlook	
19
4.	 Special topics	
25
	
4.1	 	Price-setting behaviour in a low-inflation environment	
27
	
4.2		Comparing macroeconomic conditions in economies 
	
	
	at different stages of monetary policy easing	
31
5.	 Domestic financial conditions	
35
6.	 Economic projections	
42
7.	
Appendices	
50
	
Appendix 1: Statistical tables 	
51
	
Appendix 2: Chart pack 	
56
Monetary Policy Statement.
August 2024


2
Chapter 1. Summary record of meeting. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Ngarunui Beach. Photo: Jamie Antwis
Summary 
record of 
meeting
Chapter 
01


3
Chapter 1. Summary record of meeting. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Chapter 1. 
Summary record of meeting
The Monetary Policy Committee discussed recent economic and financial 
developments and their implications for monetary policy in New Zealand. 
The Committee noted that the weakening 
in domestic economic activity observed 
in the July Monetary Policy Review has 
become more pronounced and broad-
based. Headline inflation has declined, 
and business inflation expectations have 
returned to around 2 percent at medium- and 
longer-term horizons. Committee members 
agreed that monetary policy restraint can 
now begin to ease. The pace of loosening 
will depend on the extent to which price-
setting behaviour continues to adapt to lower 
inflation and inflation expectations remain 
well anchored to the target mid-point.
Global growth remains below trend across 
advanced economies. Growth in China 
has been softer than expected, due to 
a depressed property market and weak 
consumer demand. While US growth has 
been firm, some indicators show emerging 
weakness. Recent volatility in global asset 
markets reflects nervousness about US 
economic prospects, geopolitical risks, and 
the outlook for international trade policy. 
The Committee noted that global inflation 
has continued to decline but remains 
elevated in some parts of the services 
sector in many countries. The Committee 
noted that some central banks have recently 
begun cutting policy interest rates, reflecting 
lower core inflation, weaker activity, and 
softer labour markets. In this respect, 
New Zealand’s economic activity and near-
term inflation indicators now resemble those 
in countries in which central banks have 
started cutting policy rates. 
While official economic statistics have 
evolved in line with expectations in the May 
Monetary Policy Statement, a broad range of 
high-frequency indicators point to a material 
weakening in domestic economic activity in 
recent months. These include various survey 
measures of business activity, electronic 
card transactions, vehicle traffic, house 
sales, filled jobs, and job vacancies. These 
indicators collectively provide a consistent 
signal that the economy contracted in recent 
months. The output gap is now assessed to 
be more negative than was assumed in the 
May Monetary Policy Statement, indicating 
increased spare capacity. 
The Committee discussed possible reasons 
for the current economic weakness. 
Alongside restrictive monetary policy, an 
earlier or larger impact of tighter fiscal 
policy could be constraining domestic 
demand. Falling net migration may also 
be playing a role. The Committee noted 
that measurement challenges, including 
methodological changes by Statistics 
New Zealand in the national accounts, are 
creating additional uncertainty around the 
composition and likely persistence of this 
weakness.
The Committee discussed recent 
developments in the labour market. The 
June quarter data suggest that employment 
growth has slowed, with declines in private 
sector jobs, hours worked, and wage growth. 
The impact of government spending restraint 
and public sector job losses are expected 
to materialise in further weakening in 
employment growth over coming quarters.


4
Chapter 1. Summary record of meeting. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
In discussing fiscal policy, the Committee 
noted that government expenditure is 
declining as a share of the economy, with 
contractionary impacts already felt and 
expected to continue. However, whether 
tax cuts will boost consumption is more 
uncertain. While tax cuts could stimulate 
demand, it is also possible that households 
might be more cautious about spending in 
the current economic environment.
The Committee discussed global and 
domestic financial conditions. Weaker 
economic data globally have prompted 
markets to price in lower policy rates for the 
rest of the year, pushing down sovereign 
yields in most advanced economies. While 
domestic financial conditions remain 
restrictive, they have loosened over recent 
months. Market expectations for the forward 
path of the Official Cash Rate (OCR) have 
contributed to lower wholesale and borrowing 
rates, along with some depreciation in the 
nominal exchange rate. The Committee also 
noted that more households are choosing 
shorter pricing tenors, meaning that further 
reductions in mortgage interest rates will flow 
through to lower household interest costs 
relatively quickly. 
The Committee noted that while credit 
remains available, demand for credit is 
weak. This provides a further signal of 
soft economic activity. High interest rates, 
sluggish housing market activity and low 
investment intentions have curbed demand 
for credit. The agriculture sector has also 
paid down debt, curbing credit demand.   
The Committee considered risks to the 
financial system. With elevated debt servicing 
costs and weak economic conditions, some 
households and businesses are experiencing 
financial stress. The Committee noted that 
banks had tightened lending standards in 
recent years, increased loan loss provisions 
and were well capitalised, making the financial 
system more resilient. Non-performing 
loans have increased from a year ago but 
remain relatively low by historical standards, 
and banks are well positioned to support 
borrowers. In this environment, the Committee 
agreed that there is no material trade-off 
between meeting its inflation objectives and 
maintaining financial system stability.
The Committee discussed inflation 
developments. Inflation fell considerably 
in the June quarter, due mostly to lower 
tradables inflation, while domestic inflation 
declined in line with expectations. Members 
were encouraged that surveyed business 
inflation expectations have returned to 
around 2 percent at medium- and longer-
term horizons. All measures of core inflation 
have fallen and the components of CPI 
that are sensitive to monetary policy have 
declined further. Together with the weaker 
high-frequency indicators of economic 
activity, these developments provide the 
Committee with more confidence that 
headline inflation is returning to the target 
band in the September 2024 quarter. 
The Committee discussed upside risks to 
the inflation outlook. The persistence of 
domestic inflation and the pace at which 
price-setting behaviour will adjust to a 
low-inflation environment remain uncertain. 
Members noted the possibility that firms 
might adjust prices asymmetrically – 
changing prices quickly when inflation 
was high and rising, but more slowly when 
inflation is falling. The Committee noted 
uncertainty around the outlook for potential 
output, given weak productivity growth. If 
potential output grows more slowly than 
currently assumed, there will be less spare 
capacity and less downward pressure on 
domestic inflation. 
Furthermore, ongoing geopolitical and 
trade tensions and the global reshoring 
of manufacturing activities could lead to 
higher import prices for New Zealand. 
Members also discussed the significant rise 
in global shipping costs, caused by ongoing 
disruptions to Red Sea and Panama Canal 
freight routes. Given New Zealand’s relatively 
limited trade through these routes, the 
effects on shipping costs for New Zealand 
imports are assumed to be more moderate, 
and feed through to import prices with a lag. 
The Committee discussed downside risks to 
the outlook. Members agreed that a weaker 
global economy, particularly in China, could 
dampen demand for New Zealand exports 
and reduce exporters’ earnings. More 
subdued global demand could also lead to 
lower import prices.  


5
Chapter 1. Summary record of meeting. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Members also noted that domestic inflation 
could fall more quickly than projected if 
wage- and price-setting behaviour adjusts 
more rapidly to a low inflation environment. 
For example, headline inflation will fall 
sustainably back to the target mid-point more 
quickly if price and wage setters adjust more 
to expected future inflation rather than to 
past inflation. 
The Committee discussed the reasons why 
inflation has been outside of the target range 
and the expected timeframe for inflation 
to return to the 2 percent target mid-point. 
Members noted the lingering effects on 
inflation from demand effects of monetary 
and fiscal stimulus, pandemic-related 
disruptions to supply, increased commodity 
prices and shipping costs from geopolitical 
tension, severe weather impacts on local 
food prices, and low productivity.
Conditional on the information available, 
the Committee felt that the OCR track in the 
projection reflected its view on the policy 
strategy that would best deliver on its remit. 
The Committee noted that monetary policy 
settings are consistent with annual headline 
CPI inflation remaining within the target 
band near the 2 percent mid-point over the 
forecast horizon.
The Committee observed that the balance 
of risks has progressively shifted since 
the May Monetary Policy Statement. With 
a broad range of indicators suggesting 
the economy is contracting faster than 
anticipated, the downside risks to output 
and employment that were highlighted in 
July have become more apparent. Members 
were also concerned about avoiding 
unnecessary near-term instability in output 
and employment given the evolution of 
recent indicators. 
In discussing the appropriate stance of 
monetary policy, the Committee noted 
that recent indicators give confidence that 
inflation will return sustainably to target within 
a reasonable time frame. With headline CPI 
inflation expected to return to the target band 
in the September quarter and growing excess 
capacity expected to support a continued 
decline in domestic inflation, the Committee 
agreed there was scope to temper the extent 
of monetary policy restraint. 
However, members noted that monetary 
policy will need to remain restrictive for some 
time to ensure that domestic inflationary 
pressures continue to dissipate. The pace 
of further easing will thus be conditional on 
the Committee’s confidence that pricing 
behaviour is continuing to adapt to a low-
inflation environment and that inflation 
expectations remain anchored around the 
2 percent target. On Wednesday August 14,
the Committee reached a consensus to 
reduce the Official Cash Rate by 25 basis 
points to 5.25 percent.
Attendees:
Reserve Bank members
of MPC: 
Adrian Orr (Chair), Christian Hawkesby, 
Karen Silk, Paul Conway 
External MPC members:
Bob Buckle, Carl Hansen, Prasanna Gai
Treasury Observer: 
Dominick Stephens
MPC Secretary: 
Calista Cheung


6
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Chapter 
02
Recent economic 
developments 
and monetary 
policy outlook
Matamata. Photo: Gerelmaa Bayarmagnai


7
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Chapter 2.
Recent economic developments
and monetary policy outlook
Summary
High interest rates are reducing demand in 
the New Zealand economy. Subdued global 
growth, slowing net immigration, and lower 
government spending are also dampening 
demand. The economy is shifting from a 
period of excess demand to excess supply. 
Less pressure on available resources 
domestically and lower imported inflation 
have driven declines in Consumers Price 
Index (CPI) inflation. 
Global growth is below trend, and inflation 
is declining in most of New Zealand’s major 
trading partners. Some central banks have 
begun lowering policy interest rates, and 
financial markets expect others to do so over 
coming months. Slowing growth in China is 
reducing demand for New Zealand’s exports.
Gross domestic product (GDP) increased 
by 0.2 percent in the March 2024 quarter, 
following two quarters of modest declines. 
GDP has been broadly flat since late 2022. 
Recent indicators of economic activity 
suggest that GDP contracted in the June 
2024 quarter. We assume that GDP will 
decline further in the September 2024 
quarter, but there is a risk that the weakness 
is more severe or prolonged than we expect. 
We estimate that the potential growth rate 
of the economy has slowed, reflecting 
lower growth in population and productivity. 
However, the projected decline in GDP 
means that we expect the output gap to 
decline to around -2 percent in late 2024. 
Subdued economic activity has meant 
that firms have cut back on hiring. Annual 
employment growth has slowed to 0.6 
percent. While net immigration has recently 
eased from very high levels, labour supply 
has continued to grow. Weaker labour 
demand and growing labour supply have 
resulted in worsening labour market 
conditions. The unemployment rate 
increased to 4.6 percent in the June 2024 
quarter. Businesses are reporting that it 
is much easier to find workers, and other 
measures of spare capacity in the labour 
market have also increased.
The New Zealand dollar exchange rate 
has depreciated in recent months, partly 
reflecting lower market expectations for 
the OCR. Global prices for New Zealand’s 
imports have been declining, reflecting low 
global growth and normalisation in prices 
for goods following supply chain disruptions 
over the COVID-19 pandemic.
Annual CPI inflation declined from 4.0 
percent in the March 2024 quarter to 3.3 
percent in the June 2024 quarter. We 
expect annual CPI inflation to fall further to 
2.3 percent in the September 2024 quarter, 
returning to within the Monetary Policy 
Committee’s (MPC) 1 to 3 percent target band. 
Weaker demand and falling import prices 
have contributed to a sharp decline in annual 
tradables inflation. Non-tradables inflation 
– which measures price changes for goods 
and services less exposed to international 
competition – remains high, but is declining 
as spare capacity in the economy opens up.
Measures of core inflation have declined at 
a similar pace to headline inflation over the 
past year. Survey measures of household 
and business inflation expectations have 
declined. Business expectations for medium- 
and long-term horizons are now close to the 
2 percent target midpoint.
Conditional on the central economic outlook, 
we project the OCR to decline over time. As 
inflationary pressure eases, monetary policy 
can become less restrictive. Compared to the 
May Statement, the outlook for the OCR is 
lower. This mostly reflects the weaker outlook 
for GDP and capacity pressures this year, 
and an updated assumption that businesses’ 
wage- and price-setting behaviour will adapt 
to a low-inflation environment more quickly 
over coming years. 


8
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Figure 2.1
Production GDP
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Current economic assessment
Economic growth has 
remained weak
Economic activity in New Zealand, as 
measured by production GDP, increased by 
0.2 percent in the March 2024 quarter. This 
was in line with our forecast at the time of the 
May Statement (figure 2.1). Activity in goods-
producing industries has continued to fall, 
and is now around 10 percent lower than its 
peak in 2021. Activity in services industries 
has remained relatively resilient, but 
contracted slightly in the March 2024 quarter. 
The overall level of real GDP remains below 
its peak in the September 2022 quarter.
In recent months, timely indicators of 
economic activity have weakened materially. 
Based on historical relationships, these 
indicators suggest that GDP contracted 
in the June 2024 quarter. Reflecting this, 
our projection for economic activity over 
2024 is weaker than in the May Statement, 
as discussed in box A. The persistence of 
weaker economic activity is uncertain. 
Economic growth is assumed to recover over 
the 3-year projection period, supported by 
falling interest rates.


9
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Box A: 
Timely indicators 
suggest weakening 
economic activity
A broad range of timely indicators suggest 
that economic activity contracted in the June 
2024 quarter. Monthly indicators generally 
deteriorated over the course of the quarter.
A range of indicators of economic activity 
from business surveys declined in the 
June 2024 quarter. These indicators have 
historically correlated closely with GDP 
growth. Firms in the Quarterly Survey of 
Business Opinion (QSBO) reported weaker 
trading activity, and the Performance of 
Manufacturing Index (PMI) and Performance 
of Services Index (PSI) both reported that 
activity declined through the quarter (figure 
A.1 and figure A.2). The ANZ Business 
Outlook survey reports the net share of firms 
seeing weaker activity levels compared to 
a year ago increased since the start of the 
year. Activity levels have deteriorated further 
in July.
Other timely indicators of economic activity 
have also declined (figure A.3). Real 
electronic card transactions fell in May and 
June, continuing a similar pace of decline 
as over the past year. Heavy vehicle traffic 
and dwelling consents fell sharply in June. 
While employment grew in the June quarter, 
monthly filled jobs declined and total hours 
worked and paid contracted. Job vacancies 
and house sales also fell sharply in May and 
June. The annual change in the New Zealand 
Activity Index – a broad measure of 
economic activity based on monthly 
indicators – fell from 1.0 percent in May to 
-1.1 percent in June, reflecting developments 
in these and other indicators.
Figure A.1
Performance of Manufacturing Index (production) 
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: BNZ-BusinessNZ.
Figure A.2
Performance of Services Index (activity/sales) 
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: BNZ-BusinessNZ.


10
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
We have revised our near-term 
assumption for GDP lower, but 
there is uncertainty around the 
persistence of this weakness
Our assumption for GDP growth over 2024 is 
materially weaker than at the time of the May 
Statement. We assume that GDP declined by 
0.5 percent in the June 2024 quarter, which 
is within the middle of the range of estimates 
based on historical relationships between 
timely indicators of economic activity and 
GDP growth. 
We assume that GDP declines at a slower 
pace in the September 2024 quarter, before 
increasing slightly in the December 2024 
quarter. This slowing pace of decline partly 
reflects: 
•	 income tax cuts, which took effect from 
31 July and are assumed to support 
household spending from this date; and
•	 easing financial conditions, reflecting a 
lower OCR and term interest rates – such 
as fixed mortgage rates – and a weaker 
New Zealand dollar exchange rate.
The underlying weakness in demand 
suggested by timely indicators could be 
more or less persistent than we assume, and 
the path of economic activity over 2024 is 
highly uncertain. This uncertainty reflects 
both the sharp apparent change in the 
pace of GDP growth, and uncertainty about 
the degree to which different factors have 
contributed to the decline. Key economic 
data series are also less reliable than in 
the past, due to several factors. These 
include changes in seasonal patterns, and 
methodologies that affect Stats NZ’s ability 
to measure quarterly spending by 
New Zealand households and foreign 
residents (see chapter 6). 
Figure A.3
Selected economic activity indicators
(seasonally adjusted, index=100 in January 2020)
Source: ANZ, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Electronic card transactions have been deflated using the CPI (interpolated monthly).


11
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Household and government 
spending are easing
High interest rates are contributing to 
reduced household consumption, despite 
strong population growth. Measured 
household consumption grew in the March 
2024 quarter, but Stats NZ has advised 
that these quarterly estimates are currently 
less reliable than usual. We assume that 
household consumption eases over 2024, 
reflecting high interest rates, a softening 
housing market, and the weakening labour 
market (figure 2.2). Tax cuts, which took effect 
on 31 July, are assumed to provide some 
support to household consumption, but this 
support is outweighed by other factors.
Government consumption declined in the 
March 2024 quarter, and we assume it 
drops further over 2024. The outlook for 
government consumption and investment is 
lower than assumed in the May Statement, 
based on information from Budget 2024. 
The lower outlook for government spending 
reduces aggregate demand. Box B discusses 
how changes to our fiscal policy assumptions 
have affected our projections.
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.2
Private consumption
(seasonally adjusted)


12
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Box B: 
Fiscal policy
In Budget 2024, the Government chose to reduce 
spending in the public sector and increased 
income thresholds for personal income tax 
rates. Spending reductions in the public sector 
will reduce inflationary pressure, and income 
tax threshold changes will increase inflationary 
pressure.1 The net impact for monetary policy is 
expected to be small and is highly uncertain.
Government spending is forecast to 
be a smaller share of the economy
Compared to Half-Year Economic and Fiscal 
Update (HYEFU) 2023, Government operating 
allowances – a summary measure of changes to 
operational spending and taxation policy – were 
lowered. However, Treasury’s lower outlook for 
potential GDP means it expects to collect less tax 
and issue more debt than assumed in HYEFU 2023. 
Between HYEFU 2023 and Budget 2024, the 
Treasury’s fiscal expenditure forecasts have fallen, 
but our assumptions for potential GDP growth 
have also fallen. In our current projections, we 
have incorporated a lower path for government 
consumption and investment as indicated by 
Budget 2024. However, this reduction is only slightly 
larger than the fall in our potential output assumption 
since the February Statement (figure B.1). 
Tax cuts and government 
consumption reductions have 
a similar fiscal multiplier 
In our projection, we have assumed a ‘fiscal 
multiplier’ of 0.5.2 For example, a $1 decrease in 
government consumption decreases GDP by 
$0.50, and a $1 decrease in tax revenue increases 
GDP by $0.50. Our assumption is broadly in line 
with New Zealand fiscal multiplier estimates for 
both government consumption and tax revenue. 
There is a wide range of estimates of fiscal 
multipliers, and inflationary pressures from Budget 
2024 could be higher or lower than we assume. 
Economic activity is not the only channel through 
which tax cuts can affect inflationary pressure. Tax 
cuts can also increase labour supply and affect 
wage bargaining, which may partially offset the 
inflationary pressure from higher spending.
1	
On net, changes to other tax and transfer policies are likely to be broadly offsetting for inflationary pressure.
2	
A fiscal multiplier is the effect of a change in government spending or revenue on GDP. The multiplier of 0.5 is the cumulative effect throughout a year, 
and includes the response of interest rates.	
The net effect of government spending 
reductions and income tax cuts on 
inflationary pressure is uncertain
Some of the reduction in government spending in 
Budget 2024 has already occurred. This means, 
both now and at the time of the May Statement, 
we had already observed some of the effects of 
lower government consumption and investment in 
timely indicators of economic activity (see box A). 
In contrast, tax cuts were implemented from 31 July 
so we are yet to observe their effect. 
On net, our updated assumptions about fiscal policy 
have added slightly to medium-term inflationary 
pressure since the May Statement, for several 
reasons.
•	 The May Statement had already implicitly 
accounted for a share of the effect of lower 
government spending via lower GDP forecasts 
over mid-2024.
•	 We have incorporated an estimate of the effect 
of income tax cuts on GDP from the September 
2024 quarter, which had not been included in 
the May Statement. 
•	 Our downward revision to government 
consumption and investment as a share of 
potential GDP has been slightly offset by 
a further reduction in our potential output 
assumption (see chapter 6).
The net effect of government spending reductions 
and income tax cuts on inflationary pressure is 
uncertain. As we observe more data, we will be able 
to better assess the macroeconomic implications.
Figure B.1
Government consumption and investment
(share of potential, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


13
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Investment is declining, 
reflecting weaker demand
Residential investment has continued to 
decline, as high interest rates and the soft 
housing market reduce the demand for new 
housing. Business investment has also fallen, 
consistent with weak demand and high 
interest rates. Our projections assume that 
residential and business investment decline 
further over the coming year, recovering 
thereafter as interest rates decline and 
economic activity increases.
Net immigration has slowed 
sharply
High levels of net immigration have driven 
strong population growth over the past 
year, supporting economic activity and 
boosting labour supply. However, estimated 
monthly net immigration has fallen sharply 
this year. Lower net immigration reflects 
both lower migrant arrivals and an increase 
in departures of New Zealanders, partly 
in response to weakening economic and 
labour market conditions. Net immigration 
is assumed to fall further over the coming 
year, before recovering as labour market 
conditions in New Zealand eventually 
improve (figure 2.3).
High net immigration supported housing 
market activity over 2023, and contributed to 
rent inflation rising to historically high levels. 
The weaker outlook for net immigration 
is assumed to have broadly offsetting 
effects on inflationary pressure, as smaller 
contributions to demand and spending are 
offset by slower growth in labour supply and 
potential output.
Capacity pressures are easing
The past 2 years of broadly flat economic 
activity have resulted in a decline in capacity 
pressures. For example, the share of firms in 
the June 2024 quarter QSBO citing orders as 
the factor most limiting production reached 
around 60 percent, the highest level in nearly 
10 years. The economy is shifting from a 
period of excess demand to one of excess 
supply. The weaker outlook for GDP this year 
means that the output gap is assumed to fall 
to a lower level than assumed in the May 
Statement, troughing at around -2 percent 
of potential output at the end of 2024 
(figure 2.4). Our assumption for potential 
output is slightly weaker than at the time of 
the May Statement, consistent with lower 
estimated net immigration.
Figure 2.3
Net immigration
(annual, share of working-age population)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.4
Output gap and indicator suite
(share of potential, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, NZIER, MBIE, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: The shaded area shows the range of indicators in the suite. The vertical line shows 
the final quarter of published GDP data. The dotted line shows the mean of our labour and 
non-labour indicators. 


14
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Labour market conditions 
are weakening
Subdued economic activity has meant 
that firms have cut back on hiring. Annual 
employment growth slowed to 0.6 percent in 
the June 2024 quarter. While net immigration 
has recently slowed from very high levels, 
labour supply has continued to grow – the 
working-age population grew by 2.6 percent 
in the year to the June 2024 quarter. 
Weaker labour demand and growing labour 
supply have resulted in weakening labour 
market conditions. A wide range of measures 
of labour market pressure have eased 
substantially over the past year (figure 2.5). 
Most of the measures in our labour market 
indicator suite are weaker than their average 
levels since 2000. The unemployment rate 
increased to 4.6 percent in the June 2024 
quarter, job vacancies have continued to 
fall sharply, and businesses are reporting 
that it is much easier to find workers. We 
assume that labour market conditions will 
weaken further over the coming year. The 
unemployment rate is projected to increase 
further over the coming year, peaking at 
5.4 percent (figure 2.6).
The easing labour market and declining 
headline inflation are contributing to lower 
growth in nominal wages. A smaller increase 
in the minimum wage in April compared 
to previous years has also contributed to 
slower wage growth. Annual same-job wage 
growth, as measured by the Labour Cost 
Index (LCI, ordinary and overtime, private 
sector) declined from 3.8 percent to 3.6 
percent in the June 2024 quarter. Growth 
in other broader wage measures has also 
eased. Wage growth is assumed to decline 
further as labour market conditions and 
headline inflation continue to ease.
Figure 2.6 
Unemployment rate 
(unemployed people as a share of the labour force, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.5
Labour market indicator suite
Source: Stats NZ, NZIER, RBNZ estimates.
Note: See Ball (2024), ‘Assessing and communicating labour market indicators of inflationary pressure’, Analytical Note, Reserve Bank of New Zealand. 


15
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Global growth is below trend, 
and central banks are beginning 
to reduce policy rates
Growth in New Zealand’s trading partners 
remains below trend (see chapter 3). Interest 
rates in most advanced economies are 
above estimates of neutral, as central banks 
are restricting demand to lower inflation. 
Growth in China has slowed, reflecting the 
weak property market and slower growth in 
household consumption. Financial market 
volatility has increased, in part because 
investors have become more uncertain about 
the outlook for GDP growth and interest rates 
in major economies such as the US.
Headline inflation has continued to decline 
in advanced economies, and is now at or 
close to central bank inflation targets in 
some economies. Globally, goods inflation 
rates have declined substantially, while 
services inflation rates remain elevated and 
are declining more slowly. Spare capacity is 
increasing and labour market conditions are 
softening across economies. A number of 
central banks have begun lowering policy 
interest rates, and others are expected to 
do so over coming months (see chapter 4.2). 
Market expectations for central bank policy 
rates have fallen in most economies since 
the May Statement.
Lower global inflation is feeding 
into New Zealand’s import prices
Lower global interest rates place upward 
pressure on the New Zealand dollar 
exchange rate. However, the New Zealand 
dollar has depreciated since the May 
Statement, partly reflecting a fall in market 
expectations for the OCR (figure 2.7, see 
chapter 5). All else being equal, a lower 
New Zealand dollar exchange rate leads to 
higher import prices and increases exporters’ 
returns in New Zealand dollars.
World prices for New Zealand’s imports have 
declined from their peaks in 2022, consistent 
with easing global inflation, particularly for 
goods. We assume that import prices will 
remain around their current level over the 
medium term. However, there is a wide range 
of possible outcomes for import prices, and 
trends over time will depend on factors such 
as globalisation, trade barriers, and global 
manufacturing capacity.
Global shipping costs have remained 
elevated since late last year, as disruptions 
to shipping routes through the Red Sea 
have continued. However, shipping costs 
for imports to New Zealand (as measured 
by merchandise trade data) have yet to 
increase. We assume that higher global 
shipping costs will be reflected in temporarily 
higher New Zealand import prices (see 
chapter 4.1 of the February Statement).
World prices for New Zealand’s exports are 
assumed to have increased over the first half 
of 2024, consistent with higher prices for 
dairy and a range of other commodities over 
this period. We assume that export prices 
are broadly unchanged in real terms over 
the next few years, consistent with subdued 
growth in global demand.
Figure 2.7
New Zealand dollar trade-weighted index
(nominal)
Source: RBNZ.


16
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Inflation is expected to return to 
the 1 to 3 percent target range in 
the September 2024 quarter 
Annual CPI inflation declined from 4.0 
percent in the March 2024 quarter to 3.3 
percent in the June 2024 quarter (figure 2.8). 
This was below the 3.6 percent expected 
at the time of the May Statement. Annual 
inflation has declined since the beginning 
of 2023, and we expect a further fall to 2.3 
percent in the September 2024 quarter, 
within the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target band.
Measures of annual core inflation declined 
in the June 2024 quarter and have eased 
substantially from their peaks in 2022-2023 
(figure 2.9). The pace of decline in core 
inflation measures indicates that underlying 
inflationary pressure is easing quickly, and 
the decline in headline inflation does not 
just reflect declines in a few categories. 
Survey measures of household and business 
inflation expectations have declined. Firms’ 
inflation expectations have returned close to 
the 2 percent midpoint of the inflation target 
range for medium- and long-term horizons, 
for the first time since late 2021 (figure 2.10).
Annual tradables inflation declined to 0.3 
percent in the June 2024 quarter (figure 2.11). 
This was below the 1.1 percent rate assumed 
in the May Statement and accounted for 
the weaker-than-assumed rate of headline 
inflation. Annual tradables inflation is now in 
line with pre-COVID-19 rates.
Falling prices for some volatile items, such as 
fruit, vegetables, and international airfares, 
have contributed to lower tradables inflation, 
as these prices normalise from previously 
elevated levels. However, falling import 
prices and weakening retail demand have 
also contributed to large and broad-based 
declines in inflation across a range of other 
tradable items, including cars, furniture, 
appliances, and household equipment.
Annual tradables inflation is expected to 
remain low over 2024. We assume that 
tradables inflation then rises. This is because 
recent declines in tradables inflation partly 
reflect normalisation in volatile prices from 
earlier peaks. We assume that tradables 
inflation then settles around pre-COVID-19 
levels at the end of the projection period.
Figure 2.9
Headline and core inflation measures
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ.
Note: The dashed lines represent the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for inflation over 
the medium term. The shaded area shows the range of core inflation measures. The core 
inflation measures include the sectoral factor model, factor model, trimmed mean (30%), 
weighted median, and CPI excluding food and energy.
Figure 2.8
Contributions to CPI inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for inflation over 
the medium term.
Figure 2.10
Business inflation expectations
(annual, years ahead)
Source: RBNZ’s Survey of Expectations (Business).
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for inflation over 
the medium term.


17
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Annual non-tradables inflation declined 
from 5.8 percent to 5.4 percent in the 
June 2024 quarter (figure 2.12). This was 
marginally higher than we expected at the 
time of the May Statement. Non-tradables 
inflation remains elevated compared to 
history, and broad-based across categories. 
However, inflation has declined for items 
such as restaurant and takeaway meals, and 
domestic accommodation, partly in response 
to households cutting back spending on 
discretionary items. 
Inflation for administered goods and services 
remains high – these are items that are highly 
influenced by regulated or government-set 
prices. This inflation is likely to ease over time 
in response to falling cost pressures and lower 
headline inflation. 
Insurance inflation is also contributing 
significantly to non-tradables inflation (as 
premiums rise in response to severe damage 
from weather events in 2023), but we expect 
the contribution of insurance inflation to wane 
over the coming year. 
Overall, the different rates of decline across 
components of non-tradables are as expected 
given that some components respond more 
quickly to monetary policy than others (see 
chapter 4.1 of the May Statement).
Annual non-tradables inflation is assumed 
to fall sharply over the coming year. Spare 
capacity in the economy is opening up, and 
this will flow through to lower non-tradables 
inflation over time, although prices for some 
categories will continue to respond more 
quickly than others. Our projection assumes 
that wage- and price-setting behaviour adapts 
more quickly to a low-inflation environment 
over the medium term than assumed in the 
May Statement (see chapter 4.1).
Headline inflation is expected to be lower 
over the next 12 months than at the time of 
the May Statement, mostly reflecting weaker 
tradables inflation (figure 2.13). Annual CPI 
inflation is expected to reach the 2 percent 
midpoint of the target range in the June 
2026 quarter.
Figure 2.13
CPI inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI 
inflation over the medium term.
Figure 2.12
Non-tradables inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.11
Tradables inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


18
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Monetary policy outlook
Conditional on the central economic outlook, 
we project the OCR to decline over time 
(figure 2.14). As inflationary pressure abates, 
monetary policy can become less restrictive. 
Compared to the May Statement, the 
outlook for the OCR is lower. This reflects 
both the weaker outlook for GDP and 
capacity pressures this year, and an updated 
assumption that businesses’ wage- and 
price-setting behaviour will adapt to a low-
inflation environment more quickly over the 
medium term. The OCR needs to decline 
sooner than previously assumed, in order for 
inflation to sustainably settle at the 2 percent 
target midpoint in the medium term.
Figure 2.14
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


19
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Wainui Falls. Photo: Trent Lockyer
Chapter 
03
Global 
developments
and outlook


20
Chapter 3. Global developments and outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Chapter 3.
Global developments
and outlook
This chapter outlines recent developments as of 8 August 2024.
Headline inflation rates have continued 
to decline globally, and now sit within 1 
percentage point of central bank targets 
in most advanced economies. Persistent 
services inflation continues to slow the 
pace of further disinflation. Labour market 
conditions have continued to weaken 
gradually, with unemployment rates across 
a range of advanced economies back to 
pre-COVID-19 levels. 
Several major central banks have reduced 
their policy rates over recent months and 
others are expected to follow later this 
year. Weaker economic data releases 
over recent months have lowered policy 
rate expectations in a range of advanced 
economies. Sovereign bond yields and 
global equity prices have also decreased 
in response to the weaker data. Global 
shipping costs have increased further in 
recent months. However, these costs have 
yet to pass through to global goods prices or 
shipping costs for New Zealand’s imports.
Growth across New Zealand’s key trading 
partners remains below trend and is 
expected to remain weak until the end of 
2025. High interest rates continue to reduce 
demand and have resulted in emerging 
spare capacity. Economic growth in China 
has slowed due to weak consumer spending 
and structural challenges in the housing 
market. Economic growth in the US has 
continued to be strong this year despite 
restrictive monetary policy settings. However, 
labour market data and several activity 
indicators in the US have eased over 
recent months. 
Global growth is expected to 
remain below trend until the 
end of 2025
Annual growth across New Zealand’s key 
trading partners was 2.9 percent in the March 
2024 quarter, slightly below the 3.0 percent 
recorded in the December 2023 quarter. Key 
trading partner GDP growth is expected to 
be 2.8 percent over 2024, before picking up 
slightly over 2025.
Divergences between regions remain. US 
and China GDP growth are both higher than 
OECD estimates of potential GDP growth, 
while most advanced economies continue 
to grow below potential on an annual basis 
(figure 3.1). Despite some timely activity 
indicators and labour market data in the 
US beginning to show signs of weakness, 
US GDP remained robust in the June 2024 
quarter, increasing 3.1 percent annually. 
This growth was mostly accounted for by 
household consumption. This has increased 
2.5 percent, which is in line with its long-
term trend. 	


21
Chapter 3. Global developments and outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Figure 3.1
Latest GDP growth versus OECD potential growth
(annual)
Source: Haver Analytics, OECD.
Note: Unless otherwise specified, the latest data are for the March 2024 quarter.
Structural challenges continue 
to limit growth in China
GDP growth in China was weaker than 
expected in the June 2024 quarter, 
increasing at an annual rate of 4.7 percent. 
China’s GDP data highlighted a ‘two-speed’ 
economy, with weakness in consumer 
demand and the service sector partially 
offset by increases in manufacturing activity 
and net trade (figure 3.2). Retail sales grew 
2.3 percent annually in the June 2024 
quarter, versus an average of 7.5 percent 
prior to the COVID-19 pandemic. Annual CPI 
inflation remained low, at just 0.2 percent 
in the June 2024 quarter. Weak consumer 
sentiment amid challenges in the housing 
sector remain a key drag on the Chinese 
economy. Measures of real estate activity 
remain weak. Compared with late 2021 
(when real estate stresses emerged), new 
construction, buildings sold, and investment 
completed were respectively around 70, 40 
and 30 percent lower. 
Global labour markets continue 
to weaken gradually
In advanced economies, unemployment 
rates have increased over the last year, and 
are broadly in line with their pre-COVID-19 
levels in most cases (figure 3.3). The most 
recent jobs report in the US showed the 
unemployment rate unexpectedly increasing, 
from 4.1 percent in June to 4.3 percent in July. 
Across advanced economies, job openings 
have continued to fall from high levels. Wage 
growth remains elevated but is expected 
to continue declining in response to lower 
inflation and weak economic activity. 
Figure 3.2
China GDP growth and retail sales
(annual)
Source: Haver Analytics.
Figure 3.3
Unemployment rates
(unemployed people as a share of the labour force, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Haver Analytics.


22
Chapter 3. Global developments and outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Inflation continues to decline 
slowly towards central bank 
targets
Annual headline inflation rates have declined 
to within 1 percentage point of central 
bank inflation targets in most advanced 
economies. Annual headline inflation in the 
US, euro area, and Australia is 2.5, 2.5 and 
3.8 percent respectively, according to the 
latest available data. Declines in headline 
inflation rates have largely been accounted 
for by falling goods price inflation. At an 
aggregated level for advanced economies, 
goods prices are no longer increasing. 
However, the pace of global disinflation 
has slowed in recent months, largely due 
to persistent services inflation. Services 
inflation has remained largely flat across 
most economies over the first half of 2024 
(figure 3.4). Despite this, core inflation has 
continued to slowly decline across advanced 
economies.
Some major central banks have 
started lowering their policy rates
The European Central Bank (ECB), Bank of 
Canada (BoC) and Bank of England (BoE) 
have lowered their policy rates in recent 
months. All three central banks indicated that 
monetary policy no longer needed to be as 
restrictive to bring inflation back to target.
The ECB lowered its policy rate by 25 basis 
points in June before keeping it unchanged 
in July, and noted future decisions will be 
data-dependent. Additionally, the BoE 
lowered its policy rate by 25 basis points at 
its latest meeting in August. The BoE MPC 
voted by a majority of 5-4 to reduce the Bank 
Rate, assessing that the restrictive stance 
of monetary policy continues to weigh on 
activity in the real economy. Meanwhile, 
the BoC lowered its policy rate by 25 basis 
points at both its June and July meetings. 
The BoC cited excess supply and downside 
risks to growth as reasons for reducing its 
policy rate a second time. Market pricing 
implies that investors expect the ECB, BoE 
and BoC to lower their policy rates further 
over 2024, by 70, 45 and 70 basis points 
respectively (figure 3.5).
Market pricing currently suggests that the US 
Federal Reserve (Fed) will begin lowering its 
policy rate at its next meeting in September, 
with around 105 basis points of cuts expected 
over 2024. This has increased from the 45 
basis points of cuts expected at the time of 
the May Statement and largely reflects the 
softer-than-expected activity, labour market 
and inflation data in the US over this period. 
Financial market participants are expecting 
the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) 
to lower its policy rate later than other 
advanced economy central banks. This is 
consistent with expectations at the time of 
the May Statement and primarily reflects 
persistent inflation amid a tight labour 
market in Australia. Chapter 4.2 compares 
macroeconomic conditions between 
countries that have and have not reduced 
policy rates this year. 
Figure 3.4
Aggregate inflation
(annual)
Source: Haver Analytics, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Advanced economy aggregate inflation is calculated by Haver Analytics using goods 
CPI inflation series weighted by the countries’ shares of world GDP based on PPP estimates 
from the IMF. Countries included in the sample are the US, UK, Euro area, Japan, Canada 
and South Korea.


23
Chapter 3. Global developments and outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
In July, the People’s Bank of China (PBoC) 
cut the 7-day reverse repo rate (its new key 
policy rate) and medium-term lending facility 
rate by 10 and 20 basis points respectively. 
This reduction was not expected by market 
participants. It followed weaker-than-
expected June 2024 quarter GDP data and 
continued concerns regarding deflationary 
pressures. 
Sovereign yields and equity prices 
have declined
Weaker-than-expected US labour market 
data in early August triggered a large 
decline in investor risk sentiment and lower 
global equity prices (figure 3.6). Since the 
May Statement, global equity prices have 
decreased 1.1 percent, and the US S&P 500 
is unchanged, having fallen as much as 8.5 
percent in early August. Additionally, US 
equity market volatility briefly increased to 
its highest level since October 2020, as 
measured by the VIX. Declines in Japanese 
equity prices were particularly large, with the 
Nikkei 225 decreasing 9.8 percent since the 
May Statement. This was due to a sharply 
appreciating yen, driven by a narrowing of 
interest rate differentials with other advanced 
economies. 
In the US, the 2-year Treasury yield has fallen 
by around 80 basis points since the May 
Statement. In other advanced economies, 
2-year sovereign bond yields have also 
declined significantly (figure 3.7).
Risk sentiment in financial markets has 
deteriorated, reflecting concerns about 
a weaker global economy, triggered by a 
combination of weaker-than-expected US 
economic data, heightened stock market 
valuations and geopolitical risk in the Middle 
East.
Figure 3.5
Market-implied path of policy rates
Source: Bloomberg.
Figure 3.6
Global equity prices
(index = 100 on 1 January 2020)
Source: Bloomberg.
Figure 3.7
2-year sovereign yields
Source: Bloomberg.


24
Chapter 3. Global developments and outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Global shipping costs continued 
to increase
The World Container Index has increased 
60 percent since the May Statement and 
235 percent since the beginning of 2024. 
Shipping rates continue to be affected by 
ongoing disruptions to travel in the Red Sea. 
Despite this increase, shipping costs have 
had a limited impact on global goods prices 
so far. Additionally, shipping costs paid by 
New Zealand importers have not increased 
this year (figure 3.8).
Figure 3.8
Shipping costs indices
(Index = 100 on 1 January 2020)
Source: Bloomberg, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The merchandise trade shipping costs series is estimated by taking the value of 
consumer merchandise imports including freight and insurance costs (CIF) and subtracting 
the reported value for duty (VFD), which excludes these costs. The series is expressed as a 
percentage of the VFD figure.


25
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Lindis Valley. Photo: Rebecca Williams
Chapter 
04
Special topics


26
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Chapter 4. 
Special topics 
Before the publication of each Statement, RBNZ staff provide 
analyses of some topical issues to the Monetary Policy Committee. 
Topics for the August Statement included:
1.	 Price-setting behaviour in a low-inflation environment
2.	 Comparing macroeconomic conditions in economies at different stages
of monetary policy easing	  
Special topics in the past 12 months
Topic
Date/publication
Non-tradables inflation in New Zealand
May 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)
Recent trends in New Zealand’s exporting sector
May 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)
The effect of higher shipping costs on inflation and
the OCR
February 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)
The effect of the Government’s proposed policies on 
monetary policy
February 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)
Monetary policy transmission lags
November 2023 Statement (Chapter 4)
The inflationary impact of recent migration
August 2023 Statement (Chapter 4)
Factors contributing to New Zealand’s current account 
deficit and outlook
August 2023 Statement (Chapter 4)


27
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Price-setting behaviour in a low-inflation 
environment
Summary
3	
See Austin and Reid (2017), ‘NZSIM: A model of the New Zealand economy for forecasting and policy analysis’, Bulletin, 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand.
•	 Price-setting behaviour – including of 
wages – plays a key role in determining 
how past inflation affects current inflation. 
We can use ‘survey measures’ (inflation 
expectations of households and firms) or 
‘modelled measures’ to estimate price-
setting behaviour.
•	 Non-tradables inflation in the Reserve 
Bank’s core forecasting model, NZSIM,3 
is mainly determined by modelled price-
setting behaviour and the output gap. 
Price-setting behaviour also influences 
wage growth and tradables inflation. Our 
projections for inflation and the OCR are 
therefore sensitive to our price-setting 
behaviour assumption.
•	 Given the large increase and subsequent 
decline in inflation in recent years, we 
have updated our previous research on 
price-setting behaviour. In line with the 
original research, our updated analysis 
suggests that when explaining non-
tradables inflation, modelled measures 
of price-setting behaviour perform better 
than survey measures. 
•	 Price-setting behaviour in NZSIM is 
modelled as depending on its previous 
value and the most recent inflation data. 
Following our updated analysis, we now 
assume that price-setting behaviour is 
more sensitive to recent inflation data. 
This means that price-setting behaviour 
adapts faster when actual inflation 
changes significantly.
•	 As a result of this change, price-setting 
behaviour adapts faster over coming 
years in response to falling headline 
inflation than assumed at the time of the 
May Statement. This faster adjustment 
contributes to lower inflationary pressure 
over the medium term.


28
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Price-setting behaviour is 
important to understand 
inflationary pressure
Price-setting behaviour can be influenced 
by a range of factors, including inflation 
expectations, the degree of indexation to 
past inflation, and the frequency of price 
or wage adjustments. For example, when 
businesses and workers expect high inflation, 
they may attempt to increase their own prices 
or bargain for higher wages today, increasing 
inflationary pressure. Moreover, indexation 
of prices and contracts to past inflation 
can become more widespread in high 
inflation environments, making price-setting 
behaviour as well as inflation more persistent. 
4	
See Dedola et al. (2024), ‘What does new micro price evidence tell us about inflation dynamics and monetary policy transmission?’, 
Economic Bulletin, European Central Bank and Bank of Canada (2024), ‘Box 3: Analyzing businesses’ price-setting behaviour’, 
April Monetary Policy Report.
In NZSIM, non-tradables inflation is largely 
determined by the output gap and price-
setting behaviour. Price-setting behaviour 
also affects wage growth and tradables 
inflation.
Our economic projections assume that 
restrictive monetary policy is needed 
partly because price-setting behaviour is 
assumed to take time to adjust to a low-
inflation environment. Restrictive monetary 
policy leans against the inflationary pressure 
caused by price-setting behaviour by 
creating spare capacity in the economy 
(figure 4.1). 
As price-setting behaviour adjusts to be 
consistent with a low-inflation environment, 
then monetary policy can become less 
restrictive. Therefore, the speed at which 
price-setting behaviour adapts is an 
important determinant of the outlook 
for the OCR. 
Given the changing inflation environment, 
we are closely monitoring how different 
measures of price-setting behaviour are 
changing, and evaluating whether our 
assumptions remain appropriate. Moreover, 
recent international research suggests that 
price-setting behaviour can differ between 
high- and low-inflation environments.4
Figure 4.1
Modelled explanation of non-tradables 
inflation in the central projection
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: ‘Other’ represents the unexplained residual, real wages and a lag term. The orange 
bars in the June 2025 and 2026 quarters are due to the inclusion of proposed changes to 
household electricity prices (see chapter 6).


29
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Price-setting behaviour can be 
estimated using survey measures 
or modelled measures 
Price-setting behaviour can be estimated 
using two broad types of methods. ‘Modelled 
measures’ are estimated using equations or 
models. For example, price-setting behaviour 
in NZSIM is modelled as depending on 
its previous value and the most recent 
inflation data. This means that price-setting 
behaviour adapts over time to changes in 
actual inflation. These measures can be 
quite persistent, depending on the assumed 
speed at which behaviour adapts. 
‘Survey measures’ are based on surveyed 
inflation expectations of households or 
businesses. These measures assume that 
price-setting is solely based on expected 
future inflation. Depending on the survey, 
these measures often adjust faster to recent 
changes in inflation than modelled measures. 
For instance, our Survey of Expectations 
shows that businesses expect inflation near 
2 percent beyond horizons of one year, 
despite experiencing high headline inflation 
rates over recent years.
Previous research found that 
modelled measures perform 
better than survey measures 
at explaining inflation
In 2015, we changed the price-setting 
behaviour measure in NZSIM from a survey 
measure to a modelled measure to better 
explain low non-tradables inflation over 
this period.
This decision reflected a range of analysis, 
such as Karagedikli and McDermott (2016)5 
and McDonald (2017)6 that showed modelled 
measures were better able to explain 
developments in inflation.
5	
See Karagedikli and McDermott (2016), ‘Inflation expectations and low inflation in New Zealand’, Discussion paper, 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand.
6	
See McDonald (2017), ‘Does past inflation predict the future?’, Analytical Note, Reserve Bank of New Zealand.
There is a range of reasons why modelled 
measures may perform better than survey 
measures. For instance, they may better 
capture:
•	 indexation – direct (for example, excise 
taxes, contracts) or indirect (using inflation 
as a guide)
•	 behavioural change – over time firms 
might get used to certain rates of price 
adjustment
•	 relative price dynamics – following a 
period of high or low inflation, some prices 
may slowly adjust over time to restore 
relative prices to equilibrium.
Surveys have additional challenges, such 
as sampling error, and uncertainty as to 
whether the survey population represents 
those whose expectations matter most for 
determining inflation.
Modelled measures still 
outperform survey measures 
McDonald (2017) analysed which measures 
of price-setting behaviour performed best at 
forecasting non-tradables inflation, when used 
in a range of different Phillips curve equations.
We recently undertook similar analysis to see 
whether this finding held when the high-
inflation period during the COVID-19 pandemic 
was incorporated. We find that modelled 
measures continue to outperform our survey 
measures at predicting non-tradables 
inflation. However, we also find that modelled 
measures that adapt more quickly to changes 
in recent inflation tend to perform better than 
the highly persistent measure used in NZSIM. 
Consequently, the evidence supports placing 
more weight on less persistent modelled 
measures of price-setting behaviour in our 
projections. 


30
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Price-setting behaviour measures 
are diverging by more than usual
Historically, survey and modelled measures 
of price-setting behaviour have been 
highly correlated. This reflects that firms 
and households partly form their inflation 
expectations based on recent developments 
in actual inflation. However, survey and 
modelled measures of price-setting behaviour 
have diverged sharply since 2023 (figure 4.2). 
Survey measures tend to react more quickly 
than modelled measures to changes in 
headline inflation. Even accounting for this, 
surveyed expectations have fallen at a slightly 
faster pace than historical relationships would 
suggest given the decline in headline inflation 
since 2023.7 The current divergence in price-
setting behaviour measures is likely to persist, 
conditional on our projection for headline 
inflation. 
7	
This may be explained by what the academic literature terms “rational inattention to inflation”. Bayarmagnai (2023) finds that New Zealand 
households pay more attention to inflation when it is high and adjust their inflation expectations more quickly and accurately in high-inflation 
environments.
Faster adjustment in price-setting 
behaviour lowers inflationary 
pressure over the medium term
We have adjusted our assumption for the 
path of price-setting behaviour over the 
medium term in our central projection. We 
assume that price-setting behaviour adjusts 
to a low-inflation environment more quickly 
over the medium term than in the May 
Statement. 
Our updated assumption, that price-setting 
behaviour adjusts more quickly, contributes 
to lower inflationary pressure over the 
medium term relative to the May Statement. 
This means a lower path for the OCR is 
necessary, all else equal, as monetary policy 
does not need to remain as restrictive for as 
long to return inflation to the midpoint of the 
MPC’s target range.
There are risks in both directions to our 
assumption for price-setting behaviour, 
reflecting the unusual experience with 
inflation since the COVID-19 pandemic. Price-
setting behaviour could be more persistent 
than we assume. For example, previous high 
inflation could be more entrenched in price-
setting processes. Price-setting behaviour 
could also adjust more quickly. Households 
and firms may recognise the unusual nature 
of the high inflation period in recent years, 
and so may adjust their behaviour more 
quickly to a low-inflation environment than 
historical relationships suggest.
Figure 4.2
Price-setting behaviour measures
(standardised over history)
Source: RBNZ estimates. 
Note: Measures have been standardised over history to make them comparable given 
differences in historical averages and degrees of variability between measures. The 
vertical axis shows how many standard deviations away from its historical average 
each measure is, where zero indicates the historical average. Survey measures include 
household expectations for inflation 1 year ahead and businesses’ 1- and 2-year-ahead 
inflation expectations. Modelled measures include the measure from NZSIM, a more 
flexible variation of the NZSIM measure that is more sensitive to inflation data, and 
a measure based on the simple average of headline inflation over the past 3 years. 
Projections are based on estimated historical relationships with headline inflation,  
and conditional on our current projection for inflation.


31
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Comparing macroeconomic conditions in economies
at different stages of monetary policy easing
Summary
•	 On average, economies where central 
banks have lowered policy rates are 
experiencing softer GDP growth and 
inflation closer to target. Near-term 
consensus expectations for future 
inflation are also lower for economies 
where policy rates have been reduced. 
•	 In New Zealand, GDP growth has been 
more in line with those economies where 
central banks have reduced policy rates, 
while inflation has been more aligned to 
those that have held rates steady. 
•	 We project New Zealand GDP growth to 
weaken significantly this year, to below 
the growth rates in economies where 
central banks have lowered interest 
rates. If inflation declines as we assume 
in our projections, it will quickly align with 
central banks that have lowered policy 
rates. 
•	 While comparing the differences in 
these economies can be useful, the 
divergences are relatively small. Broadly, 
all of the economies in our sample are 
seeing inflation fall and have similar 
medium-term outlooks. 
How do economies that have 
lowered policy rates compare with 
those that are holding rates?
We analyse a sample of advanced small 
open economies that are similar to us 
and larger key trading partners, who we 
group together based on where they are 
in their monetary policy cycles. This allows 
us to understand if there are differences 
in macroeconomic conditions on average 
between economies where the central bank 
has begun to lower policy rates, and those 
where it has not. Our sample contains central 
banks from the following inflation-targeting 
economies: Sweden, the euro area, Canada, 
the UK, the US, Norway, Australia and 
New Zealand. 
In this sample, Sweden, the euro area, Canada 
and the UK have already lowered policy rates 
while the US, Norway and Australia have not 
yet done so. However, market participants 
currently expect all the central banks in this 
sample to have begun reducing policy rates 
by the March 2025 quarter (table 4.1). The 
estimated degree of monetary policy rate 
restrictiveness is broadly similar across the 
two groups (figure 4.3). This suggests that 
those already reducing policy rates are doing 
so because of differing economic conditions, 
rather than because monetary conditions are 
much tighter.
Figure 4.3
Estimated deviation of policy rates from neutral
Source: Sveriges Riksbank, Bank of Canada, European Central Bank, Bank of England, Federal 
Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Norges Bank, Reserve Bank of Australia, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: Dotted lines denote simple averages for each group.


32
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Table 4.1
Policy rates and expectations across economies
Sweden
Canada
Euro area UK
US
Norway
Australia
Peak policy
rate (%)
4
5
4.5
5.25
5.25-5.50
4.5
4.35
Month of
first cut
May
2024
June
2024
June
2024
August 
2024
September 
2024
December 
2024
February 
2025
Current policy 
rate (%)
3.75
4.5
4.25
5.0
5.25-5.50
4.5
4.35
Source: Bloomberg.
Note: Dates in italics are market-implied expectations of first rates cuts, derived from overnight indexed swap rates and Federal Funds Rate 
futures as at 8 August 2024. Euro area rates refer to their main refinancing operations fixed rate.
8	
See Antwis (2024), ‘Comparing services inflation in New Zealand and abroad’, Analytical Note, Reserve Bank of New Zealand.	
Inflation is higher in countries that 
have not reduced policy rates
Across measures of inflation, outcomes differ 
between countries that have lowered policy 
rates and those that are yet to do so. For 
economies who have lowered rates, headline 
inflation is on average 0.1 percentage points 
above central bank targets. This compares 
to an average of 0.8 percentage points 
above for those that have held rates and 1.3 
percent higher in New Zealand (figure 4.4). 
This divergence is larger with respect to 
goods inflation. The average annual rate of 
goods inflation in countries that have lowered 
policy rates is 1.1 percentage points below 
a level that has historically been consistent 
with inflation at target.8 In countries that are 
holding, it is on average 0.5 percent higher 
than benchmark, while in New Zealand it 
is 0.2 percentage points higher. Services 
inflation remains materially higher than 
benchmark in all countries in the sample.
The outlook for inflation also differs between 
the two groups. Bloomberg consensus 
forecasts expect those that have lowered 
rates to have significantly lower inflation 
over the next 12 months relative to those 
who have not. While New Zealand’s starting 
point of inflation is in line with countries that 
have held rates, our forecasts for inflation 
in New Zealand, based on more timely 
indicators for inflation, are more aligned with 
the economies who have lowered rates 
(figure 4.5).
Figure 4.4
Headline inflation
(annual, deviation from target midpoint)
Source: Haver Analytics, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Dotted lines denote simple averages for each group. Data as at 8 August 2024. 
Figure 4.5
Inflation projections
(annual, deviation from target midpoint)
Source: Bloomberg consensus forecasts, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: This chart shows the average inflation forecast for each group based on Bloomberg 
consensus forecasts for other economies, and the RBNZ’s current projection for New Zealand. 
Data as at 8 August 2024. 


33
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Figure 4.7
Central bank output gap estimates 
(share of potential)
Source: Sveriges Riksbank, Bank of Canada, Bank of England, Norges Bank, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: Data as at 8 August 2024. Sweden, Canada and the UK have already reduced rates, while 
Norway has not. UK output gap has been linearly interpolated from published annual average 
excess demand/excess supply figures. Sweden estimates a GDP gap measuring the deviation 
of GDP from the Riksbank’s assessed trend. 
Figure 4.6
GDP growth
(annual)
Source: Haver Analytics. Stats NZ. 
Note: The chart includes GDP data up to the March 2024 quarter.
Figure 4.8
Unemployment rates
(12-month change)
Source: Haver Analytics, Stats NZ.
Note: Dotted lines denote simple averages for each group. Data as at 8 August 2024.
Activity has slowed significantly
in countries that have lowered 
policy rates 
GDP growth has slowed significantly in 
economies that have lowered policy rates. 
In the economies that have lowered rates, as 
well as in New Zealand, the average annual 
GDP growth rate is now below 0.5 percent, 
compared to an average of 1.7 percent in 
the economies that have held policy rates 
constant (figure 4.6). While GDP data are 
generally lagged in all economies, timely 
indicators such as business surveys suggest 
that this difference will continue in the 
near term.
Weak GDP growth is resulting in easing 
capacity pressures. While some of the central 
banks in our sample do not publish estimates 
of the output gap, available data show that 
those that have lowered rates have assessed 
their output gaps to have been negative 
since mid-2023, with the exception of the 
UK, which was the most recent to lower 
policy rates. We assume that the output gap 
in New Zealand turned negative in the June 
2024 quarter, and will decline sharply over 
the rest of the year (figure 4.7).
Labour market conditions have 
weakened in most economies
Labour market conditions in most of the 
economies in our sample have softened. The 
average change in unemployment rates over 
the last 12 months is broadly similar between 
the two groups in our sample (figure 4.8).
There is significant variation between 
economies that have lowered policy rates. 
Sweden (the first economy in our sample 
to lower rates) and Canada (which has 
lowered policy rates twice to date) have 
seen larger increases in unemployment 
rates over the past 12 months. In contrast, 
the UK has experienced a smaller increase 
and unemployment has been stable in 
the euro area. Over the same period, the 
unemployment rate in New Zealand has 
increased by a similar degree to Sweden 
and Canada.


34
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
How does New Zealand compare?
Broadly, economies that have lowered policy 
rates have lower inflation and weaker GDP 
growth than economies that have not yet 
lowered policy rates. However, compared to 
these economies, data in New Zealand are 
mixed and we do not completely align with 
either of these groups. 
While headline inflation in New Zealand has 
been falling, inflation is still further above our 
target midpoint than all other countries in the 
sample (figure 4.4). In part, this may reflect 
that New Zealand publishes inflation only 
quarterly, whereas most other countries have 
monthly data. Our projections that consider 
more timely indicator data for inflation 
suggest that annual headline inflation will fall 
more quickly than in most economies holding 
policy rates and bringing us in line with 
economies that have already lowered rates 
(figure 4.5).
From an activity and unemployment 
perspective, the New Zealand economy 
has evolved broadly in line with those that 
have lowered policy rates. As indicated by 
recent timely data, we now expect GDP in 
New Zealand to contract over the middle 
of 2024. As a result, GDP growth and the 
output gap are likely to fall below economies 
where interest rates have been lowered (see 
box A, chapter 2). Over the last 12 months, 
the unemployment rate in New Zealand 
has increased by 1 percentage point, similar 
to Sweden and Canada and higher than 
the 0.6 percentage point average of those 
economies holding policy rates. 
New Zealand is currently mixed across these 
macroeconomic measures compared to the 
two groups of economies. New Zealand’s 
output gap reached a higher level than 
other countries in our sample during the 
COVID-19 pandemic, indicating higher 
capacity pressures relative to our sample 
countries. The duration of border closures 
and New Zealand’s remote geographical 
location impacted the availability of labour 
and goods, contributing to these larger 
capacity pressures.
Accommodative monetary and fiscal policy 
in New Zealand also supported domestic 
demand during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
Consequently, inflation in New Zealand has 
remained elevated. However, our economic 
projections show that this is likely to be 
unwound and we are quickly moving closer 
to the group of countries that have lowered 
policy rates.


35
Chapter 5. Domestic financial conditions. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Domestic 
financial 
conditions
Chapter 
05
Lewis Pass. Photo: Rachael Grant


36
Chapter 5. Domestic financial conditions. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Chapter 5.
Domestic financial conditions
Monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation by 
influencing financial conditions in New Zealand. These financial 
conditions include the interest rates at which households and 
businesses save and borrow, the exchange rate and other 
factors such as credit availability. This chapter outlines recent 
developments in financial conditions in New Zealand, as at 
8 August 2024.
Financial conditions have loosened since 
the May Statement. Mortgage rates and 
term deposit rates have fallen at all horizons. 
Wholesale interest rates such as interest 
rate swaps have decreased significantly at 
all terms compared to immediately before 
the May Statement. One reason for the 
loosening in financial conditions is that market 
participants’ expectations for upcoming 
OCR decisions are lower than they were 
immediately before the May Statement 
(figure 5.1). Market participants’ near-term 
expectations for the OCR decreased 
significantly in July, in response to the July 
Monetary Policy Review, as well as weaker-
than-expected data.
As of 8 August 2024, market pricing indicates 
that market participants expect 100 basis points 
of cuts to the OCR by the end of 2024 and 200 
basis points by July 2025. Compared to before 
the May Statement, market expectations for the 
level of the OCR are around 55 basis points 
lower for the end of 2024 and 75 to 90 basis 
points lower across 2025. 
Domestic wholesale interest rates have 
decreased significantly at all terms since the 
May Statement as market participants have 
reassessed the likely path of future OCR 
moves (figure 5.2). The 2-year swap rate 
has decreased by around 80 basis points, 
consistent with significantly lower near-term 
OCR expectations. The 10-year swap rate has 
also decreased by around 45 basis points. 
Following these moves, the interest rate 
swap curve is less inverted compared to 
before the May Statement. This is because 
shorter-term rates are now not as far above 
longer-term rates.
Figure 5.1
Market expectations for the OCR 
Source: Bloomberg.
Note: The blue line shows market expectations for the OCR immediately before the May 
Statement. Each data point represents market expectations of the level of the OCR at a given 
point in the future, as measured by overnight indexed swap pricing.
Figure 5.2
New Zealand interest rate swap rates
(terms in years)
Source: Bloomberg.
Note: Interest rate swap rates are wholesale interest rates often used as a benchmark by 
financial institutions in setting other interest rates in the economy. They represent the fixed 
interest rate that one party to the swap agreement receives in exchange for paying a floating 
rate to the other party for the duration of the agreement. 


37
Chapter 5. Domestic financial conditions. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
The New Zealand dollar exchange rate 
has moved lower on a trade-weighted 
basis since the May Statement (figure 5.3). 
Expected short-term interest rates in 
New Zealand have declined to levels below 
those of some of our key trading partners, 
including the US and Australia. This has 
reduced the attractiveness of New Zealand 
assets for overseas investors looking for 
higher relative returns, putting downward 
pressure on the New Zealand dollar. 
Weaker risk sentiment has also contributed 
to a weaker New Zealand dollar. 
Mortgage rates have declined since the 
May Statement (figure 5.4). Mortgage rates 
for 1- and 2-year tenors account for a large 
proportion of new mortgage flows. They 
have both declined by around 30 basis 
points. Despite this, we assess current 
mortgage rate levels as still being restrictive. 
Decreases in wholesale rates have been 
larger than the decreases in mortgage rates. 
This means that spreads between mortgage 
rates and wholesale rates have increased 
since the May Statement (figure 5.5). The 
spreads between mortgage and wholesale 
rates at the 1- and 2-year horizons are 
now slightly below their average levels in 
the pre-COVID-19 period. Mortgage rates 
continue to be influenced by the low cost 
of bank funding. 
Source: RBNZ.
Figure 5.3
New Zealand dollar trade-weighted index
(nominal)
Source: interest.co.nz.
Note: The mortgage rates shown are the average of the latest advertised fixed-term rates  
on offer from ANZ, ASB, BNZ and Westpac for mortgages with a loan-to-value ratio of less 
than 80%.
Figure 5.4
New Zealand mortgage rates
Figure 5.5
New Zealand 1- and 2-year mortgage rates 
as a spread to equivalent swap rates
Source: interest.co.nz, Bloomberg.


38
Chapter 5. Domestic financial conditions. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Interest rates on term deposits, which make 
up a large share of banks’ core funding, are 
lower at all terms. The spread between the 
6-month term deposit rate and the equivalent 
wholesale rate has increased since the May 
Statement (figure 5.6). This spread, which 
has trended upwards since the start of 2023, 
remains lower than its pre-COVID-19 average, 
holding down the cost of bank funding. 
Relative bank funding costs are likely to 
increase over the medium term, with banks 
expected to compete more aggressively for 
customer deposits as accommodative bank 
funding conditions continue to fade.
Source: interest.co.nz, Bloomberg.
Note: The term deposit rate shown is the average of the latest 6-month term rates on offer 
from ANZ, ASB, BNZ and Westpac. The 6-month bank bill rate represents the rates at 
which banks are willing to borrow from, or lend to, one another over a 6-month term.
Figure 5.6
Spread between the 6-month term deposit 
rate and the 6-month bank bill rate


39
Chapter 5. Domestic financial conditions. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Table 5.1 
Developments in domestic financial conditions as of 8 August 2024
Wholesale interest rates 
Market pricing 
for the OCR
•	 Market expectations for the OCR can be inferred from prices for overnight indexed swap (OIS) 
contracts, which measure the expectations of market participants for the OCR. Market pricing for 
the OCR has been volatile since the May Statement. After the May Statement, market participants’ 
expectations for the OCR over 2024 increased. However, the July Monetary Policy Review 
and weaker-than-expected recent data contributed to a significant downward shift in market 
participants’ expectations for the OCR in 2024. 
•	 Market pricing for the OCR is currently significantly lower than at the time of the May Statement. 
Immediately after the July Monetary Policy Review was released, market participants moved to 
price in a larger degree of monetary policy easing. Markets are now pricing in around 100 basis 
points of cuts by November, which is around 55 basis points of additional easing compared to 
what was priced in at the time of the May Statement. The current and expected OCR settings are 
contractionary, sitting above our estimates for the neutral OCR (see figure 7.4).
Interest rate 
swaps
•	 An interest rate swap involves the exchange of fixed and floating interest rate payments between 
two parties over a specified period. The level of interest rate swaps will be approximately equal 
to market expectations for average short-term market interest rates over the swap tenor. 
•	 New Zealand swap rates have been volatile since the May Statement. Overall, swap rates are 
significantly lower than they were just before the May Statement. The 2-year swap rate is around 
80 basis points lower over this period and the 10-year swap rate is around 45 basis points lower. 
Consequently, the degree of swap curve inversion (when shorter-term rates are higher than longer-
term rates) has decreased, with the difference between the 2- and 10-year swap rates narrowing 
from around -40 basis points at the time of the May Statement to around -5 basis points.
•	 Domestic developments have been a key influence on recent interest rate movements. 
Wholesale rates increased in response to the May Statement and remained in a relatively close 
range between the May Statement and the July Monetary Policy Review. Subsequently, markets 
significantly lowered their OCR expectations in response to the July Monetary Policy Review. 
Weaker activity indicators and lower-than-expected CPI data have also contributed to declines 
in interest rate swaps. These factors have resulted in interest rate swaps moving to their lowest 
levels since the middle of 2022.
New Zealand 
government 
bonds (NZGB)
•	 NZGB yields are lower since the May Statement, influenced by similar factors to interest rate 
swaps (discussed above). 
•	 Bid-ask spreads, which measure how far apart buyers and sellers are from reaching an agreed 
price to trade, are broadly unchanged since the May Statement. 
•	 Demand for NZGBs has remained relatively strong given the level of issuance over recent years, 
but there are signs that elevated issuance levels are having an effect on market conditions. 
Recent NZGB auctions for longer tenor bonds have had lower-than-average bid-cover ratios, 
although demand for short and medium tenor bonds has remained relatively strong. 
•	 The difference between NZGB yields and swap rates has moved higher since the May Statement. 
These spreads are now at their highest levels since 2011, reflecting both the recent increase in 
supply of NZGBs, and high levels of forecast issuance in coming years.


40
Chapter 5. Domestic financial conditions. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
New Zealand dollar
Interest rate 
differentials
•	 Differences between interest rates in New Zealand and both the US and Australia have 
decreased since the May Statement. This has contributed to a depreciation in the New Zealand 
dollar against the US dollar and Australian dollar. 
Risk sentiment
•	 Market risk sentiment has been weaker since the May Statement. US equities are slightly lower, 
and US equity market volatility, as measured by the VIX Index (a measure of option implied 
volatility on the US S&P 500 index), has increased. Bond market volatility measures have also 
increased. 
•	 Overall, risk sentiment has likely contributed to a weaker New Zealand dollar since the May 
Statement. 
Commodity 
prices
•	 Decreases in New Zealand’s key export commodity prices tend to cause the New Zealand 
exchange rate to depreciate. 
•	 Prices of key export commodities in New Zealand – particularly dairy – have declined slightly 
since the May Statement. These moves have likely contributed marginally to a weaker 
New Zealand dollar since the May Statement. 
Retail interest rates
Mortgage rates
•	 Mortgage rates have decreased since the May Statement, following the reduction in swap rates. 
While mortgage rates have declined, they have decreased by less than wholesale swap rates. 
As a result, the spreads between mortgage rates and swap rates have increased since the May 
Statement.
•	 Mortgage rates at shorter terms have decreased by more than longer-term mortgage rates 
since the May Statement. 1- and 2-year mortgage rates have both decreased by around 30 basis 
points, while 4- and 5-year mortgage rates have decreased by around 15 and 30 basis points, 
respectively. 
Deposit rates
•	 Term deposit rates have decreased at all terms since the May Statement. 
•	 The spread between term deposits and swap rates has increased slightly since the May Statement. 
Term deposit spreads had remained relatively unchanged through early 2024, after increasing 
significantly during 2023. Term deposit spreads are likely to increase towards pre-COVID-19 levels 
in coming years, as banks compete more aggressively for deposit funding.
•	 Rates on other types of deposits, including bonus saver and transaction accounts, remain low 
compared to wholesale interest rates. This continues to hold down the overall cost of bank funding.


41
Chapter 5. Domestic financial conditions. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Bank funding conditions
Funding 
composition
•	 Term deposit volumes have increased over recent months, while on-call transaction and savings 
deposit volumes have declined slightly. Term deposit volumes grew by around $2 billion 
between April and June 2024, while on-call account volumes fell by around $1 billion. 
•	 Banks remain well funded and have strong liquidity buffers. Lower-cost deposit types, in 
particular transaction accounts, remain a larger share of bank funding compared to pre-COVID-19 
averages. This has contributed to lower average bank funding costs. Bank core funding ratios 
remain high, sitting at 89.1 percent in June 2024.
•	 Banks have paid back around 20 percent of the approximately $20 billion of loans that were 
taken out as part of the Funding for Lending Programme (FLP). The volume of repayments will be 
particularly high during August 2024, with around $2 billion of loans set to be repaid. 
•	 The speed at which banks repay the remainder of the FLP borrowings slows over the rest of 
2024, before increasing in 2025. The final repayments will be made at the end of 2025. As these 
loans are repaid, bank competition for other sources of funding, such as deposits, is expected to 
increase. 
Credit spreads
•	 The cost of raising long-term wholesale bank funding relative to benchmark wholesale rates has 
remained at a similar level since the May Statement. 
•	 Domestic bank credit spreads are lower than at the time of the May Statement. Broad wholesale 
funding conditions remain relatively favourable, particularly in the context of a high interest rate 
environment.


42
Chapter 6. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Chapter 
06
Tararua Ranges. Photo: Hamish Fitchett
Economic 
projections


43
Chapter 6. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Chapter 6.
Economic projections
This chapter summarises the baseline economic projections that 
MPC members considered when making their policy assessment. 
The projections were finalised on 12 August 2024
These projections rely on a set of key 
assumptions about the global and domestic 
factors influencing the economy. These 
include:
•	 the magnitude and persistence of recent 
weakness in economic activity;
•	 the level of potential GDP and the extent 
to which the output gap has declined 
recently;
•	 the pace at which price-setting behaviour 
adapts to a low-inflation environment;
•	 the speed at which labour market and 
wage pressures ease and the effects of 
these factors on household spending and 
core inflation;
•	 the extent to which high interest rates and 
house price declines from their peak in 
late 2021 contribute to lower residential 
construction and household consumption;
•	 the extent to which business investment 
weakens as a result of declining capacity 
pressures in the economy;
•	 the outlook for net immigration and the 
extent to which it contributes relatively 
more to aggregate demand or labour 
supply;
•	 the extent to which trends in activity and 
inflation in our key trading partners affect 
domestic financial conditions, demand 
for New Zealand’s goods and services 
exports, and prices for imports;
•	 the extent to which households increase 
their consumption as a result of income 
tax cuts that came into effect 31 July 2024; 
•	 that government consumption and 
investment evolve consistent with the 
fiscal forecasts – including final operating 
allowances – in Budget 2024 (see box B, 
chapter 2).
There is significant uncertainty about these 
assumptions.


44
Chapter 6. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
The projections take account of recent 
data, which show New Zealand’s economy 
is weakening, spare capacity is opening up 
and headline inflation is declining (see box 
A, chapter 2). Surveys of business activity, 
spending data, job vacancies, building 
consents and house sales suggest that 
economic activity contracted in the June 
2024 quarter.
We assume that potential GDP growth has 
been relatively subdued. Weaker potential 
GDP growth relative to the May Statement 
is accounted for, in part, by a lower forecast 
for net immigration. However, the expected 
fall in economic activity over the middle of 
2024 means that significant spare capacity 
emerges in the economy. This is expected to 
contribute to lower non-tradables inflation.
The labour market has also continued 
to weaken, with the unemployment rate 
increasing to 4.6 percent in the June 2024 
quarter. 
We now assume that price-setting behaviour 
adapts more quickly over the medium term 
in response to falling headline inflation 
(see chapter 4.1). A lower assumption for 
price-setting behaviour contributes to lower 
inflationary pressure over the medium term.
Annual tradables inflation is expected to 
decline further in the near term. We assume 
tradables inflation then rises as the effect of 
normalisation in volatile prices from earlier 
peaks wanes, before settling back around 
pre-COVID-19 levels at the end of the 
projection period.
CPI inflation data in the June 2024 quarter 
showed non-tradables inflation declining 
gradually as expected. The decline in 
headline inflation to date has been largely 
accounted for by tradables inflation. 
However, opening spare capacity suggests 
non-tradables inflation will ease over the 
coming year. We forecast headline inflation 
to be well within the 1 to 3 percent target 
band in the September 2024 quarter. Annual 
inflation is expected to reach the 2 percent 
midpoint of the target range in the June 
2026 quarter.


45
Chapter 6. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Table 6.1 
Key projection assumptions
Key factors
Global factors
•	 World interest rates have fallen since the May Statement. Several central banks have reduced 
policy rates, and market expectations for future policy rates have fallen.
•	 The New Zealand dollar trade weighted index (TWI) is assumed to remain at 69.5 over the 
projection.
Domestic 
capacity 
pressures
•	 Our updated assessment for GDP growth is considerably weaker in the near term. The change 
in the near-term outlook is based on timely indicators of activity that declined in May and 
deteriorated further in June.
•	 Although we had already been expecting subdued growth for the remainder of 2024, we have 
revised the outlook for GDP lower due to recent data including the QSBO, PMI, PSI, Truckometer, 
electronic card transactions, house sales and building consents.
•	 In this projection, the output gap reaches -2.2 percent of potential GDP in the December 2024 
quarter, lower and sooner than the May Statement projected trough of -1.6 percent in the March 
2025 quarter. The mean of our output gap indicator suite was -0.8 percent in the June 2024 
quarter.
Price-setting 
behaviour
•	 Price-setting behaviour is assumed to be persistent, because this approach better explains 
inflation over history than survey measures of inflation expectations (see chapter 4.1). We now 
assume that price-setting behaves more consistently with a low-inflation environment over 
the medium term, in response to falling headline inflation. A lower assumption for price-setting 
behaviour contributes to lower inflationary pressure, and so a lower outlook for the OCR over 
the medium term.
Economic growth
Production
•	 We assume that the economy contracted by 0.5 percent in the June 2024 quarter. GDP is 
assumed to contract further in the September 2024 quarter and grow slightly in the December 
2024 quarter.
•	 We assume that significant spare capacity is emerging and will increase until early 2025. The 
supply of goods and services is expected to continue to improve, supported by continued 
population growth through immigration which expands the productive capacity of the economy.


46
Chapter 6. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Consumption
•	 Consumption growth has been subdued since the beginning of 2022, despite high population 
growth over that period. We have incorporated the $9.6 billion tax cuts programme approved 
in Budget 2024, over the Treasury’s forecast period. The positive impetus of these tax cuts 
on private consumption has largely been offset by lower house price and population growth 
forecasts, leaving a slightly lower near-term consumption forecast than in the May Statement. 
We project continued subdued consumption through 2024, before it starts to recover in 2025 
due to lower interest rates and a recovery in house prices. 
•	 Reported consumption was unusually strong in the March 2024 quarter, which we largely 
attribute to measurement issues. In 2022, Stats NZ changed the method for measuring exports 
of travel services, which are subtracted from total spending in New Zealand to calculate private 
consumption. Stats NZ has changed how foreign tourist spending is allocated between quarters. 
Previously, spending was allocated to the quarter tourists depart, but is now allocated across 
the days tourists are in New Zealand. This has the effect of increasing foreign tourist spending in 
December quarters, and reducing it in March quarters. Despite this, these series have not been 
backcast, which means that there is a significant series break in 2022 and issues with seasonal 
adjustment in the March 2024 quarter numbers. Therefore, reported consumption likely is higher 
than actual consumption in the March 2024 quarter GDP numbers. Stats NZ intends to review 
this issue.
•	 Further to this, Stats NZ estimates that ‘imports of low-value goods purchased directly by 
households’ rose 20 percent in the March 2024 quarter, contributing 0.5 percentage points 
to private consumption. This is likely an overestimate, because the measurement assumes a 
historic average value of low-value goods and multiplies this number (adjusted for inflation) 
by the number of packages imported. The rise of foreign online retailers such as Temu in the 
last year has likely reduced the average value of low-value goods, but increased the number 
substantially. This compositional shift has not been captured.
•	 For the purposes of this projection, we assume low-value imports remain at their current elevated 
level, and we adjust for our estimate of travel receipt seasonal adjustment issues. However, these 
complications add to our usual uncertainty about the starting point for the economy.
Investment
•	 Business investment has declined by less to date than would usually be expected at this stage 
in the business cycle. We expect downwards pressure to materialise in the second half of this 
year from weak demand, restrictive interest rates, low business profitability, and emerging spare 
capacity. Given the significant deterioration in indicators of economic activity since the May 
Statement and weaker output gap assumed, we have revised down the expected trough in 
business investment. Starting in mid-2025, business investment is assumed to increase as the 
output gap becomes less negative.
•	 A substantial decline in residential investment is underway and is expected to continue until the 
beginning of 2025. High interest rates and subdued house price growth are contributing to a 
decline in residential construction activity, consistent with the decline in dwelling consents since 
mid-2022. Lower interest rates and net immigration around its pre-COVID-19 average support a 
recovery in house prices and building activity in the second half of the projection. 
•	 The scale and speed of the residential investment slowdown is similar to the May Statement, 
given continued weakness in timely indicators like consents and ready-mixed concrete.
Government
•	 Government spending forecasts are consistent with the fiscal forecasts – including final operating 
allowances – in Budget 2024, but have been adjusted for the March 2024 quarter GDP data.
•	 Government investment is lower in each quarter over the projection horizon than the May 
Statement published forecast, given the downward revision in Budget 2024 and a downside 
surprise in the latest GDP release. However, government investment is a relatively small share of 
total government spending (17 percent of total government spending).
•	 Government consumption is lower in each quarter over the projection horizon than the May 
Statement projection, given the downward revision in Budget 2024. However, it had a slightly 
higher starting point than expected in March 2024 quarter GDP.
•	 The net result is lower total government spending over the medium term than published in the 
May Statement. Total government spending continues to decline as a share of potential GDP 
over the projection horizon, and slightly more quickly than in the May Statement forecast.


47
Chapter 6. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Exports and 
imports
•	 Services exports surprised significantly to the downside in the March 2024 quarter, accounted 
for by a major fall in exports of travel services. This is primarily caused by recent methodology 
changes. We continue to expect services exports to recover in the medium term due to the 
continued recovery of international tourism to pre-COVID-19 levels.
•	 Goods export volumes surprised to the upside in the March 2024 quarter, and are now close to 
our trend assumption. We assume goods exports grow at about the same rate as potential GDP.
•	 Import volumes surprised significantly to the upside in the March 2024 quarter, and recent 
merchandise trade data (which do not include low-value goods) have suggested further strength 
in goods imports in the June 2024 quarter. This strength in imports is unusual given the very 
weak activity indicators in the June 2024 quarter.
•	 There are two reasons to take limited signal from this strength in imports: firstly, because of 
measurement issues associated with low-value goods. Secondly, some of the March 2024 
quarter strength may reflect catch-up from December 2023 quarter weakness, which was 
affected by shipping delays due to the initial Red Sea crisis.
•	 We assume imports will fall from their higher June 2024 quarter starting point according to their 
usual relationship with other components of GDP. However, their starting point is materially 
higher, so they remain higher than in the May Statement forecast until the end of 2026. This 
forecast makes the implicit assumption that the volume of low-value goods will remain at its 
March 2024 quarter level.
Labour market
Employment and 
wages 
•	 The New Zealand labour market has continued to ease. The unemployment rate increased 
further to 4.6 percent in the June 2024 quarter. Employment growth has slowed, and is expected 
to remain subdued over the next year.
•	 Same-job wage growth was as expected in the June 2024 quarter, and is expected to continue 
to ease.
•	 Tax cuts may increase the supply of labour and affect wage bargaining. This may partially offset 
the inflationary pressure from higher consumption spending due to tax cuts.
•	 Our suite of labour market indicators implies the labour market is now reducing pressure on 
inflation, and this is expected to continue throughout the forecast horizon.
•	 The unemployment rate is expected to continue to rise to a peak of 5.4 percent in early 2025, 
in line with a declining output gap. The unemployment rate is assumed to peak at a higher level 
than in the May Statement due to a more negative output gap projection.
Inflation
Headline
•	 Annual headline CPI inflation is expected to continue to decline to within the 1 to 3 percent target 
band in the September 2024 quarter, reaching the 2 percent target midpoint in the first half of 2026.
•	 Inflation is expected to remain in the upper half of the target range over the next 18 months, partly 
due to persistent price increases in categories such as local authority rates, insurance and utilities.
Tradables
•	 Annual tradables inflation has been lower than expected over the past year, and is expected to 
be negative in the September 2024 quarter.
•	 In the later part of the projection, tradables inflation is assumed to be slightly higher than its pre-
COVID-19 average. This is due to the assumed delayed effects of recent shipping disruptions 
and a lower assumption for the New Zealand dollar TWI, which puts upward pressure on 
tradables prices in New Zealand dollar terms.
Non-tradables
•	 Annual non-tradables inflation is expected to decline slightly more quickly than previously 
assumed due to the lower assumption for activity and the output gap.
•	 We have included an additional judgement for non-tradables inflation to reflect proposed 
changes to household electricity pricing in the June 2025 quarter and the June 2026 quarter.9 
These adjustments are assumed not to feed significantly into ongoing pricing pressure.
9	
See Commerce Commission draft decision.	


48
Chapter 6. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Figure 6.3
Unemployment rate
(unemployed people as a share of the labour force,
seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Charts
Figure 6.1
Inflation components
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Dotted lines show the projections from the May Statement. The shaded 
area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI inflation 
over the medium term.
Figure 6.2
Private sector LCI wage inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.4
House price growth
(annual)
Source: CoreLogic, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.5
Production GDP
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.6
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


49
Chapter 6. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Figure 6.9
Business investment
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.7
Private consumption
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.8
Residential investment
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.10
Government consumption
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.11
Total exports
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.12
Total imports
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


50
Chapter 7. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Mission Bay. Photo: Jamie Antwis
Chapter 
07
Appendices


51
Chapter 7. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Chapter 7.
Appendices
Appendix 1: Statistical tables
Table 7.1
Key forecast variables
GDP growth 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Annual
Unemployment 
rate
TWI
OCR
2022
Mar
-0.1
1.8
6.9
3.2
72.6
0.9
 
Jun
1.0
1.7
7.3
3.3
72.1
1.6
 
Sep
1.8
2.2
7.2
3.3
70.6
2.7
 
Dec
-0.5
1.4
7.2
3.4
70.8
3.8
2023
Mar
-0.3
1.2
6.7
3.4
71.3
4.5
Jun
0.5
1.1
6.0
3.6
71.0
5.3
Sep
-0.3
1.8
5.6
3.9
70.6
5.5
Dec
-0.1
0.5
4.7
4.0
70.8
5.5
2024
Mar
0.2
0.6
4.0
4.4
71.6
5.5
Jun
-0.5
0.4
3.3
4.6
71.4
5.5
Sep
-0.2
0.8
2.3
5.0
70.0
5.4
Dec
0.1
0.5
2.3
5.3
69.5
4.9
2025
Mar
0.7
0.5
2.2
5.4
69.5
4.6
Jun
0.9
0.5
2.3
5.4
69.5
4.4
Sep
0.9
0.9
2.4
5.3
69.5
4.1
Dec
0.9
0.3
2.3
5.2
69.5
3.8
2026
Mar
0.8
0.4
2.1
5.1
69.5
3.6
Jun
0.7
0.4
2.0
4.9
69.5
3.4
Sep
0.8
0.9
2.0
4.8
69.5
3.3
Dec
0.8
0.3
2.0
4.7
69.5
3.1
2027
Mar
0.8
0.4
2.0
4.6
69.5
3.1
Jun
0.7
0.4
2.0
4.5
69.5
3.0
Sep
0.7
0.9
2.0
4.5
69.5
3.0


52
Chapter 7. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Table 7.2
Measures of inflation, inflation expectations, and asset prices
2022
2023
2024
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Inflation (annual rates)
CPI
7.2
6.7
6.0
5.6
4.7
4.0
3.3
CPI non-tradables
6.6
6.8
6.6
6.3
5.9
5.8
5.4
CPI tradables
8.2
6.4
5.2
4.7
3.0
1.6
0.3
Sectoral factor model
estimate of core inflation
5.7
5.8
5.8
5.3
4.7
4.2
3.6
CPI trimmed mean (30% measure)
6.1
6.1
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
3.8
CPI weighted median
5.0
5.6
6.6
5.0
4.4
4.4
3.5
GDP deflator (expenditure)
5.3
5.3
5.8
6.5
3.5
3.9
Inflation expectations
RBNZ Survey of Expectations
– inflation 1 year ahead
5.1
5.1
4.3
4.2
3.6
3.2
2.7
2.4
RBNZ Survey of Expectations 
– inflation 2 years ahead
3.6
3.3
2.8
2.8
2.8
2.5
2.3
2.0
RBNZ Survey of Expectations 
– inflation 5 years ahead
2.4
2.4
2.4
2.3
2.4
2.3
2.3
2.1
RBNZ Survey of Expectations 
– inflation 10 years ahead
2.2
2.2
2.3
2.2
2.3
2.2
2.2
2.0
Asset prices (annual percent changes)
Quarterly house price index (CoreLogic NZ)
-11.2
-12.0
-9.0
-4.1
-0.6
2.6
REINZ Farm Price Index 
(quarterly average to date)
5.0
-3.2
-5.7
-11.8
-10.9
-9.8
-13.2
NZX 50 (quarterly average to date)
-12.8
-3.3
4.0
1.7
-0.4
-0.6
-0.5
4.0


53
Chapter 7. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Table 7.3
Measures of labour market conditions	
(seasonally adjusted, changes expressed in annual percent terms, unless specified otherwise)	
2022
2023
2024
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Household Labour Force Survey
Unemployment rate
3.4
3.4
3.6
3.9
4.0
4.4
4.6
Underutilisation rate
9.4
9.1
9.9
10.4
10.7
11.2
11.8
Labour force participation rate
71.8
72.1
72.4
72.0
71.9
71.6
71.7
Employment rate 
(% of working-age population)
69.4
69.6
69.8
69.2
69.0
68.4
68.4
Employment growth
1.7
3.1
4.5
3.0
2.9
1.3
0.6
Average weekly hours worked
34.0
33.5
33.5
33.5
33.7
33.8
33.2
Number unemployed
(thousand people)
100
103
110
120
124
135
143
Number employed 
(million people)
2.87
2.90
2.94
2.94
2.95
2.94
2.95
Labour force (million people)
2.97
3.01
3.05
3.06
3.07
3.08
3.10
Extended labour force
(million people)
3.05
3.09
3.14
3.15
3.17
3.18
3.20
Working-age population
(million people, age 15 years+)
4.13
4.17
4.21
4.24
4.28
4.30
4.32
Quarterly Employment Survey – QES
Filled jobs growth
1.5
2.2
6.5
6.1
4.3
3.5
-0.2
Average hourly earnings growth 
(private sector, ordinary time)
8.1
8.3
7.7
7.1
6.6
4.8
4.0
Other data sources
Labour Cost Index growth, adjusted 
(private sector, ordinary and overtime)
4.3
4.5
4.3
4.1
3.9
3.8
3.6
Labour Cost Index growth, unadjusted
(private sector, ordinary time)
6.1
6.1
6.1
5.7
5.7
5.2
4.8
Estimated net working-age 
immigration (thousands, quarterly)
20.3
29.2
40.0
22.7
12.1
9.5
Change in All Vacancies Index* 
-3.4
-13.8
-21.5
-27.9
-27.6
-27.3
-33.4
Note: The All Vacancies Index is produced by MBIE as part of the monthly Jobs Online report, which shows changes in job vacancies advertised by businesses on 
internet job boards. The unadjusted labour cost index (LCI) is an analytical index that reflects quality change in addition to price change (whereas the official LCI 
measures price changes only). For definitions of underutilisation, the extended labour force, and related concepts, see Stats NZ (2016) ‘Introducing underutilisation 
in the labour market’. Estimated net working-age immigration is the Stats NZ outcomes-based measure.
*The All Vacancies Index is a non-seasonally adjusted series.


54
Chapter 7. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Table 7.4
Composition of real GDP growth
(annual average percent change, seasonally adjusted, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
Final consumption expenditure
Private
6.4
4.8
4.5
2.4
0.2
6.0
2.7
0.9
-0.8
2.9
3.9
Public authority
1.9
3.8
3.3
5.8
6.9
7.9
2.0
0.5
-3.3
-0.9
0.7
Total
5.4
4.6
4.3
3.2
1.8
6.4
2.5
0.8
-1.4
2.0
3.2
Gross fixed capital formation
Residential
8.8
-1.8
-0.1
2.7
2.2
3.3
-0.6
-4.4
-7.8
2.3
5.8
Other
0.0
10.0
7.1
2.7
-2.9
12.6
2.9
-0.9
-3.9
2.0
5.3
Total
2.3
6.7
5.2
2.7
-1.7
10.2
2.1
-1.7
-4.8
2.0
5.4
Final domestic 
expenditure
4.6
5.1
4.5
3.0
1.0
7.3
2.4
0.2
-2.2
2.0
3.7
Stockbuilding*
0.1
0.2
-0.2
-0.2
-0.3
0.6
0.0
-1.5
1.4
0.0
0.0
Gross national 
expenditure
4.8
5.6
4.3
2.7
-0.3
8.5
2.6
-1.3
-0.7
1.9
3.7
Exports of goods 
and services
2.0
3.8
3.3
0.2
-17.9
2.4
6.1
6.1
5.4
3.8
2.8
Imports of goods 
and services
5.1
7.8
4.8
1.3
-15.9
17.1
4.4
-1.0
3.6
1.9
4.8
Expenditure on GDP
3.9
4.3
3.9
2.5
0.1
4.7
2.8
0.4
-0.6
2.4
3.1
GDP (production)
3.8
3.4
3.5
2.4
-0.5
4.6
2.7
0.2
-0.4
2.7
3.2
GDP (production, 
March qtr to March qtr)
3.3
3.5
3.5
0.7
4.5
0.6
2.0
0.3
0.1
3.4
3.1
* Percentage point contribution to the growth rate of GDP.


55
Chapter 7. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Table 7.5
Summary of economic projections
(annual percent change, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
Price measures
CPI 
2.2
1.1
1.5
2.5
1.5
6.9
6.7
4.0
2.2
2.1
2.0
Labour costs
1.5
1.9
2.0
2.4
1.6
3.1
4.5
3.8
2.8
2.4
2.2
Export prices
(in New Zealand dollars) 
4.1
3.3
1.2
6.8
-6.0
20.8
1.1
-2.8
6.2
2.3
2.2
Import prices
(in New Zealand dollars) 
1.2
1.6
4.1
2.4
-2.5
18.8
8.1
-3.9
3.3
-1.2
0.1
Monetary conditions
OCR (year average)
2.0
1.8
1.8
1.2
0.3
0.5
3.1
5.5
5.1
4.0
3.2
TWI (year average)
76.5
75.6
73.4
71.7
72.4
74.0
71.2
71.0
70.1
69.5
69.5
Output
GDP (production, annual 
average % change)
3.8
3.4
3.5
2.4
-0.5
4.6
2.7
0.2
-0.4
2.7
3.2
Potential output (annual 
average % change)
3.2
3.2
3.1
2.7
-0.6
2.5
2.1
2.6
2.4
2.3
2.4
Output gap (% of potential 
GDP, year average)
0.3
0.5
0.9
0.5
0.6
2.8
3.4
1.0
-1.8
-1.4
-0.6
Labour market
Total employment 
(seasonally adjusted)
5.9
2.9
1.5
2.6
0.2
2.5
3.1
1.3
-0.1
1.8
2.9
Unemployment rate (March 
qtr, seasonally adjusted)
4.9
4.4
4.2
4.2
4.6
3.2
3.4
4.4
5.4
5.1
4.6
Trend labour productivity 
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.5
0.2
-0.1
-0.1
0.1
0.3
0.6
Key balances
Government operating 
balance* (% of GDP, 
year to June)
1.5
1.9
2.4
-7.3
-1.3
-2.7
-2.4
-2.7
-3.3
-1.8
-0.4
Current account balance 
(% of GDP)
-2.5
-3.1
-3.8
-2.3
-2.5
-6.5
-8.2
-6.8
-6.1
-4.3
-4.0
Terms of trade
(SNA measure, annual 
average % change)
2.1
4.4
-2.1
2.0
-1.0
0.4
-5.1
-1.4
1.5
4.0
2.4
Household saving rate 
(% of disposable income)
-1.8
-2.0
-1.3
1.4
7.6
2.7
2.0
0.0
-1.4
-2.3
-2.4
World economy
Trading-partner GDP 
(annual average % change)
3.5
4.0
3.5
1.7
-0.5
6.2
2.7
3.1
2.6
3.0
2.8
Trading-partner CPI 
(TWI-weighted)
1.9
1.8
1.4
2.4
0.8
4.1
4.8
2.2
2.4
2.0
2.2
* Government operating balance is a model-based estimate of OBEGAL divided by nominal GDP in the projection. The estimate is partial because it relies on 
projections for some components from the Budget 2024.


56
Chapter 7. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Appendix 2: Chart pack
Figure 7.1
Composition of CPI inflation
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 7.2
Output gap and output gap indicators
(share of potential)
Source: NZIER, MBIE, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The output gap indicators based on information from labour market surveys 
are shown separately from the other indicators. For each group of indicators, the 
shaded area shows the range of values and the line shows the mean value. The 
output gap estimate in the final quarter is based on our near-term GDP estimate.
Figure 7.3
Unemployment and underutilisation rates
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 7.4
OCR and nominal neutral OCR indicator suite
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area indicates the range between the maximum and minimum 
values from our suite of long-run nominal neutral OCR indicators. See Castaing et al. 
(2024), ‘Estimates of New Zealand’s nominal neutral interest rate’, Bulletin, Reserve 
Bank of New Zealand.
Figure 7.5
GDP and potential GDP
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 7.6
Measures of core inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Core inflation measures exclude the GST increase in 2010. The shaded 
area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI inflation 
over the medium term.


57
Chapter 7. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2024
Figure 7.7
Inflation expectations
(annual, years ahead) 
Source: RBNZ Survey of Expectations (Business).
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for 
annual CPI inflation over the medium term.
Figure 7.9
House price inflation
(annual, nominal) 
Source: REINZ.
Source: Stats NZ, Global Dairy Trade, Refinitiv, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 7.12
Terms of trade, dairy and oil price indices
(index=100 in Q3 2008, quarterly average)
Figure 7.10
Mortgage interest rates
Source: interest.co.nz, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The rates shown for the fixed terms are the average of the advertised 
rates from ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac, shown as weekly data. The floating 
rate represents the monthly yield on floating housing debt from the RBNZ 
Income Statement survey.
Figure 7.8
Private sector wage growth
(annual, nominal) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 7.11
New Zealand dollar exchange rates
(quarterly average) 
Source: NZFMA, RBNZ.
