BANK: RBNZ
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: Monetary Policy Statement February 2024
DATE: 27/02/2024
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/monetary-policy-statements/2024/feb/mps-feb-2024.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Monetary Policy 
Statement. 
February 2024
B.33


ii
Policy assessment. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Policy assessment.
OCR 5.50% – Monetary Policy  
remains restrictive
The Monetary Policy  
Committee today agreed to 
hold the Official Cash Rate 
(OCR) at 5.50%. 
Over the past year or so, the New Zealand 
economy has evolved broadly as anticipated by 
the Committee. Core inflation and most measures 
of inflation expectations have declined, and the 
risks to the inflation outlook have become more 
balanced. However, headline inflation remains 
above the 1 to 3 percent target band, limiting the 
Committee’s ability to tolerate upside inflation 
surprises. 
Restrictive monetary policy and lower global 
growth have contributed to aggregate demand 
slowing to better match the supply capacity of the 
New Zealand economy. With high immigration 
and weaker demand growth, capacity constraints 
in the New Zealand labour market have eased.  
However, recent high population growth is 
supporting aggregate spending, as evident in 
upward pressure on dwelling rents, for example.  
Internationally, global economic growth remains 
below trend and is expected to slow further 
during 2024. This subdued environment will 
support a further moderation in New Zealand’s 
import price inflation. 
The outlook for the China economy remains 
particularly weak relative to recent historical 
norms, with structural factors constraining long-
term growth. A more general risk to global 
growth is that central banks may need to keep 
policy interest rates at restrictive levels for longer 
than currently reflected by financial market 
pricing, to ensure that inflation targets are met. 
Heightened geopolitical and climate conditions 
remain a risk for inflation. The recent rise in global 
shipping costs is one manifestation of these risks. 
The Committee remains alert to these relative 
cost pressures and will act to limit spillovers into 
general inflation if necessary.  
The Committee remains confident that the 
current level of the OCR is restricting demand. 
However, a sustained decline in capacity 
pressures in the New Zealand economy is 
required to ensure that headline inflation returns 
to the 1 to 3 percent target. The OCR needs to 
remain at a restrictive level for a sustained period 
of time to ensure this occurs. 
Meitaki, thanks.
Adrian Orr 
Governor 
Figure i.1
Official Cash Rate (OCR)
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


iii
Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
REPORT AND SUPPORTING NOTES PUBLISHED AT:
www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/monetary-policy-statement
Subscribe online: www.rbnz.govt.nz/email-updates
Copyright © 2023 Reserve Bank of New Zealand
This report is published pursuant to section 129 
of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 2021. 
ISSN 1770-4829
rbnz.govt.nz
Thank you to RBNZ staff for photography in this report. 
Cover: Kaikōura Peninsula. Photo: Matthew Brunt
Monetary Policy Framework
The Monetary Policy Committee operates and makes 
decisions under the monetary policy framework that 
comprises the following key components:
•	 the Remit;
•	 the Charter;
•	 the Code of Conduct; and
•	 the monetary policy strategy.
The corresponding documents to these components 
and additional information can be accessed on our 
website under the monetary policy framework.


1
Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
The projections were finalised on 22 February 2024. The Official Cash Rate (OCR) 
projection incorporates an outlook for monetary policy that is consistent with the MPC’s 
monetary policy assessment, which was finalised on 28 February 2024. 
Contents
Policy assessment	
ii
1.	 Summary record of meeting	
2
2.	 Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook	
6
	
Box A: Changes to New Zealand’s monetary policy framework	
16
	
Box B: Introducing the Selected Price Indexes	
17
3.	 Global developments and outlook	
19
4.	 Special topics	
25
	
4.1		 The effect of higher shipping costs on inflation and the OCR	
27
	
4.2	 The effect of the Government’s proposed policies 	
	
	
	
	 on monetary policy	
30
5.	 Domestic financial conditions	
33
6.	 Economic projections	
39
7.	 Appendices	
48
	
Appendix 1: Statistical tables 	
49
	
Appendix 2: Chart pack 	
54
Monetary Policy Statement.
February 2024


2
Chapter 1. Policy assessment. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Taranaki Maunga. Photo: Gerelmaa Bayarmagnai
Summary 
record of 
meeting
Chapter 
01


3
Chapter 1. Policy assessment. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Chapter 1. 
Summary record of meeting
The Monetary Policy Committee discussed recent developments in 
the New Zealand and global economies. The Committee agreed that 
the New Zealand economy has evolved largely as expected over the 
past year or so. Headline inflation, core inflation and most measures 
of inflation expectations are continuing to decline. However, inflation 
remains above the Committee’s target range. Restrictive monetary policy 
is contributing to an easing in capacity pressures. Monetary policy needs 
to remain restrictive to ensure that inflation returns to target. 
Global growth was below trend last year. New 
Zealand’s trading partner growth is expected 
to slow in 2024. This will support a further drop 
in global inflation and New Zealand import 
price inflation. Measures of headline and core 
inflation continue to fall among our trading 
partners. Global supply disruptions have eased, 
and restrictive monetary conditions continue 
to contribute to reduced demand. Although 
prices of New Zealand’s exports have recently 
increased, below trend global growth is 
expected to limit the scale of further increases. 
In discussing global financial conditions, the 
Committee noted that long-term wholesale 
interest rates have fallen since the November 
Statement. This has put downward pressure 
on domestic wholesale interest rates. Globally, 
central banks have generally kept policy 
interest rates steady at restrictive levels, and 
financial market participants have shifted 
their focus towards the timing and degree of 
potential policy rate cuts expected this year.
The Committee discussed recent domestic 
economic developments. Capacity pressures 
have eased significantly over the past year. 
Aggregate demand is now better matched 
with the supply capacity of the economy. A 
combination of lower demand and growing 
supply is bringing domestic inflation down. 
Below-trend global growth and slightly lower 
prices for our imported goods and services 
have also helped to lower headline inflation 
over recent quarters. 
Members noted that gross domestic 
product (GDP) declined by 0.3 percent in the 
September 2023 quarter. This was weaker 
than projected in the November Statement. 
Revisions to GDP going back several years 
imply that potential GDP – the amount of 
production that the economy can supply 
sustainably – has also been lower than 
previously assumed. On net, these factors 
imply that the starting point for capacity 
pressures in the New Zealand economy is only 
slightly lower than previously assumed.
The Committee discussed the low rate of 
productivity growth implied by recent GDP 
data. If sustained, lower productivity would 
contribute to a lower rate of potential growth of 
the economy. This would limit the rate at which 
the economy can sustainably grow without 
generating inflation. 
Members noted that strong net immigration 
is contributing to demand, with the recent 
increase in rent inflation an example. However, 
net immigration also means that there are more 
workers available, boosting the supply capacity 
of the economy. Businesses are reporting that 
it has become much easier to find workers. 
In general, capacity pressures in the labour 
market have eased. 
Members discussed the recent increases 
in global dairy prices and lower prices 
for our imported goods and services. 
These developments have resulted in an 
improvement in New Zealand’s terms of trade, 
which will increase primary sector incomes and 
domestic activity. Recent attacks on shipping 
in the Red Sea and drought near the Panama 
Canal are creating delays in getting exports to 
global markets and increasing global shipping 
costs. These rising costs could decrease 
exporter profitability and will likely feed into 
global and imported inflation if sustained. 


4
Chapter 1. Policy assessment. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Members noted that annual house price inflation 
remains modest. There is heightened uncertainty 
around the outlook for house prices. This reflects 
continued restrictive interest rates, the scale 
of decline in residential investment, and the 
net economic effects of currently strong net 
immigration. 
The Committee discussed recent inflation outturns. 
Annual consumers price index (CPI) inflation 
declined to 4.7 percent in the December 2023 
quarter. While this is much lower than its peak 
of 7.3 percent in mid-2022, it remains above the 
Committee’s 1 to 3 percent target band. Inflation was 
lower than expected in the December 2023 quarter. 
Both tradable and non-tradables inflation fell, with 
tradables inflation falling by more than expected. 
Recent drops in core inflation and business inflation 
expectations are encouraging, but they remain 
above the 2 percent mid-point of the Committee’s 
target band. 
Members discussed the lags of monetary policy 
and how the economy has evolved relative to 
the series of projections made over the last year 
or so. In general, the economy has evolved as 
expected. Headline inflation is slightly lower 
than had been assumed, reflecting lower-than-
expected tradables inflation. The unemployment 
rate is lower than projected, but wage inflation 
has been more subdued. The current assessment 
of capacity pressures is consistent with previous 
projections. These past forecasts and outcomes 
are consistent with the assessment that monetary 
policy settings have constrained demand broadly 
as expected. 
The Committee discussed the implications of fiscal 
policy for the economic outlook and the potential 
impacts of new proposed policies. The Committee 
noted that the central projection for government 
spending is based on Treasury’s published 
forecasts in the Half Year Economic and Fiscal 
Update (HYEFU) 2023. Government expenditure is 
projected to decline as a share of the economy in 
coming years. There is uncertainty over the timing 
and scale of new fiscal policy initiatives and the 
implications for monetary policy. The Committee 
will take any new fiscal initiatives into account 
when Budget 2024 is released in May. 
The Committee discussed the recent publication 
of the selected price indices from Stats NZ. The 
Committee welcomed the publication of these 
monthly indicators. The Committee also noted 
that more frequent publication of inflation figures 
and more regular reweighting of the CPI would 
be consistent with global practice. Such changes 
would support the Committee in assessing the 
current state of the economy, particularly in periods 
of heightened economic uncertainty and volatility.
Members discussed recent developments in 
domestic financial conditions. Overall, credit 
growth remains subdued. Financial conditions 
have become less restrictive since the November 
Statement. Mortgage rates have dipped slightly 
at most tenors and term deposit rates have fallen 
at tenors of more than six months. The margin 
between mortgage rates and wholesale interest 
rates is expected to return to more historically 
normal levels, as competition for term deposits 
continues and funding conditions for banks 
continue to tighten. This is expected to see 
mortgage rates hold up relative to wholesale 
interest rates.
The Committee discussed the key risks to the 
outlook for inflation. Members noted that overall, 
risks to the outlook for inflation were more balanced 
than at the time of the November 2023 Statement. 
However, from a monetary policy perspective, there 
remains less capacity to absorb upside inflation 
surprises, relative to downside surprises.
The Committee discussed the outlook for China, 
given its significance for the global economy 
and for New Zealand export and import prices. 
Structural challenges facing the economy in 
China remain concerning for long-term growth. 
Potential growth is slowing, partly due to 
demographic trends, but also due to substantial 
declines in productivity growth. High levels of 
debt, particularly in the property sector, and weak 
demand remain the most acute downside risks. 
The Committee discussed the backdrop of 
heightened geopolitical tension and risk of 
spillovers to the global economy. The current 
rise in global shipping costs is a realisation of 
these spillovers. Although higher shipping costs 
add to near-term inflation, projections assume 
that this relative price shock will reverse. There 
is considerable uncertainty over the size and 
duration of higher shipping costs. Consistent with 
the Remit, the Committee has therefore ‘looked 
through’ the first-round effect of recent higher 
shipping costs. Nevertheless, the Committee 
remains alert to these costs lasting longer than 
currently assumed. In that event, potential 
spillovers into general prices might require a 
monetary policy response.
Members also noted downside risks to the global 
growth outlook in advanced economies. Median 
analyst projections were for a steady decline in 
inflation, with global growth expected to track 
modestly below the growth rates seen in 2023. A 
more general risk to global growth is that central 
banks may need to keep policy interest rates at 
restrictive levels for longer than currently reflected 
in financial market pricing, to ensure that inflation 
targets are met.


5
Chapter 1. Policy assessment. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Members noted that, while pressures in the 
New Zealand labour market are easing, some 
of the labour market capacity measures in our 
suite have eased only modestly. The Committee 
noted that variations in labour demand lag 
broader economic activity. Labour markets have 
evolved as expected, and a further moderation 
in labour market capacity pressure is expected. 
Capacity pressures in the labour market will 
need to continue to ease to meet our inflation 
mandate.
The Committee agreed that in the current 
circumstances, there is no material trade-off 
between meeting their inflation objectives and 
maintaining the stability of the financial system. 
The Committee discussed the Bank’s current 
public consultation on the proposed settings for 
Debt-to-Income (DTI) restrictions on borrowing. 
The Committee agreed that the DTI policy will 
further support financial stability through the 
interest rate cycle.
The Committee noted the recent changes to the 
Reserve Bank Act, Remit and MPC Charter. In line 
with the Charter, the Committee discussed the 
reasons inflation is outside of the target range, 
the expected time for inflation to return to the 
target midpoint of 2 percent, and the reasons for 
that timeframe.
The Committee noted that high inflation 
reflected:
•	 the significant disruption to global supply 
stemming from COVID-related responses 
from policy makers, businesses, and 
households, 
•	 the substantial disruption to domestic 
production from COVID-related policies 
and a tight domestic labour market,
•	 the impact on demand of the easing 
in monetary policy and rise in fiscal 
spending undertaken at the beginning of 
the pandemic in the face of substantial 
uncertainty and significant downside risks 
to the economy, and,
•	 the increase in commodity prices and 
shipping costs resulting from war and 
geopolitical tension.
These factors are discussed in detail in the 
November 2022 Review and Assessment of  
the Formulation and Implementation of 
Monetary Policy.
The Committee noted that annual headline CPI 
inflation was expected to return to the target 
band in the September quarter this year and 
that monetary policy settings are consistent 
with annual headline CPI inflation returning to 
the 2 percent target midpoint later in 2025. The 
Committee noted, given current projections, 
there was limited tolerance to increase the 
time to the target mid-point. The Committee is 
conscious that the economy has limited capacity 
to absorb further upside inflation surprises, as 
this could risk a rise in inflation expectations and 
make it more difficult to get inflation back  
to target. 
The Committee noted that aggregate demand 
is now better matched with the supply capacity 
of the economy. Policy settings consistent with 
the projected time for CPI inflation to return to 
the 2 percent target midpoint result in a period 
of excess supply. These ongoing restrictive 
monetary policy settings are necessary to guard 
against the risk of a rise in inflation expectations, 
while avoiding unnecessary instability in output, 
employment, interest rates and the exchange rate. 
In discussing the appropriate stance of monetary 
policy, members agreed they remain confident 
that monetary policy is restricting demand. A 
further decline in capacity pressure is expected, 
supporting a continued decline in inflation. The 
Committee agreed that interest rates need 
to remain at a restrictive level for a sustained 
period of time, to ensure annual consumer price 
inflation returns to the 1 to 3 percent target range. 
On Wednesday 28 February, the Committee 
reached a consensus to keep the Official Cash 
Rate at 5.50 percent.
Attendees:
Reserve Bank members  
of MPC: 
Adrian Orr, Christian Hawkesby,  
Karen Silk, Paul Conway
External MPC members: 
Bob Buckle, Peter Harris, 
Caroline Saunders
Treasury Observer: 
Dominick Stephens
MPC Secretary: 
Adam Richardson


6
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Chapter 
02
Recent 
economic 
developments 
and monetary 
policy outlook
Little Kaiteriteri. Photo: Rebecca Williams


7
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Chapter 2.
Recent economic developments  
and monetary policy outlook
Summary
•	 High interest rates are reducing demand in 
the New Zealand economy. A combination 
of lower demand and growing supply is 
bringing domestic inflation down, but it 
remains elevated. Below-trend global 
growth and slightly lower prices for our 
imported goods and services have also 
contributed to declines in headline inflation 
in recent quarters.
•	 Growth in gross domestic product (GDP) 
slowed more than expected in the 
September 2023 quarter, declining by 
0.3 percent. Revisions to GDP going back 
several years imply that potential GDP – 
the amount of goods and services that the 
economy can supply sustainably – has 
been lower than previously assumed. In 
combination, these factors imply that the 
starting point for capacity pressures in 
the New Zealand economy is only slightly 
lower than previously assumed.
•	 Recent developments in economic 
indicators have been mixed but point 
to subdued growth in the near term. 
Uncertainty about the global economic 
outlook and high interest rates have 
reduced private demand, as seen in 
declines in business investment and per 
capita consumption. Building consents 
have continued to fall and residential 
construction has slowed.
•	 Strong net migration is supporting overall 
demand. The demand effects of strong 
population growth are apparent in 
increasing pressure on rents. However, 
migration also means there are more 
workers available, boosting the productive 
capacity of the economy. Businesses 
say it is now much easier to find workers, 
with more people looking for jobs and 
less demand for extra workers. The 
unemployment rate increased slightly to 
4.0 percent in the December 2023 quarter, 
and measures of slack in the labour market, 
such as the underutilisation rate, also 
edged higher. While annual wage inflation 
has continued to ease, it remains elevated. 
Wage inflation tends to lag broader labour 
market pressures.
•	 Demand for New Zealand’s goods exports 
has remained relatively subdued. However, 
recent increases in global dairy prices 
and lower prices for our imported goods 
and services have significantly improved 
New Zealand’s terms of trade in recent 
months. The recent conflict in the Red 
Sea and drought near the Panama Canal 
are creating delays and increasing global 
shipping costs. This will likely feed into 
higher global and imported inflation if 
sustained.
•	 Annual consumers price index (CPI) inflation 
declined to 4.7 percent in the December 
2023 quarter. While this is much lower 
than its peak of 7.3 percent in mid-2022, 
it remains well above the Monetary Policy 
Committee’s (MPC) 1 to 3 percent target 
band. Inflation was lower than expected in 
the December 2023 quarter. Both tradables 
and non-tradables inflation fell, but only 
tradables inflation fell more than expected. 
Recent drops in core inflation and business 
inflation expectations are encouraging, 
but they remain high compared to the 2 
percent mid-point of the MPC’s target band.
•	 Conditional on our central economic 
outlook, the Official Cash Rate (OCR) is 
expected to remain around current levels 
for an extended period in order for the MPC 
to meet its inflation target. The outlook 
for the OCR is slightly lower than in the 
November 2023 Statement. This reflects 
that the slightly lower outlooks for capacity 
pressures, import prices and house price 
inflation more than offset the higher outlook 
for export prices.


8
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Current economic assessment
Growth has been weaker than 
expected 
Economic activity in New Zealand, as 
measured by production GDP, fell 0.3 
percent in the September 2023 quarter. 
This was much lower than the 0.3 percent 
expansion expected at the time of the 
November Statement (figure 2.1). While 
the services sector grew by more than 
assumed, manufacturing was weaker. On the 
expenditure GDP side, business investment 
and exports fell more than expected.
Revisions imply that the level of 
potential GDP has also been lower
The most recent release of GDP data from 
Stats NZ also included significant revisions 
going back several years. These revisions 
reflected the use of more accurate, but much 
more lagged, economic data (a process 
known as ‘annual benchmarking’) and 
methodological changes. The downward 
revisions to growth in previous quarters 
mean that the size of the economy as a 
whole – as measured by expenditure GDP – 
is now 1.9 percent smaller than assumed in 
the November Statement.
The downward revisions to expenditure GDP 
were largely accounted for by downward 
revisions to real (inflation-adjusted) 
government expenditure and residential 
investment (figure 2.2). The downward 
revision to government expenditure was due 
to both lower government consumption and 
lower government investment. Much of this 
revision was due to new, but lagged, data 
on real investment in plant, machinery and 
equipment, and other construction. Part of 
the revision was also due to methodological 
changes, such as Stats NZ now accounting 
for attendance rates in schools, and a 
reclassification of some COVID-19-related 
spending. Overall, these revisions imply that 
the contribution of the government sector to 
real economic activity is lower than had been 
assumed.
Figure 2.1
Production GDP
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.2
Contributions to revisions in expenditure GDP
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)


9
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
While real government expenditure was 
revised to a lower level, private expenditure 
on household consumption and business 
investment was revised to a higher level. 
These upward revisions, combined with 
weaker growth in the September 2023 
quarter, mean that the levels of household 
consumption and business investment are 
close to those assumed at the time of the 
November Statement (figures 2.3 and 2.4). 
Household consumption is assumed to 
ease further in per capita terms over the 
remainder of this year as high interest rates 
and a deteriorating labour market weigh on 
income growth. Subdued global growth and 
high interest rates are assumed to continue 
to reduce underlying business investment in 
2024. However, household consumption and 
business investment are assumed to recover 
in the latter half of the three-year projection 
as interest rates start to decline.
Capacity pressures are easing
The downward revisions to GDP over several 
years imply that the level of potential GDP is 
lower than previously assumed. This means 
that the starting point for the output gap – 
the difference between actual activity and 
the level of activity that the economy can 
support sustainably – is only slightly lower 
than assumed in the November Statement 
(figure 2.5). The output gap is estimated to 
have declined rapidly since mid-2022, as 
demand has declined and supply constraints 
have eased. 
Economic growth is expected to 
remain subdued in the near term
High interest rates and below-trend global 
growth are reducing demand in the economy. 
Recent developments in economic indicators 
have been mixed, but point to subdued 
growth in coming months on balance. Some 
survey measures of economic activity have 
recovered in recent months. 
Figure 2.3
Total private consumption
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.4
Business investment 
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 
Figure 2.5
Output gap and indicator suite
(share of potential GDP, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, NZIER, RBNZ estimates. 


10
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Business confidence has improved markedly 
since the new Government was elected at the 
end of last year, but such measures have not 
had strong relationships with realised activity 
in the past. Firms’ expectations of their own 
activity in the coming year have increased 
since late last year. International visitor 
numbers have continued to recover, with a 
larger share of visitors from higher income 
countries such as the United States, who tend 
to spend more per person when they are in 
New Zealand. Total hours worked, which can 
be an indicator of overall activity, increased 
0.8 percent in the December quarter.
On the other hand, the Performance of 
Manufacturing and Services Indices (PMI 
and PSI respectively) are below their long-
run averages, with the PMI now indicating 
contraction in the manufacturing sector for 11 
months (figure 2.6). The number of building 
consents issued have continued to decline, 
pointing to weaker residential construction in 
the next year. 
Overall, New Zealand’s economic growth 
is expected to remain subdued in 2024. 
Continued declines in business investment 
and residential construction account for 
this weakness. Government consumption 
and investment are assumed to evolve in 
line with the Half Year Economic and Fiscal 
Update 2024. Once the lower starting point 
for government consumption and investment 
in the latest GDP data is accounted for, 
government consumption is assumed 
to gradually decline, while government 
investment is assumed to increase 
substantially. As discussed in chapter 4.2, the 
central projection does not incorporate any 
policies proposed by the new Government, as 
we await more details. 
Economic growth and capacity pressures 
are expected to increase through 2025 and 
2026, as interest rates start to decline from 
their elevated levels and the higher outlook 
for the terms of trade supports activity. 
Strong migration is adding to both 
demand and supply
Strong population growth, mainly due 
to migration, is providing some support 
to economic activity. Net migration has 
increased rapidly since the end of 2022, 
adding 2.4 percent per annum to the 
population at the end of 2023. While the 
number of people leaving New Zealand 
has increased, the number of arrivals has 
more than offset this. Although migration 
data are subject to considerable revision 
until 16 months after the initial estimate, the 
most recent data indicate that the surge 
in migration may have peaked (figure 2.7). 
Migration is assumed to return to its 2014-
2019 average rate over the medium term.
The demand effects of net migration are 
apparent in increasing pressure on rents. 
Despite strong growth in rents, demand in the 
housing market has been relatively subdued, 
and prices have increased only modestly in 
the past year, after declining about 15 percent 
from their November 2021 peak. 
Figure 2.6
PMI and PSI
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: BNZ-BusinessNZ.
Figure 2.7
Net working age migration
(annual, share of working age population)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


11
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Annual house price inflation is assumed to 
return gradually to its long-run average rate 
of around 5 percent.
High migration is also boosting the 
productive capacity of the economy, by 
adding to the supply of labour. Initially, many 
migrants arrived on work and special visas, 
as businesses looked to fill extreme labour 
shortages resulting from the closed border 
during the pandemic. In the latest Quarterly 
Survey of Business Opinion (QSBO), 
businesses reported that it was much easier 
to find both skilled and unskilled labour. 
Labour as a factor most limiting output has 
declined since the start of 2023, after being 
reported as the factor most limiting output 
throughout 2022 (figure 2.8).
Labour market pressures are 
easing, but by less than expected
Easing labour shortages appear to be due 
to both lower demand for workers and 
increased supply. Various measures of 
labour market pressure eased further in the 
December 2023 quarter, although mostly by 
slightly less than anticipated at the time of the 
November Statement. 
The unemployment and underutilisation 
rates increased to 4.0 percent and 10.7 
percent respectively. While annual same-job 
wage growth (as measured by the labour 
cost index, ordinary time, private sector) 
declined from 4.1 percent to 3.9 percent, 
this decline was less than expected. Strong 
growth in wages was seen across several 
industry groups, suggesting wage growth is 
slightly stronger and more broad-based than 
expected. Overall, the degree of pressure 
in the labour market has clearly eased 
since the acute shortages of 2022. A new 
visualisation of labour market indicators, 
shown in figure 2.9, will be introduced in 
a forthcoming Analytical Note. The labour 
market is assumed to continue to ease over 
the medium term, with fewer job vacancies 
and rising unemployment.
Figure 2.8
QSBO factor most limiting output 
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: NZIER, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.9
Labour market indicator suite
Source: Stats NZ, NZIER, RBNZ estimates. 


12
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Productivity growth has been 
weaker than usual, likely due to 
COVID-19 disruptions
Recent GDP revisions imply that productivity 
growth in New Zealand has been lower than 
previously estimated during the COVID-19 
period. While capital accumulation and 
technological progress are critical in driving 
productivity growth over time, the matching 
of workers with jobs that best utilise their 
skills is also key. 
It is likely that the border closure and 
reopening significantly impacted job 
matching. Prior to COVID-19, New Zealand’s 
labour market experienced high inward and 
outward migration flows. This was hugely 
disrupted during the COVID-19 pandemic, 
and the economy is still in the process of 
returning to normal, including very large 
inward and outward people flows in the 
past year. With GDP revised lower, and very 
strong growth in the working-age population, 
productivity growth appears to have been 
relatively weak. Once migration flows have 
stabilised, we might expect productivity 
growth to return to its previous trend.
If sustained however, lower productivity 
growth would contribute to lower growth in 
potential output, meaning lower incomes 
and well-being. This would also impose a 
lower ‘speed limit’ on the economy. Real 
GDP growth in excess of this limit would 
imply increasing capacity and inflationary 
pressures. 
Investigating supply-side influences on the 
economy and inflation is a key priority for 
the Reserve Bank’s research agenda, as 
highlighted in our Review and Assessment 
of the Formulation and Implementation of 
Monetary Policy.
Global growth remains below 
trend, but New Zealand’s terms  
of trade have improved
Global demand growth remains below trend. 
Several factors are contributing to this, 
including high interest rates. While economic 
growth remains relatively strong in the 
US, it is continuing to slow in Australia and 
stagnating in the euro area. China achieved 
its “around 5 percent” growth target in 2023, 
but recent data still point towards a very 
weak property market and slowing consumer 
spending growth. Global growth is expected 
to slow further this year.
Below-trend global growth has been 
reflected in relatively weak demand for 
New Zealand’s goods exports in recent 
quarters. However, global dairy prices have 
recovered in recent months following their 
rapid fall in the September 2023 quarter.
Headline inflation rates in many of our 
trading partners have declined more quickly 
than expected, reducing the global prices 
for imports to New Zealand. Higher export 
prices and declines in our import prices have 
resulted in an improvement in New Zealand’s 
terms of trade, meaning that as a country 
we can afford more imports for a given 
level of exports (figure 2.10). However, the 
recent conflict in the Red Sea and drought 
near the Panama Canal are creating delays 
and increasing shipping costs. These are 
expected to feed into global and imported 
inflation in the near term, albeit to a lesser 
extent than during the peak of supply 
constraints during the COVID-19 pandemic 
(see chapter 4.1 for more discussion).
Figure 2.10
Terms of trade
(System of National Accounts, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


13
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Figure 2.11
Contributions to CPI inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for inflation over 
the medium term.
Headline inflation has declined, 
but remains above target
As in many other countries, headline inflation 
in New Zealand has fallen slightly more 
quickly than anticipated. Annual CPI inflation 
declined from 5.6 percent to 4.7 percent 
in the December 2023 quarter, below the 
5.0 percent assumed at the time of the 
November Statement. However, the larger 
decline in headline inflation relative to our 
projection was entirely accounted for by 
lower tradables inflation, which measures 
price changes for goods and services 
that are more exposed to international 
competition (figure 2.11). Tradables inflation 
declined to 3.0 percent in the December 
quarter on an annual basis and was negative 
(-0.2 percent) on a quarterly basis.
Non-tradables inflation – which measures 
price changes for goods and services less 
exposed to international competition – 
declined in the December 2023 quarter, 
but by marginally less than assumed in the 
November Statement. Non-tradables inflation 
declined from 6.3 percent to 5.9 percent on 
an annual basis, and from 1.7 percent to 1.1 
percent on a quarterly basis.
Among the components of CPI, the main 
contributor to lower-than-expected inflation 
in the December 2023 quarter was the 
transport group (figure 2.12). This contrasts 
with most quarters since the end of 2021, 
when the transport group made a significant 
contribution to inflation being higher than 
anticipated. Within this, falling international 
airfares and petrol prices in the December 
2023 quarter made the largest contributions. 
As discussed in Box B, the introduction of 
monthly CPI indices for some components 
(Selected Price Indices) by Stats NZ will 
support the Reserve Bank’s near-term 
forecasting ability for these more volatile 
components.
Figure 2.12
Contributions to quarterly CPI forecast error
(one quarter ahead)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


14
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
As headline CPI inflation has declined, 
measures of ‘core’ or persistent inflation 
have also eased (figure 2.13). All measures 
of core inflation declined in the December 
2023 quarter. Survey measures of inflation 
expectations have also declined, with 
business expectations in the Reserve Bank’s 
Survey of Expectations falling at all horizons 
surveyed (figure 2.14). Household inflation 
expectations declined one year ahead, 
but increased two and five years ahead. 
While the declines in core inflation and 
expectations are encouraging, they remain 
elevated and above the 2 percent midpoint 
of the MPC’s target band.
Headline inflation is assumed to continue 
to decline over the medium term. Easing 
capacity pressures and declining inflation 
expectations are expected to reduce non-
tradables inflation, albeit at a slightly slower 
pace than assumed in the November 
Statement. This is slightly more than offset 
by a much lower starting point and weaker 
outlook for tradables inflation, reflecting 
declining global prices for our imports. 
Annual headline CPI inflation is assumed 
to return to within the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent 
target band by the September 2024 quarter, 
and to the 2 percent midpoint by the end of 
2025 (figure 2.15). 
Figure 2.14
Business inflation expectations
(annual, years ahead)
Source: RBNZ Survey of Expectations (Business).
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for inflation over 
the medium term.
Figure 2.15
CPI inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for inflation over 
the medium term.
Figure 2.13
Headline and core inflation measures
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ. 
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for inflation over 
the medium term.


15
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Figure 2.16
Official Cash Rate
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Monetary policy outlook
Conditional on our central economic outlook, 
we expect the OCR will need to remain 
around current levels for an extended period 
in order for the MPC to meet its inflation 
target (figure 2.16). The outlook for the OCR 
is slightly lower than in the November 2023 
Statement. This reflects that the slightly lower 
outlooks for capacity pressures, import prices 
and house price inflation more than offset the 
higher outlook for export prices. 


16
Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Box A: 
Changes to New Zealand’s  
monetary policy framework
1	
See Supporting New Zealand’s economic stability – Toitu te Ohanga.
2	
Reserve Bank Governor Adrian Orr’s speech delivered on 16 February 2024 discusses the removal of MSE as a primary objective.
3	
The amended Charter changed the requirement for the MPS to explain how monetary policy decisions affect sustainable house prices to a more general 
requirement for the MPC to seek to understand the effects of monetary policy decisions on the sustainability of house prices.
In December 2023, the 
Government made changes to 
New Zealand’s monetary policy 
framework. These included 
amending the Reserve Bank of 
New Zealand Act 2021 (the Act) 
to focus the economic objective 
of the MPC on achieving and 
maintaining price stability by 
removing the second economic 
objective of supporting maximum 
sustainable employment (MSE). 
The changes to our monetary 
policy framework provide more 
clarity on the MPC’s priorities.
To reflect the changes to the Act, 
the Minister of Finance amended 
the MPC Remit, which sets out 
the operational objectives for 
formulating monetary policy. The 
new Remit, issued in December 
2023, removed the operational 
objective of supporting MSE. 
The removal of MSE as a primary 
objective is consistent with the 
views expressed in the Reserve 
Bank’s 2022-2023 Remit Review, 
which recommended clarifying 
the primacy of achieving the 
inflation target.1
While MSE has been removed 
as a primary objective, the 
MPC will continue to consider 
labour market developments 
when formulating monetary 
policy.2 This is because the 
labour market is an important 
factor that influences inflation. 
In addition, the amendments to 
the Remit added employment 
as one of the variables in which 
the MPC should seek to avoid 
unnecessary volatility.
The MPC and the Minister of 
Finance also agreed on a new 
MPC Charter in December 2023. 
The Charter sets additional 
transparency and accountability 
requirements for the MPC, as 
well as guidance on decision-
making procedures. The 
amended Charter contains 
new requirements for the MPC 
to explain the timeframe over 
which inflation is expected to 
return to the target midpoint 
and the reasons for that 
timeframe. The new Charter also 
includes changes to reflect the 
removal of MSE as a primary 
objective in the Remit, changes 
to requirements relating to 
sustainable house prices3 and 
requirements for the MPC to 
seek to understand interactions 
with the Government’s economic 
objectives and support 
information sharing with the 
Treasury. 
Following the changes to the 
Act and Remit, the MPC has 
also updated its Statement 
of the MPC’s Monetary Policy 
Strategy that sets out the MPC’s 
overarching plan for how it 
will formulate monetary policy 
under different circumstances 
to achieve its objectives. The 
changes were made in order to 
be consistent with the amended 
Act, Remit and Charter, and 
to better reflect the MPC’s 
experience of setting monetary 
policy in recent years. These 
changes are relatively small and 
are intended to reflect current 
practice.
The latest Remit, Charter and 
Statement of the MPC’s Monetary 
Policy Strategy can be found at 
monetary policy framework.


17
Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Box B: 
Introducing the Selected Price Indexes
The Reserve Bank depends 
on high-quality economic data 
to achieve its monetary policy 
objectives. New Zealand is 
one of only a few developed 
countries that do not produce 
a monthly CPI. Furthermore, 
New Zealand does not review 
CPI weights as frequently as 
most developed countries. 
Timely reweighting is important 
because consumers substitute 
various goods and services when 
relative prices, preferences or 
availability changes. It is likely 
that many such substitutions 
have occurred since the most 
recent reweight in 2020 based 
on the Household Economic 
Survey 2018-19. More frequent 
publication and reweighting of 
the CPI would support the MPC 
in assessing the current state of 
the economy and reduce the risk 
of policy errors from slow data 
releases, particularly in periods of 
heightened uncertainty.
Toward this goal, in November 
2023 Stats NZ began publishing 
additional CPI components on a 
monthly basis. The Selected Price 
Indexes (SPI) are published about 
two weeks after each reference 
month. The SPI represents about 
45 percent of the total CPI basket. 
This includes food (18.8 percent) 
and rent (9.5 percent), which were 
already available monthly, as well 
as the following components:
•	 Alcoholic Beverages and 
Tobacco (7.1 percent)
•	 Petrol (3.9 percent)
•	 Diesel (0.3 percent)
•	 Domestic Air Transport (0.7 
percent)
•	 International Air Transport (2.0 
percent)
•	 Domestic Accommodation (0.7 
percent)
•	 Overseas Accommodation 
(2.2 percent)
These new SPI components 
represent an additional 17 percent 
of the CPI basket that is now 
available monthly.
The SPI components 
contributed significantly to 
recent headline inflation 
The SPI includes components 
that tend to be the most volatile 
in the CPI basket. These include 
food, petrol and international air 
transport. These are particularly 
sensitive to global prices and 
shocks, which make them 
subject to large price swings. As 
inflation is a measure of change 
in the CPI, this volatility means 
that the SPI components tend 
to contribute a larger amount to 
headline inflation than might be 
expected given their weights 
in the CPI basket. Figure B.1 
shows that although the new SPI 
components account for only 17 
percent of the basket, they have 
been contributing significantly 
towards headline inflation, 
particularly in recent years. For 
example, the new components 
contributed around 2 percentage 
points to the 7.3 percent annual 
inflation in the year to June 2022. 
Furthermore, when food and 
rent are added, all the SPI have 
contributed to approximately 
two thirds of headline inflation 
since the start of the COVID-19 
pandemic. This contribution 
highlights the potential of the SPI 
to improve near-term forecast 
accuracy.
Figure B.1
Component contribution to headline inflation
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


18
Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
The SPI is not a monthly 
consumer price index
While the SPI provides some 
insight, it has some limitations 
relative to a monthly CPI. It does 
not include several components 
that contribute to domestically 
generated inflation. For example, 
in the year to December 2023 
the decrease in headline inflation 
from 5.6 percent to 4.7 percent 
could largely be attributed 
to decreases in the volatile 
SPI subgroups, with food and 
transport contributing the most 
to this decrease. However, 
non-tradable components 
were stronger than expected, 
largely caused by housing 
costs, insurance and rental price 
inflation which tend to be more 
persistent and less volatile. Out 
of these three components, only 
rental prices are included in the 
SPI. More timely indicators of 
these non-tradable goods and 
services would be welcomed to 
further assist the Reserve Bank 
in setting monetary policy to 
achieve its inflation target.
The SPI improves the 
information available to 
forecasters
The SPI will be most useful 
in improving our bottom-up 
approach to forecasting headline 
inflation. This is a method where 
forecasts of each component of 
the CPI basket are aggregated 
to forecast a headline inflation 
rate. Having this higher frequency 
data on some of the more 
volatile subgroups will increase 
the accuracy of the bottom-up 
forecast. The SPI for the first 
month of the quarter will usually 
be available before the quarterly 
Monetary Policy Statement. 
Before interim Monetary Policy 
Reviews, two months of SPI data 
will be available. Initial analysis 
shows that the first month of 
SPI data for a given component 
explains a significant amount 
of the variation in ultimate CPI 
outcome for that component. 
When the second month of SPI 
data is included, the amount of 
explained variation increases 
further. Therefore, 
the partial information on the 
selected CPI components gives 
insight into the direction and 
magnitude of price changes for 
the upcoming CPI release.
While the SPI is not intended to 
be a perfect measure of the CPI, 
it is a step in the right direction 
and gets New Zealand closer to 
the global standard. Overall, the 
SPI has increased the frequency 
of available information on 
consumer prices and gives 
forecasters an additional set 
of data to indicate the size and 
direction of changes in inflation 
components in a timelier manner. 
The Reserve Bank encourages 
Stats NZ to continue improving 
the frequency at which prices 
are reported in the New Zealand 
economy.


19
Chapter 2. Recent economic developments and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Mangawhai Heads. Photo: Paul Conway
Chapter 
03
Global 
developments 
and outlook


20
Chapter 3. Global developments and outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Chapter 3.
Global developments 
and outlook
Global economic growth remains below 
its trend. Despite this, growth in 2023 was 
stronger than expected at the start of the 
year. In particular, the US economy remained 
more resilient than expected, growing 
2.5 percent in 2023 against a Consensus 
Economics expectation of just 0.3 percent 
in January 2023. Growth in New Zealand’s 
trading partners is expected to slow in 2024. 
In advanced economies, high interest rates 
continue to reduce demand. Trend growth 
in China is expected to moderate slightly, 
reflecting a variety of structural factors, 
including lower average rates of investment.
Globally, headline inflation is expected to 
ease gradually, but elevated core services 
inflation remains a concern in many 
economies. Labour markets remain strong in 
major economies. Unemployment rates are 
still low compared with pre-COVID-19 levels, 
although labour demand has eased from the 
high levels reached in 2022. 
Major central banks have kept their policy 
rates unchanged in recent months, and 
financial market participants have shifted 
their focus towards the timing and degree 
of policy rate cuts expected this year. Global 
risk appetite has improved in recent months 
as longer-term interest rates have fallen, 
which supported a sharp increase in global 
equity prices. 
Global economic activity has been 
resilient given high interest rates
Global economic growth remained strong in 
late 2023 despite restrictive monetary policy. 
Growth in New Zealand’s trading partners is 
estimated to have averaged 3.0 percent in 
2023, slightly below the pre-COVID-19 (2014-
2019) average of 3.6 percent. Trading-partner 
growth is forecast to decline to 2.7 percent 
this year, slowing across most economies 
(figure 3.1).
The US economy expanded 0.8 percent in 
the December 2023 quarter. This was higher 
than expectations and reflected strong 
household consumption. US annual GDP 
growth is projected to fall from 2.5 percent 
in 2023 to 2.1 percent in 2024 as monetary 
policy tightening continues to pass through. 
The US labour market has remained strong.
Figure 3.1
Key trading partner GDP forecasts
(index=100 in Q4 2019)
Source: Consensus Economics, Haver Analytics, RBNZ estimates.
Note: GDP forecasts are based on Consensus Economics estimates, except New Zealand’s 
which is based on our current projection.


21
Chapter 3. Global developments and outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Figure 3.2
Job openings
(index=100 in Q4 2019)
Source: Federal Reserve Economic Data, Haver Analytics, MBIE.
In contrast, euro area GDP growth has 
continued to stagnate due to the impact of 
the war in Ukraine, low consumer confidence 
and restrictive monetary policy. GDP growth 
remained at 0.1 percent in the year to the 
December 2023 quarter, and near-term 
indicators suggest growth will remain weak in 
early 2024. 
In Australia, economic growth continues to 
slow, primarily due to weaker household 
consumption growth as real income 
growth remains weak. Strong investment 
continues to provide support to growth. 
GDP growth is forecast to decline from 1.8 
percent in 2023 to 1.4 percent in 2024, as 
household consumption remains subdued 
and investment growth slows. This is despite 
strong population growth due to migration 
and a recovery in the tourism sector.
China’s economy expanded 5.2 percent 
in 2023, consistent with the Government’s 
target of around 5 percent growth for 
the year. Recent economic activity has 
gradually increased in response to fiscal and 
monetary policy support following a period 
of weakness in mid-2023. Further loosening 
of fiscal policy is expected to provide 
additional support this year. However, 
deflationary pressures remain persistent and 
consumption growth slowed significantly at 
the end of last year. The Chinese property 
sector has also weakened further, with 
declines in both house prices and transaction 
volumes. 
Annual growth in China is forecast to be 
4.6 percent in 2024 and 4.3 percent in 
2025. This slower pace of growth largely 
reflects the ongoing effects of longer-term 
structural challenges, with potential growth 
slowing as a result of declining population, 
weakening productivity growth and intended 
rebalancing away from high rates of debt-
financed investment. The slowing property 
market and acute financial stress amongst 
many property developers remain downside 
risks to Chinese growth.
Global labour market conditions 
are gradually easing
Labour market conditions are beginning 
to ease from tight levels. Labour demand 
(as seen in job openings) has fallen as a 
result of contractionary monetary policy 
and slowing demand (figure 3.2). However, 
unemployment rates remain low, having 
increased only gradually, and wage growth 
remains historically high. 
The euro area labour market remains 
robust, with job openings still elevated and 
unemployment rates at record lows – despite 
weak economic growth. Labour markets 
in the US have seen a fall in demand for 
workers, although the unemployment rate 
has yet to increase materially. The US labour 
market is expected to gradually loosen 
further in coming months, reducing wage 
growth and services inflation towards more 
normal levels. Australia’s labour market 
remains tight but is showing signs of easing, 
with elevated population growth and record 
high labour force participation boosting 
labour supply. Indicators of labour demand 
have eased further in recent months.


22
Chapter 3. Global developments and outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Global inflation continues  
to decline
Headline inflation across advanced 
economies has continued to decline (figure 
3.3). Lower energy, food and goods inflation 
has contributed to the recent decline in 
inflation in advanced economies. Oil prices 
have fallen since the November Statement 
in response to slowing global demand and 
supply increases from non-OPEC countries. 
Inflation in the euro area has fallen faster 
than expected in recent months to an annual 
rate of 2.8 percent, due to lower energy 
prices and larger-than-expected declines 
in core inflation. In the US, annual headline 
inflation has fluctuated between 3 and 4 
percent since June last year and fell to 3.1 
percent in January 2024. Headline inflation 
is comparatively higher in Australia and the 
United Kingdom at annual rates of around 
4 percent, although recent inflation in both 
countries was below expectations. Deflation 
in China has persisted in recent months. 
Weak domestic demand, alongside falling 
food and producer prices, is more than 
offsetting increasing services inflation. 
Core inflation (excluding food and energy) 
also continues to decline but is higher than 
headline inflation in many economies, due 
to high services inflation (figure 3.4). In 
recent months, annual core inflation rates 
have converged in the US, euro area and 
Australia to just below 4 percent. Core 
goods inflation has declined materially, 
and in some economies is now around or 
below pre-COVID-19 levels. In contrast, core 
services inflation has continued to ease 
more gradually and remains elevated across 
advanced economies. 
Headline and core inflation in advanced 
economies are expected to continue to 
decline in 2024, returning headline inflation 
close to central bank targets in some 
economies by the end of the year. Easing 
capacity pressures and loosening labour 
markets as a result of previous monetary 
tightening are expected to reduce core 
services inflation. As discussed in chapter 4.1, 
higher global shipping costs pose an upside 
risk to global goods inflation in the near 
term. In China, headline inflation is forecast 
to increase gradually back towards more 
normal levels. 
Figure 3.3
Headline inflation for key trading partners 
(annual)
Source: Haver Analytics.
Note: Data are monthly, except for Australia and New Zealand, which only publish official 
inflation data quarterly.
Figure 3.4
Inflation excluding food and energy 
for key trading partners 
(annual)
Source: Haver Analytics.
Note: Data are monthly, except for Australia and New Zealand, which only publish official 
inflation data quarterly.


23
Chapter 3. Global developments and outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Figure 3.5
Market-implied path of policy rates
Source: Bloomberg.
Figure 3.6
2-year sovereign yields
Source: Bloomberg.
Expectations for central banks’ 
policy rates have fallen slightly
Most major central banks view their current 
monetary policy stances as restrictive, and 
some have begun to communicate the 
possibility of reducing policy rates later in 
2024. In particular, the most recent policy 
rate projections from Federal Reserve 
(Fed) policymakers imply a decline of 75 
basis points in 2024. This shift was largely 
in response to falling headline inflation in 
the second half of 2023. However, several 
major central banks have indicated there 
have been further signs of core inflation 
persistence and they are looking for further 
evidence of inflation being on a sustained 
path towards their targets before reducing 
their policy rates. 
Financial market participants continue to 
expect policy easing to begin from around 
the middle of this year, followed by a 
more rapid easing of policy than has been 
indicated by central banks (figure 3.5). 
Markets are pricing the policy rates of the 
Fed and European Central Bank (ECB) to 
decline around 80 basis points this year, 
while a more moderate 45 basis point 
decline is expected from the Reserve Bank 
of Australia (RBA). This largely reflects the 
slower relative pace of disinflation in Australia 
to date. The RBA has indicated that further 
policy rate increases may still be required 
and that the outlook for its policy rate is 
balanced. 
Sovereign bond yields have decreased 
slightly alongside lower expectations for 
central bank policy rates. Although the 
US 2-year yield is little changed since the 
November Statement, it has declined by 
around 40 basis points since October, with 
similar falls observed in other advanced 
economies (figure 3.6).


24
Chapter 3. Global developments and outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Global risk appetite has improved 
in recent months
Weaker inflation and robust activity data, 
alongside expectations for lower interest 
rates, have supported global risk sentiment 
since the November Statement. Equity prices 
in advanced economies have increased 
sharply in recent months, reaching record 
highs in both the US and Japan (figure 3.7). 
US equity prices have also been supported 
by stronger-than-expected corporate 
earnings results. 
Similarly, spreads on corporate bonds in 
both developed and emerging markets 
have narrowed to their lowest levels since 
early 2022. This reflects market perceptions 
that private sector balance sheets remain 
healthy and will be supported by market 
expectations for central bank policy rate cuts 
in the years ahead. Corporate debt issuance 
has increased sharply as issuers look to take 
advantage of the narrowing in corporate 
spreads. For example, large US corporates 
issued around US$190 billion of bonds in 
January, almost US$15 billion more than the 
previous record for January in 2017.
Figure 3.7
Global equity prices
(index=100 on 1 January 2020)
Source: Bloomberg.


25
Chapter 4. Special topic. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Cape Kidnappers. Photo: Nele McHattie
Chapter 
04
Special 
topics


26
Chapter 4. Special topic. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Chapter 4. 
Special topics 
Before the publication of each Statement, the Monetary Policy 
Committee is provided with analyses of some topical issues. 
Topics for the February Statement included:
1.	 The effect of higher shipping costs on inflation and the Official Cash Rate
2.	 The effect of the Government’s proposed policies on monetary policy	
 
Special topics in the past 12 months
Topic
Date/publication
Monetary policy transmission lags
November 2023 Statement (Chapter 4)
The inflationary impact of recent migration
August 2023 Statement (Chapter 4)
Factors contributing to New Zealand’s current account 
deficit and outlook
August 2023 Statement (Chapter 4)
The recovery in international tourism over the  
2022/23 summer
May 2023 Statement (Chapter 4)
Have inflation expectations become more sensitive  
to higher inflation?
May 2023 Statement (Chapter 4)
The international dimension of non-tradables inflation
February 2023 Statement (Chapter 4)
Monitoring the labour market for inflationary 
pressures with high-frequency microdata
February 2023 Statement (Chapter 4)


27
Chapter 4. Special topic. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
The effect of higher shipping costs on 
inflation and the Official Cash Rate
4	
UN Global Platform; PortWatch
Summary
•	 Conflict in the Middle East and drought in 
Central America have led to disruptions in 
global trade, with major delays and cost 
increases.
•	 Higher shipping costs are likely to 
increase import prices and inflation with 
a lag. Available research suggests that 
a sustained doubling in shipping costs 
could add about 0.3 to 0.7 percentage 
points to annual inflation over a 12-month 
period.
•	 In our current projections, we have 
incorporated a conservative and 
temporary impact of higher shipping 
costs on import prices and headline 
inflation.
•	 Although higher shipping costs add to 
near-term inflation, we currently assume 
in our projections that this is a relative 
price shock that will reverse. There is 
considerable uncertainty about the 
size and duration of higher shipping 
costs resulting from recent disruptions 
to shipping routes. Consistent with 
flexible inflation targeting, we have 
therefore ‘looked through’ the first-
round effect of recent higher shipping 
costs. Nevertheless, we remain vigilant 
to these costs persisting for longer than 
currently assumed. In that event, potential 
spillovers into general prices might 
require a monetary policy response.
Overview of the disruptions
Several major shipping companies have 
stopped sending ships through the Red Sea 
in response to Houthi rebel attacks. Many 
ships are now travelling around the Cape of 
Good Hope, which increases journey times 
by around 30 to 50 percent. Since large 
scale re-routing around Africa began in mid-
December 2023, traffic through the Suez 
Canal has declined by around 50 percent.4
Meanwhile, the Panama Canal is suffering 
one of its worst droughts since the 1950s, 
reducing its capacity. The water level in 
Gatun Lake, which supplies water to the 
Panama Canal, has dropped to its lowest in 
several decades and is forecast to remain 
low in coming months. Average daily ship 
crossings through the Panama Canal have 
declined from around 36 to 24.
Shipping costs have increased
Most global goods trade occurs via sea 
freight. The Red Sea facilitates about 12 
percent of global maritime trade and 30 
percent of global container shipping trade. 
The Panama Canal accounts for about 5 
percent of global maritime trade.
Shipping disruptions have increased 
shipping costs, either via higher fuel and 
labour costs, as shipping companies resort 
to alternative routes, or via queue-jumping 
fees. Longer voyages also generate 
capacity constraints on alternative routes, 
while risk surrounding the Red Sea crisis 
has increased insurance costs. As a result, 
various measures of global containerised 
shipping costs have doubled or tripled since 
early December 2023 (figure 4.1).
Figure 4.1 
Shipping cost indices
(indexed to 2015-2019 averages)
Source: Bloomberg.


28
Chapter 4. Special topic. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Currently, about 13 to 14 percent of 
New Zealand’s exports go to the European 
Union and wider Mediterranean region, 
meaning they are potentially impacted by  
the Red Sea conflict (figure 4.2).
Freight costs for New Zealand businesses, 
measured as shipping and insurance 
costs as a proportion of the total value of 
consumer goods imports, have yet to show 
any significant increases as of January 
2024 (figure 4.3). However, this measure is 
only available with a lag and will most likely 
increase going forward. 
Some exporters have reported paying much 
higher fees to ensure priority shipping during 
previous periods of shipping disruption. In 
some cases, exporters have even substituted 
sea freight for air freight. This has been 
done in order to meet supply contracts and 
maintain market presence. This suggests that 
in the short term at least, shipping disruptions 
may not materially affect total export volumes 
but could lead to higher spending on 
transport services.
While shipping costs are increasing, there 
are some important differences between 
the current disruption and those that 
occurred in the COVID-19 pandemic. First, 
the current disruption is limited to two trade 
lanes, whereas COVID-19 affected all ports 
globally at different times, making it much 
more difficult to manage. Second, new 
ships commissioned during the COVID-19 
pandemic are increasing shipping capacity, 
implying less upward pressure on shipping 
costs.
Other aspects of global supply chains 
also suggest that the effects of the current 
disruptions are likely to be less severe than 
those of the COVID-19 pandemic. Global 
demand for goods is weaker, in part owing 
to tighter monetary conditions, while the 
composition of demand has shifted from 
goods back towards services. On the supply 
side, global manufacturing is no longer being 
affected by lockdowns and China currently 
has large excess manufacturing capacity. 
This implies less capacity pressure, which will 
help to sustain downward pressure on global 
goods inflation. 
In addition, shipping costs globally account 
for around 3 percent of the total cost of final 
imported goods prices. As such, there may 
also be scope for some firms to limit price 
rises temporarily by compressing profit 
margins.
Figure 4.2
Share of New Zealand exports to affected regions
(average of shares from 2014 Q2 to 2023 Q3)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 4.3
Shipping costs for consumer goods imports 
(share of import value for duty)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: These series are estimated by taking the value of consumer merchandise imports 
including freight and insurance costs (CIF) and subtracting the reported value for duty (VFD), 
which excludes these costs. They are expressed as a percentage of the VFD figure.


29
Chapter 4. Special topic. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Higher shipping costs tend to  
be inflationary
We have scaled the findings of research 
covering a range of countries to the effect 
of a sustained doubling in freight rates. 
Although only an estimate, this exercise 
suggests that a sustained doubling in freight 
rates may lead to an increase of 0.3 to 0.7 
percent on the price level over a 12-month 
period (table 4.1). These varied impacts reflect 
factors such as the delays between ordering 
shipping services, the delivery of goods, 
and price adjustments by firms in response 
to elevated shipping costs. They likely 
also reflect the common practice among 
importers of locking in freight rates into the 
future.
More recent OECD research suggests that a 
persistent 100 percent increase in shipping 
costs could increase annual OECD import 
price inflation by almost 5 percentage points.5 
Scaling the share of shipping costs in 
New Zealand’s imports relative to the 
increase in several shipping cost indices to 
date suggests that the current shipping cost 
shock could increase New Zealand import 
prices by around 2 percent, compared to an 
estimated increase of 6 percent during the 
COVID-19 pandemic. 
Our projections assume that the recent 
shipping disruption in both the Red Sea and 
5	
See OECD Economic Outlook, Interim Report February 2024: Strengthening the Foundations for Growth
6	
See How Does a Rise in International Shipping Costs Affect U.S. Inflation? – Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City (kansascityfed.org) 
7	
See How will rising shipping cost affect inflation in OECD countries? – ECOSCOPE (oecdecoscope.blog)
8	
See The impact of shipping costs and inflation – Bank Underground
9	
See Shipping costs and inflation – ScienceDirect
Panama Canal add a total of 2 percentage 
points to non-oil import price inflation across 
the June and September 2024 quarters. We 
assume that the impact of the shipping cost 
shock is temporary and reverses at the same 
rate in the following two quarters. Modelled 
in this way, this shock increases annual 
headline inflation by 0.2 percentage points in 
the June and September quarters of 2024. 
In terms of the monetary policy response, this 
is a relative price shock and therefore has 
little-to-no impact on the Official Cash Rate 
projection. Given our framework of flexible 
inflation targeting over the medium term, 
monetary policy effectively looks through 
the first-round effect of this temporary supply 
shock.
Of course, we remain vigilant to any 
spillovers into the general prices for 
New Zealand goods and services. An 
escalation of the Middle East conflict and 
further disruption in the Red Sea would 
increase the risk of a full shutdown of this 
route, pushing freight rates higher and 
delivery times longer.
All else being equal, this would further 
increase inflation and the likelihood of 
spillovers into generalised inflationary 
pressures. However, a sustained disruption 
may incentivise further efficiencies in 
shipping logistics, as shipping could optimise 
alternative trade routes more effectively.
Table 4.1
Estimates of a 100 percent rise in shipping costs’ effect on inflation
Organisation
Impact on
Size of impact (% pts)
FRB Kansas City (2016)6 
US Core PCE
0.6
OECD (2021)7 
Global CPI
0.4
BoE Bank Underground (2022)8 
US PCE
0.3
IMF (2023)9 
Global CPI
0.7


30
Chapter 4. Special topic. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
The effect of the Government’s proposed policies  
on monetary policy 
10	
To create our forecasts of government investment, we use fiscal forecasts that Treasury produces for some key variables, namely 
the purchase of physical assets and the purchase of intangible assets, and convert them to an SNA framework. In addition, we use 
announcements on specific policy initiatives to determine the timing and likely amount of spending to generate projections consistent with 
Treasury’s economic and fiscal forecasts.
Summary
•	 Government policies influence the 
behaviour of households, workers and 
businesses, and affect our international 
trade. Taxation and expenditure policies 
redistribute resources in the economy 
and through time.
•	 Government spending and taxation 
affect financial markets via debt issuance 
and sovereign credit ratings.
•	 Policy changes announced by the new 
Government will affect the economy in 
various ways. The net effect of these 
policy changes on inflationary pressures 
is currently uncertain because most 
policies have yet to be finalised.
•	 The MPC’s central projection for 
government spending is based on 
Treasury’s published forecasts in 
the Half-Year Economic and Fiscal 
Update (HYEFU) 2023. These will be 
updated following Budget 2024 in late 
May. Announced policy changes are 
assessed in this chapter relative to fiscal 
and regulatory settings as at the HYEFU 
2023.
Our approach to forecasting 
government spending
Government spending makes up about a 
quarter of total expenditure in the economy 
each year. Changes in the amount and type 
of government expenditure cause changes 
in aggregate demand and therefore 
inflationary pressures. 
Our forecasts split government expenditure 
into government consumption and 
government investment. Government 
consumption captures the operational 
expenditure associated with running the 
functions of government. Government 
investment reflects capital spending 
associated with building infrastructure and 
investment in other long-lasting assets.
Government transfers and subsidies are 
neither government consumption nor 
investment. We do not forecast these 
variables directly, but capture them 
indirectly in our projections of household 
consumption. We use a similar approach to 
capture the effects of tax changes.
In the current projection, our forecasts for 
government consumption and investment 
are consistent with Treasury’s forecasts 
in the HYEFU 2023. The HYEFU had not 
incorporated proposed government policy 
changes nor September 2023 quarter GDP 
data. 
We have adjusted our government 
forecasts for the downward revision in 
the level of government consumption and 
investment in the September 2023 quarter 
GDP release. For government investment, 
we have adjusted the HYEFU forecasts 
from GAAP accounting terms to System of 
National Accounts (SNA) categories, which 
is the standard for GDP reporting.10 We 
have not incorporated the effects of any 
proposed policy changes. Budget 2024 
policy changes will be incorporated in our 
forecasts after their announcement in late 
May.


31
Chapter 4. Special topic. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Announced changes in 
government policy
The announced policy changes that are 
most relevant for monetary policy are those 
affecting:
1.	 The incentives to purchase or build 
residential properties;
2.	 The size of government expenditure; and
3.	 Income tax rates and government 
transfers.
Most of these policies have yet to be finalised 
and the net effect on capacity and inflationary 
pressures in the economy is uncertain. 
However, preliminary assessments of the 
effects of these policies are as follows.
Purchasing and building residential 
properties
The reintroduction of interest deductibility 
and the easing of the bright-line rule are 
two policy changes that shift incentives for 
purchasing and building housing.
The interest deductibility policy allows 
residential property investors to deduct 
interest payments on debt from taxable rental 
income. The previous Government’s policy 
was to phase out this deduction gradually, 
while allowing the owners of new builds to 
deduct interest for the first 20 years.
The reinstatement of interest deductions is 
expected to increase demand for existing 
properties from indebted investors. While 
increased demand is expected to put upward 
pressure on house prices at the margin, 
several factors suggest this impact will be 
relatively small:
•	 Cash investors and owner-occupiers, 
who comprise a much larger share of the 
housing market (approximately 63 percent 
of sales), are not affected by the policy 
change.11
11	
The share of property sales is the average share of each buyer type between January 2013 and October 2023.
12	
https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/hub/news/2023/08/what-drives-rents-in-new-zealand
•	 Indebted investors have been able 
to substitute investment in existing 
properties for new build investment, 
retaining the ability to deduct interest for 
the first 20 years. 
•	 The high serviceability test rates currently 
being used by banks are constraining the 
borrowing capacity of potential investors. 
The bright-line rule imposes a tax on the 
capital gain of an investment property sold 
within a given period. Prior to the policy 
change, a property purchased after March 
2018 would be subject to this tax if it were:
a)	 sold within five years if purchased prior 
to March 2021, or if it was an eligible new 
build; otherwise
b)	 sold within 10 years of purchase 
The new Government has decided all 
properties sold from 1 July 2024 will be 
subject to a 2-year bright-line rule.
We view the reduction in the bright-line rule 
as putting small upside pressure on house 
prices. We expect a marginal increase in 
investor demand given a greater after-tax 
payoff from potential capital gains. In the 
short term, investors who have owned 
property for more than two years, but less 
than the bright-line rule applied to their 
property, will no longer be locked into 
holding property to avoid the tax. As a 
result, there may be a near-term increase 
in property listings, which could temporarily 
dampen house prices. 
We expect the effects of these policies to 
flow primarily to house prices rather than 
rents. Recently published research has 
found the drivers of rents in New Zealand in 
the past 20 years have been the number of 
people per dwelling and nominal income.12 
We therefore expect that changes in tax and 
interest rates are primarily capitalised into 
land prices.


32
Chapter 4. Special topic. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Government expenditure
The Government’s mini-budget, released 
alongside the HYEFU in December 2023, 
announced cutting government expenditure 
as a priority. More details on how this will 
be achieved, while balancing other fiscal 
objectives of reducing taxes and government 
debt, is expected at the May Budget. The 
mini-budget signalled that government 
consumption is intended to be lower than the 
HYEFU forecast. 
Given announcements so far, we expect 
changes to government investment policy 
to be largely a re-prioritisation of projects, 
rather than a material increase or reduction in 
investment.
Income tax rates and subsidies
Intentions to change tax and transfer policies 
were announced at the mini-budget in 
December 2023. These included setting 
higher income thresholds on income tax 
rates, and some income relief for lower 
income households, including tax credits, 
the Family Boost childcare rebate and 
superannuants receiving a higher winter 
energy payment.
In isolation, all these policies should increase 
household disposable income. Higher 
disposable income should then lead to 
higher household consumption, although 
there is uncertainty about how much of the 
higher disposable income will be spent. 
This would put upward pressure on our 
household consumption forecast.
On the supply side, lower effective tax rates 
will incentivise some people to enter the 
workforce or work more, due to higher after-
tax incomes. Lower tax rates will incentivise 
other people to work less given they can 
maintain their current income while working 
fewer hours. The aggregate outcome of 
these two effects is uncertain.
The childcare rebate might also incentivise 
more people to work at the margin, 
increasing labour supply. We will incorporate 
our estimate of these offsetting pressures 
once these policies are confirmed.
Conclusion
Due to uncertainty around magnitude and 
timing, these policy changes have not yet 
led to specific adjustments in our forecasts. 
However, as more details are confirmed, we 
will incorporate their expected effects. These 
uncertainties are at least partially offsetting, 
and it is not clear at this stage whether the 
net effect of proposed Government policy 
changes will be inflationary or disinflationary.


33
Chapter 5. Domestic financial conditions. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Chapter 4. Special topic. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Domestic 
financial 
conditions
Chapter 
05
Nelson Lakes. Photo: Mahia Pepper


34
Chapter 5. Domestic financial conditions. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Chapter 5.
Domestic financial conditions
Monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation by 
influencing financial conditions in New Zealand. These include 
the interest rates at which households and businesses save 
and borrow, the exchange rate and other factors such as credit 
availability. This chapter outlines recent developments in 
financial markets.
Financial conditions have loosened slightly 
since the November Statement. Mortgage 
rates have dipped slightly at most terms and 
term deposit rates have fallen at terms of 
more than six months. Wholesale interest 
rates, such as swap rates, have been volatile 
in recent months. Overall, wholesale interest 
rates at terms of up to two years have 
increased when compared to immediately 
before the November Statement, while 
rates at terms of longer than two years have 
decreased.
Market participants’ near-term expectations 
for the Official Cash Rate (OCR) decreased in 
mid-December 2023, following the release 
of weaker-than-expected New Zealand 
GDP data and the US Federal Reserve 
commenting on the possibility of policy 
easing in 2024. In recent weeks, OCR 
expectations have increased following 
stronger-than-expected New Zealand labour 
market data against a backdrop of increasing 
global interest rates. As of 22 February 
2024, markets are pricing in a moderate 
chance of a rate increase by May 2024, 
with expectations for OCR cuts to begin by 
November 2024. Market expectations for 
upcoming decisions are higher than prior to 
the November Statement (figure 5.1).
Domestic wholesale interest rates, such as 
interest rate swaps, are little changed at 
shorter terms but have decreased at longer 
terms since the November Statement (figure 
5.2). The 10-year swap rate has decreased 
by around 10 basis points. Following these 
moves, the interest rate swap curve is more 
inverted than at the time of the November 
Statement.
Figure 5.1
Market expectations for the OCR
Source: Bloomberg.
Note: Each data point represents market expectations of the level of the OCR at a given 
point in the future, as measured by overnight indexed swap pricing.
Source: Bloomberg.
Note: Interest rate swap rates are wholesale interest rates often used as a benchmark 
by financial institutions in setting other interest rates in the economy. They represent the 
fixed interest rate that one party to the swap agreement receives in exchange for paying a 
floating rate to the other party for the duration of the agreement. 
Figure 5.2
New Zealand interest rate swap rates
(terms in years)


35
Chapter 5. Domestic financial conditions. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
The New Zealand dollar exchange rate has 
moved higher on a trade-weighted basis 
since the November Statement (figure 5.3). 
New Zealand export commodity prices, 
which often have an influence on the 
exchange rate, are higher. An improvement 
in global risk sentiment has provided some 
support for the New Zealand dollar. This has 
been offset, to some extent, by a stronger 
US dollar. 
Mortgage rates have decreased slightly 
since the November Statement (figure 5.4). 
Increases in shorter-term wholesale rates 
mean that the spread between mortgage 
rates and wholesale rates has decreased in 
the past month, following a sharp increase 
in prior months (figure 5.5). Despite this, the 
broad upward trend in spreads since the 
end of 2022 is likely to continue over the 
next few years. This is because increases in 
banks’ cost of funding will likely continue to 
place upward pressure on mortgage rates in 
the years ahead, even in an environment of 
falling swap rates.
Source: RBNZ.
Figure 5.3
New Zealand dollar TWI
(nominal)
Source: interest.co.nz.
Note: the mortgage rates shown are the average of the latest fixed-term rates on offer 
from ANZ, ASB, BNZ and Westpac. 
Figure 5.4
New Zealand mortgage rates
(terms in years)
Figure 5.5
New Zealand 2-year mortgage rates as 
a spread to equivalent swap rates
Source: Bloomberg, interest.co.nz.


36
Chapter 5. Domestic financial conditions. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Interest rates on term deposits, which make 
up a large share of banks’ core funding, 
have increased slightly at the 6-month 
term but decreased at longer terms. The 
recent upward trend in the spread between 
term deposit rates and wholesale rates 
has stalled, as wholesale rates at shorter 
tenors have moved higher (figure 5.6). This 
spread remains significantly lower than 
pre-pandemic averages, holding down the 
cost of bank funding. A higher-than-normal 
share of customer deposits remain in day-
to-day or transaction accounts that pay very 
low interest rates, further holding down 
bank funding costs. Bank funding costs are 
likely to increase further over the medium 
term, with banks expected to compete 
more aggressively for customer deposits 
as accommodative funding conditions for 
banks continue to fade.
Source: interest.co.nz, Bloomberg.
Note: The term deposit rates shown are the average of the latest fixed term rates on offer 
from ANZ, ASB, BNZ and Westpac. Bank Bill rates represent the rates at which banks are 
willing to borrow from, or lend to, one another for terms of one to six months.
Figure 5.6
Spread between the 6-month term deposit 
rate and the 6-month bank bill rate


37
Chapter 5. Domestic financial conditions. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Table 5.1 
Developments in domestic financial conditions as of 22 February 2024
Wholesale interest rates 
Market pricing 
for the OCR
•	 The November Statement contributed to an upward shift in market participants’ expectations 
for the OCR in 2024. This was primarily due to the higher-than-anticipated OCR forecast, which 
peaked at 5.69 percent. Market pricing for the OCR, which shifted lower in mid-December 
following the release of Q3 domestic GDP data and global factors, has recently moved higher on 
global and domestic data developments.
•	 Market pricing for the OCR is currently higher than at the time of the November Statement. In 
recent weeks, markets have priced in a moderate chance of a further OCR increase by May 
2024. As such, the expected peak OCR for this cycle, as measured by overnight indexed swap 
pricing, has increased by around 20 basis points to 5.67 percent. Markets still expect the OCR to 
decline in 2024, pricing in around 25 basis points of cuts by November. However, immediately 
before the November Statement markets were pricing in around 60 basis points of cuts this year. 
The current and expected OCR settings are contractionary, sitting above our estimates for the 
neutral OCR (see figure 7.4).
Interest rate 
swaps
•	 Short-term New Zealand swap rates are little changed since the November Statement. Conversely, 
long-term New Zealand swap rates have decreased over the same period, with the 10-year swap 
rate around 10 basis points lower. Consequently, the degree of inversion (when shorter-term rates 
are higher than longer-term rates) in the interest rate swap curve has increased, with the difference 
between the 2- and 10-year swap rates widening from around minus 40 basis points immediately 
before the November Statement to around minus 50 basis points.
•	 Longer-term global interest rate swaps decreased in the period between the November Statement 
and the start of 2024, as markets began to anticipate additional policy easing this year. This fall 
has since partially reversed following some stronger-than-expected recent global economic data. 
Global interest rates continue to be a key influence on longer-term interest rate movements in 
New Zealand.
New Zealand 
government 
bonds (NZGB)
•	 Short-term NZGB yields have risen slightly since the November Statement. Long-term yields have 
decreased, driven by lower long-term global interest rates.
•	 Bid-ask spreads, which is how far apart buyers and sellers are from reaching an agreed price to trade, 
are broadly unchanged since the November Statement. 
•	 The differences between NZGB yields and swap rates at different horizons remain at relatively high 
levels, reflecting increased supply of NZGBs.
New Zealand dollar
Interest rate 
differentials
•	 The interest rate differential between New Zealand and Australia has increased since the 
November Statement, and this has supported an appreciation of the New Zealand dollar against 
the Australian dollar. The differential between New Zealand and the United States is broadly 
unchanged over the same period. 
Risk sentiment
•	 On balance, market risk sentiment has improved since the November Statement as the value of risk 
assets, such as global equities, have moved higher and some measures of financial market volatility 
have moved lower. The improvement in risk sentiment is likely to have provided support for the 
New Zealand dollar. 
Commodity 
prices
•	 Increases in New Zealand’s key export commodity prices tend to be supportive for the 
New Zealand dollar. 
•	 Prices of key export commodities in New Zealand – particularly dairy – have increased since the 
November Statement, likely supporting the value of the New Zealand dollar. 


38
Chapter 5. Domestic financial conditions. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Retail interest rates
Mortgage rates
•	 Mortgage rates have decreased since the November Statement. The declines in mortgage rates 
occurred prior to much of the recent increase in wholesale rates.
•	 Mortgage rates at terms of two to five years have decreased by more than the 1-year mortgage 
rate since the November Statement. The 2-year mortgage rate has decreased by around 15 basis 
points since the November Statement, while the 5-year mortgage rate has decreased by around 
10 basis points. The 1-year mortgage rate has decreased by about 5 basis points.
•	 The increase in the spread between mortgage rates and swap rates during 2023 has reversed 
since the start of 2024, as swap rates have increased. That said, mortgage rates are likely to 
increase relative to wholesale rates over coming years, as banks’ funding costs increase.
Deposit rates
•	 Term deposit rates have decreased at all terms apart from six months since the November 
Statement. The increase in term deposit spreads to wholesale rates during 2023 has stalled 
since the November Statement. That said, term spreads to wholesale rates are likely to continue 
rising towards pre-COVID-19 levels over the coming years, as banks compete more aggressively 
for deposit funding.
•	 Rates on other types of deposits, including bonus saver and transaction accounts, remain low 
compared to wholesale interest rates, holding down the cost of bank funding.
Bank funding conditions
Funding 
composition
•	 Term deposit volumes have continued to increase in recent months, and at a faster rate than on-
call transaction and savings deposits. Term deposit volumes grew by around $7 billion between 
October and December 2023, while on-call account volumes grew by around $3 billion. 
•	 Banks remain well funded and have strong liquidity buffers. Lower-cost deposit types, in 
particular transaction accounts, remain a larger share of bank funding compared to pre-COVID-19 
averages. This has contributed to lower average bank funding costs. Bank core funding ratios 
remain high at 90.9 percent in December 2023.
•	 Banks have begun to repay loans taken out under the Funding for Lending Programme. As these 
loans are repaid, banks are expected to increasingly compete for other sources of funding, such 
as deposits, and to issue additional debt in wholesale markets.
Credit spreads
•	 The cost of raising long-term wholesale bank funding relative to benchmark wholesale rates has 
been stable since the November Statement. 
•	 Domestic bank credit spreads are broadly unchanged from the time of the November Statement.


39
Chapter 6. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Chapter 5. Domestic financial conditions. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Chapter 
06
Maungawhau Mt Eden. Photo: Lucas Chen
Economic 
projections


40
Chapter 6. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Chapter 6.
Economic projections
This chapter summarises the baseline economic projections that 
Monetary Policy Committee (MPC) members considered when 
making their policy assessment. The projections were finalised on 
22 February 2024.
These projections rely on a set of key 
assumptions about the global and domestic 
factors influencing the economy. These 
include:
•	 how much lower the level of potential 
GDP has been over history given the 
extent that GDP has been revised in 
previous years;
•	 the speed at which labour market and 
wage pressures ease, and the effects 
of these factors on household spending 
and core inflation;
•	 the outlook for net immigration, and the 
extent to which high net immigration 
contributes relatively more to aggregate 
demand or labour supply;
•	 the extent to which the decline in house 
prices from late 2021 to early 2023 
and their recovery since mid-2023, on 
balance, contribute to lower residential 
construction activity and household 
consumption;
•	 the extent to which activity and inflation 
in our key trading partners slows in the 
coming year and the consequences for 
domestic financial conditions, demand 
for New Zealand’s exports, and export 
and import prices; 
•	 the scale and duration of the effect 
of recent shipping disruptions in the 
Red Sea and Panama Canal on global 
shipping prices and import inflation; 
•	 the extent to which business investment 
weakens as a result of declining capacity 
pressures in the economy;
•	 how businesses, consumers and workers 
respond to ongoing cost pressures and 
high interest rates in New Zealand; 
•	 the extent to which banks pass on 
any lower wholesale borrowing costs 
as global central banks start to move 
towards policy easing in the short or 
medium term, and 
•	 that government consumption and 
investment evolve in line with the 
macroeconomic and fiscal forecasts 
in the Half Year Economic and 
Fiscal Update (HYEFU) 2023. Other 
Government economic policy settings 
as at this update are also assumed to be 
unchanged, including tax and transfer 
policies. As outlined in chapter 4.2, 
we do not yet have sufficient certainty 
in the form and timing of new policies 
to incorporate them into our central 
forecast.


41
Chapter 6. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Uncertainty around assumptions in our 
projections is high, as there are several 
partially offsetting factors influencing the 
economic environment. These factors 
include: the impact of higher interest rates on 
demand and inflation globally; the ongoing 
impact of regional wars; shipping disruptions; 
and a return to more normal fiscal spending 
from high levels during the COVID-19 
pandemic. The change in government may 
also materially change the outlook for fiscal 
spending, revenue and economic policy.
GDP unexpectedly fell in the September 
2023 quarter and was revised lower over 
recent years, largely reflecting downward 
revisions to real government spending. 
Higher-frequency data suggest that 
economic activity remained relatively flat 
at the end of 2023, as the lagged impact 
of monetary policy tightening on per capita 
spending was offset by high levels of net 
immigration. Taken together, this suggests 
that the starting point for the output gap was 
slightly lower than previously expected.     
The net effect of lower GDP and potential 
output in recent data is reflected in a similar 
profile for the output gap over the projection 
horizon as in the November Statement. 
Projections for the levels of domestic 
spending (excluding government spending) 
are relatively similar to those in November. 
Net exports are expected to recover at a 
similar pace over the medium term as goods 
and services exports steadily recover after 
dropping sharply during the COVID-19 
pandemic. Imports remain more subdued 
in the near term in line with relatively flat 
or falling levels of real domestic spending. 
A faster-than-expected recovery in export 
prices and a faster decline in import prices 
have also supported New Zealand’s terms  
of trade.
Core inflation measures and business 
inflation expectation measures across all 
horizons have decreased in the past quarter, 
but are still high. The declines are consistent 
with easing labour market pressures and 
declining annual wage inflation. As these 
factors continue to ease and capacity 
pressures decline, non-tradables inflation 
is expected to decrease gradually over the 
medium term. Lower headline CPI inflation 
due to larger than expected declines in 
tradables inflation has also coincided 
with sharper falls in short-term inflation 
expectations. This is expected to help ease 
non-tradables inflation via lower wage and 
pricing pressure over time as a result of 
global shipping disruptions.
Overall, annual consumer price inflation is 
expected to return to within the Reserve 
Bank’s 1 to 3 percent target band by the 
September 2024 quarter, as expected in 
the November Statement. This reflects a 
similar output gap outlook to the November 
Statement. Headline inflation is expected 
to reach the 2 percent target midpoint by 
the December 2025 quarter. This reflects 
in part the assumption of a small temporary 
lift in foreign import prices in the June 
and September 2024 quarters, which is 
subsequently reversed in the following two 
quarters. Overall, average inflation over the 
projection is slightly lower than projected 
in the November Statement. Conditional on 
this central economic outlook, the OCR is 
expected to be similar to that shown in the 
November Statement, in order for the MPC 
to meet its inflation objective.


42
Chapter 6. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Table 6.1 
Key projection assumptions
Key factors
Global factors
•	 In recent quarters, economic strength has been mixed among New Zealand’s key trading 
partners. Economic growth remains strong in the US, while continuing to slow in Australia and 
stagnating in the euro area. Growth in China is moderate, after a weaker-than-expected recovery 
in 2023.
•	 Recent disruptions to shipping in both the Red Sea and Panama Canal have led to a sharp 
increase in global shipping costs in recent months. We have assumed a small temporary 
increase in foreign import prices in the June and September 2024 quarters, which is 
subsequently reversed in the following two quarters, to reflect the effects of these disruptions. 
The overall scale and duration of the effects remain highly uncertain (see chapter 4.1).
•	 On balance, global economic growth is expected to slow further in 2024 and remain subdued 
thereafter, similar to what was anticipated in the November Statement. The lagged impact of 
higher interest rates in 2022 and 2023 and the normalisation of government spending as a 
share of GDP from high levels reached during the COVID-19 pandemic are expected to further 
reduce demand. 
•	 Overall, slowing global demand continues to reduce capacity and inflationary pressures. 
Consequently, we generally expect that lower global inflation will result in lower imported 
inflation in New Zealand over time. However, supply-side shipping disruptions may at least 
partially offset this if sustained, keeping import inflation higher than otherwise in coming years. 
•	 Expected global policy interest rates are only marginally lower than assumed in the November 
Statement. This reflects lower inflation data and a slight shift towards an easing bias from some 
central banks, particularly in the US. However, market expectations for the speed and scale of 
easing have been scaled back more recently as activity and inflation data in some countries 
such as the US have been more resilient than expected. 
•	 The New Zealand dollar trade-weighted index (TWI) has appreciated since the November 
Statement. One supporting factor for the New Zealand dollar has been a recovery in export 
prices in recent months following a sharp decline during 2023. 
•	 The TWI is assumed to remain at 71.5 over the projection.
International 
tourism
•	 Services exports, particularly tourism and education, have recovered rapidly since the border 
was reopened in 2022. We maintain a strong growth projection for services exports. Additional 
spending by overseas tourists is contributing to capacity pressures across the transport, 
accommodation and hospitality sectors.
•	 We assume that tourism exports have recovered to around 90 percent of their pre-pandemic 
levels in inflation-adjusted terms over the 2023-2024 summer season and will surpass  
pre-pandemic levels by the end of the projection.
Migration and 
house prices
•	 Net immigration since the border reopened has been exceptionally strong and higher than 
anticipated in previous Statements. 
•	 Robust economic activity during the COVID-19 period, combined with constrained labour 
supply caused by tight border restrictions, contributed to strong wage inflation. Since the 
border reopened, many businesses have been able to fill vacant jobs with migrants. This 
has contributed to easing wage pressures. To this extent, high net immigration has been 
disinflationary.
•	 Immigrants add to the supply of labour but also add to demand. Immigrants need to establish 
new homes in New Zealand, which increases demand for housing and housing-related 
goods and services. In recent months, the housing-related inflationary impacts from high net 
immigration have become more evident in some areas, especially rents.
•	 The recovery in house prices continues, albeit at a moderate pace. Monthly REINZ house prices 
fell by around 15 percent in seasonally adjusted terms from their peak in November 2021 to 
March 2023. House prices have since risen by 3 percent to January 2024.


43
Chapter 6. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Migration and 
house prices 
cont.
•	 The lagged impact of recent monetary policy tightening continues to restrain the scale and 
speed of the housing market recovery, despite ongoing additional demand via high net 
immigration. We project slower house price growth in 2024 following weaker price momentum 
in late 2023. Mortgage rates have fallen by less than wholesale rates, causing a faster 
normalisation in mortgage rate spreads than previously assumed. We assume that house prices 
grow at a similar pace to that in the November Statement over the medium term, at around 6 
percent per year. This reflects the lagged impact of high net immigration and lower interest rates 
later in the projection horizon.
•	 A slower recovery in house prices and housing market activity is associated with moderately 
lower household consumption levels in 2025 compared to the November Statement. However, 
this restraining impact fades towards the end of the projection horizon as house price growth 
returns to levels projected previously.  
Economic growth
Production
•	 We assume that production GDP did not grow in the December 2023 quarter. Government 
consumption, private consumption and investment are expected to decline. The continued 
recovery in exports and government investment are factors supporting GDP growth. The stock of 
produced goods (inventories) is also expected to fall by less than in the previous quarter.
•	 Weaker-than-expected growth in the September 2023 quarter translates into a lower estimate 
of capacity pressures and a steeper fall already having occurred than assumed in the November 
Statement. However, this is only slightly lower than assumed in November given that the 
downward revisions to GDP also imply potential GDP has been lower. We estimate that the output 
gap peaked at 3.9 percent of potential GDP in the September 2022 quarter and has turned 
negative to -0.5 percent in the December 2023 quarter.
•	 We expect close to zero quarterly GDP growth in the December 2023 quarter, with high interest 
rates dampening domestic demand. However, quarterly changes in GDP are highly uncertain. 
For the June 2024 year, annual GDP growth is projected to slow to 0.3 percent before gradually 
increasing over the rest of the forecast.
•	 Over the medium term, the productive capacity of the economy is expected to improve, 
increasing economic activity. In large part, this is supported by strong population growth through 
net immigration that adds to labour supply.
•	 We expect the output gap to become negative from the December 2023 quarter after a sharp 
drop in the September 2023 quarter, with actual production lower than the economy’s potential. 
An extended period of below-trend growth is expected to be necessary to reduce labour market 
pressures and see our inflation objective met sustainably over the medium term.
Consumption
•	 Consumption declined slightly less in the September 2023 quarter than expected in the 
November Statement. Recent card spending data suggest a further decline in consumption in 
the December 2023 quarter. 
•	 Consumption is expected to grow only moderately in early 2024, as households with mortgages 
move onto higher interest rates and the effect of lower house prices continues to pass through 
to lower spending. In addition, the labour market is expected to weaken further and wage 
inflation is expected to fall, reducing aggregate labour income. However, high net immigration is 
expected to provide some support for aggregate consumption and house prices. Consumption 
is expected to decline on a per capita basis from the March 2023 to the March 2024 quarter by 
around 3.5 percent.
•	 Consumption is expected to gradually recover from mid-2024, supported by lower interest rates 
and increasing house price inflation.


44
Chapter 6. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Investment
•	 Significant pressure on available resources has supported high levels of business investment in 
the last few years.
•	 Business investment is expected to decline in coming quarters, due to high interest rates and 
easing capacity pressures. The global economic slowdown and regional wars are also likely to 
reduce business investment further by adding to uncertainty about future global demand.
•	 Residential investment has fallen in recent quarters, consistent with a decline in the number of 
dwelling consents. Our projected decline in residential investment is consistent with current high 
mortgage interest rates, high construction costs and lower house prices relative to their peak in 
November 2021. 
•	 The impact of high net immigration on housing demand and house prices is expected to support 
a recovery in residential investment over the medium term. We project the share of residential 
investment to potential GDP to return to around pre-pandemic levels by the end of the forecast.
Government
•	 We assume that government consumption and investment evolve in line with the macroeconomic 
and fiscal forecasts in HYEFU 2023.
•	 Government investment, particularly in infrastructure, is projected to increase considerably. 
•	 Government consumption is projected to decline moderately in 2024 and 2025 before stabilising 
toward the end of the forecast horizon. Spending declines slightly more rapidly in the coming two 
years and recovers more moderately in 2026 than in the November Statement.   
•	 Over the medium term, real government consumption and investment as a share of potential GDP 
is assumed to continue to decline gradually from high levels during the height of the COVID-19 
pandemic. Historical downward revisions to government spending levels imply that government 
spending now accounts for a lower share of GDP than previously estimated.  
•	 The projections for government consumption and investment, and the impact of taxation on 
spending by private households and businesses will change under forthcoming policy changes 
under the new Government (see chapter 4.2).
Exports and 
imports
•	 Overall, prices of New Zealand’s commodity exports have recovered in recent months after sharp 
falls during 2023, led by dairy prices. This has occurred as global growth expectations have 
stabilised. Market expectations have started to pivot towards policy easing in 2024 and 2025 for 
some central banks, supporting global demand for our goods exports. 
•	 Goods export volumes are expected to recover in the near term after falling slightly further than 
expected in the September 2023 quarter. Volumes gradually increase over the medium term, as 
global economic growth recovers from mid-2024.
•	 International travel is recovering broadly as expected. By the end of the projection, services 
exports are assumed to have surpassed pre-COVID-19 levels.
•	 Import prices fell by more than expected in the September 2023 quarter, largely accounted for by 
lower-than-expected oil prices. This is in line with declining global economic growth and an unwind 
of COVID-19 supply bottlenecks, including via falling shipping costs. 
•	 We assume that the recent shipping disruption in both the Red Sea and Panama Canal add a 
total of two percentage points to non-oil import price inflation across the June and September 
2024 quarters. This increase is spread evenly in these two quarters and is subsequently reversed 
symmetrically. These assumptions are subject to significant uncertainty as to the timing and 
magnitude of these shipping disruptions. 
•	 Import prices are assumed to decline steadily over the later part of the projection. The pace 
of these declines is assumed to be similar to pre-COVID-19 trends, and that expected in the 
November Statement. 


45
Chapter 6. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Labour market
Employment and 
wages 
•	 The New Zealand labour market continues to soften, but at a slightly slower pace than previously 
expected. The unemployment rate increased from 3.9 to 4.0 percent in the December 2023 
quarter. The employment rate eased slightly from 69.1 to 69.0 percent as the increase in the 
number of people employed grew less than the working-age population. Overall, our suite of 
labour market indicators provides consistent evidence that labour market pressures have been 
easing relative to last year. 
•	 In coming quarters, employment growth is expected to remain low in line with slowing economic 
activity. Employment may fall below its maximum sustainable level for a time. Slowing economic 
growth, together with gradual growth in the labour force, is expected to further relieve labour 
market pressures. The unemployment rate is assumed to increase to around 5.1 percent in the 
first half of 2025, in line with the declining output gap.
•	 Strong net immigration has been alleviating labour shortages. The number of job vacancies has 
been falling as immigrants fill existing job vacancies and high interest rates reduce new labour 
demand. These factors have created a better balance between labour supply and demand than 
during the time of the COVID-19 border restrictions. This reduces inflationary pressures, at least 
in the near term, without a rapid increase in unemployment. In line with this, annual same-job 
wage inflation decreased from 4.1 to 3.9 percent in the December 2023 quarter, although this 
drop was less than expected in the November Statement. To this extent, high net immigration 
has been disinflationary. However, in recent months net immigration has added to demand more 
substantially – in particular for housing via rents.
•	 On balance, we expect same-job wage inflation to decline gradually over the medium term, as 
labour market pressures continue to ease. However, wage inflation is assumed to stay above 
pre-COVID-19 levels as nominal same-job wages catch up to some extent with lost purchasing 
power because of high consumer price inflation in recent years.
Inflation
Headline
•	 Annual headline CPI inflation has continued to decline from its peak, at a slightly faster rate 
than previously expected. Headline CPI inflation dropped from 5.6 percent to 4.7 percent in the 
December 2023 quarter, accounted for by a faster-than-expected drop in tradables inflation. 
Inflation is projected to decrease further to 3.8 percent in the March 2024 quarter.
•	 Annual headline CPI inflation is projected to return to within the 1 to 3 percent target band in 
the September 2024 quarter, as in the November Statement. Headline inflation reaches the 2 
percent target midpoint in the December 2025 quarter. This in part reflects the impact of higher 
assumed import prices via shipping costs. 
Tradables
•	 Annual tradables inflation has continued to decline from its peak and is projected to decrease 
overall across the forecast horizon, as global inflationary pressures ease further. Petrol prices 
and non-oil import prices are forecast to decline gradually overall, contributing to the fall in 
tradables inflation. However, tradables inflation is assumed to increase temporarily in the June 
and September quarters of 2024 on the assumed impact of global shipping disruptions. 
Non-tradables
•	 Annual non-tradables inflation is assumed to have peaked but is still supported by ongoing 
domestic capacity pressures and strong wage growth.
•	 The projection for capacity pressure is assessed to be similar to that assumed in the November 
Statement. These pressures are assumed to decline steadily as high interest rates restrain 
domestic demand growth. At the same time, the productive capacity of the economy is expected 
to increase, mainly because of high net immigration. 
•	 Falling headline inflation is also associated with lower inflation expectations, supporting lower 
wage and price setting. Overall, non-tradables inflation is assumed to decrease only slowly, as 
capacity pressures ease and core inflation and inflation expectations decline.


46
Chapter 6. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Figure 6.3
Unemployment rate
(unemployed people as a share of the labour force, 
seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Charts
Figure 6.1
Inflation components
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Dotted lines show the projections from the November Statement. The 
shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI 
inflation over the medium term.
Figure 6.2
Private sector LCI wage inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.4
House price growth
(annual)
Source: CoreLogic, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.5
Production GDP
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.6
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


47
Chapter 6. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Figure 6.9
Business investment
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.7
Private consumption
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.8
Residential investment
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.10
Government consumption
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.11
Total exports
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.12
Total imports
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 7. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
48
Chapter 6. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Chapter 
07
Wairarapa. Photo: Karan Dasgupta
Appendices


49
Chapter 7. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Chapter 7.
Appendices
Appendix 1: Statistical tables
Table 7.1
Key forecast variables
GDP growth 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Annual
Unemployment 
rate
TWI
OCR
2022
Mar
0.0
1.8
6.9
3.2
72.6
0.9
 
Jun
1.1
1.7
7.3
3.3
72.1
1.6
 
Sep
1.8
2.2
7.2
3.3
70.6
2.7
 
Dec
-0.6
1.4
7.2
3.4
70.8
3.8
2023
Mar
-0.2
1.2
6.7
3.4
71.3
4.5
Jun
0.5
1.1
6.0
3.6
71.0
5.3
Sep
-0.3
1.8
5.6
3.9
70.6
5.5
Dec
0.0
0.5
4.7
4.0
70.8
5.5
2024
Mar
0.3
0.4
3.8
4.2
71.5
5.5
Jun
0.3
0.6
3.2
4.6
71.5
5.6
Sep
0.5
1.2
2.6
4.8
71.5
5.6
Dec
0.5
0.4
2.5
5.0
71.5
5.6
2025
Mar
0.6
0.5
2.6
5.0
71.5
5.5
Jun
0.7
0.4
2.4
5.1
71.5
5.3
Sep
0.8
0.8
2.1
5.1
71.5
5.2
Dec
0.9
0.3
2.0
5.0
71.5
4.9
2026
Mar
0.8
0.5
2.0
4.9
71.5
4.5
Jun
0.7
0.4
2.0
4.8
71.5
4.2
Sep
0.7
0.8
2.0
4.8
71.5
3.8
Dec
0.8
0.3
2.0
4.8
71.5
3.5
2027
Mar
0.9
0.4
2.0
4.7
71.5
3.2


50
Chapter 7. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Table 7.2
Measures of inflation, inflation expectations, and asset prices
2022
2023
2024
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Inflation (annual rates)
CPI
7.3
7.2
7.2
6.7
6.0
5.6
4.7
CPI non-tradables
6.3
6.6
6.6
6.8
6.6
6.3
5.9
CPI tradables
8.7
8.1
8.2
6.4
5.2
4.7
3.0
Sectoral factor model 
estimate of core inflation
5.1
5.5
5.7
5.7
5.7
5.2
4.5
CPI trimmed mean (30% measure)
5.8
6.4
6.1
6.1
6.0
5.5
5.0
CPI weighted median
4.8
5.0
5.0
5.6
6.6
5.0
4.4
GDP deflator (expenditure)
6.3
4.6
5.2
5.7
6.4
7.3
Inflation expectations
ANZ Business Outlook – inflation  
1 year ahead (quarterly average to date)
6.0
6.1
6.3
5.9
5.5
5.1
4.8
4.3
RBNZ Survey of Expectations  
– inflation 2 years ahead
3.3
3.1
3.6
3.3
2.8
2.8
2.8
2.5
RBNZ Survey of Expectations  
– inflation 5 years ahead
2.4
2.3
2.4
2.4
2.4
2.3
2.4
2.3
RBNZ Survey of Expectations  
– inflation 10 years ahead
2.1
2.1
2.2
2.2
2.3
2.2
2.3
2.2
Asset prices (annual percent changes)
Quarterly house price index 
(CoreLogic NZ)
5.4
-4.2
-11.2
-12.1
-9.0
-4.3
REINZ Farm Price Index  
(quarterly average to date)
28.1
12.2
5.0
-3.2
-5.7
-11.8
-10.9
NZX 50 (quarterly average to date)
-9.0
-11.3
-12.8
-3.5
3.8
1.9
-0.2
-0.6


51
Chapter 7. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Table 7.3
Measures of labour market conditions	
(seasonally adjusted, changes expressed in annual percent terms, unless specified otherwise)	
2022
2023
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Household Labour Force Survey
Unemployment rate
3.3
3.3
3.4
3.4
3.6
3.9
4.0
Underutilisation rate
9.3
9.0
9.3
9.1
9.9
10.4
10.7
Labour force participation rate
70.9
71.6
71.8
72.1
72.4
72.0
71.9
Employment rate  
(% of working-age population)
68.5
69.3
69.4
69.6
69.8
69.1
69.0
Employment growth
1.3
1.2
1.7
3.0
4.3
2.7
2.4
Average weekly hours worked
33.7
33.9
34.0
33.6
33.4
33.5
33.7
Number unemployed 
(thousand people)
97
96
100
103
110
119
122
Number employed  
(million people)
2.81
2.85
2.87
2.90
2.93
2.93
2.94
Labour force (million people)
2.91
2.95
2.97
3.00
3.04
3.05
3.06
Extended labour force 
(million people)
2.99
3.02
3.06
3.09
3.13
3.14
3.15
Working-age population 
(million people, age 15 years+)
4.10
4.11
4.13
4.17
4.20
4.23
4.26
Quarterly Employment Survey – QES
Filled jobs growth
1.5
1.4
1.5
2.3
6.4
6.1
4.3
Average hourly earnings growth 
(private sector, ordinary time)
7.0
8.6
8.1
8.2
7.7
7.1
6.6
Other data sources
Labour cost index growth, 
private sector, adjusted
3.4
3.9
4.3
4.5
4.3
4.1
3.9
Labour cost index growth, 
private sector, unadjusted
5.2
5.6
6.1
6.1
6.1
5.7
5.7
Estimated net working-age 
immigration (thousands, quarterly)
-3.2
7.8
20.3
25.9
38.1
24.7
Change in All Vacancies Index
3.7
8.5
-5.1
-14.0
-21.8
-27.9
-28.2
Note: The All Vacancies Index is produced by MBIE as part of the monthly Jobs Online report, which shows changes in job vacancies advertised 
by businesses on internet job boards. The unadjusted labour cost index (LCI) is an analytical index that reflects quality change in addition to price 
change (whereas the official LCI measures price changes only). For definitions of underutilisation, the extended labour force, and related concepts, 
see Stats NZ (2016) ‘Introducing underutilisation in the labour market’. Estimated net working-age immigration is the Stats NZ outcomes-based 
measure.


52
Chapter 7. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Table 7.4
Composition of real GDP growth
(annual average percent change, seasonally adjusted, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
Final consumption expenditure
Private
6.4
4.8
4.5
2.4
0.2
6.0
2.7
0.4
0.5
2.8
3.7
Public authority
1.9
3.8
3.3
5.8
6.9
7.9
2.0
-0.3
-2.7
-0.2
0.7
Total
5.4
4.6
4.3
3.2
1.8
6.4
2.5
0.2
-0.3
2.0
3.0
Gross fixed capital formation
Residential
8.8
-1.8
-0.1
2.7
2.2
3.2
-0.5
-4.3
-8.5
4.4
9.0
Other
0.0
10.0
7.1
2.7
-2.9
12.6
2.9
-1.1
-0.6
3.9
4.8
Total
2.3
6.7
5.2
2.7
-1.7
10.2
2.1
-1.9
-2.4
4.0
5.7
Final domestic 
expenditure
4.6
5.1
4.5
3.0
1.0
7.3
2.4
-0.3
-0.8
2.5
3.6
Stockbuilding*
0.1
0.2
-0.2
-0.3
-0.3
0.6
-0.1
-0.7
0.5
0.1
0.0
Gross national 
expenditure
4.8
5.6
4.3
2.7
-0.3
8.6
2.6
-1.0
-0.1
2.6
3.6
Exports of goods  
and services
2.0
3.8
3.3
0.2
-17.9
2.4
6.1
5.1
6.4
5.6
3.8
Imports of goods  
and services
5.1
7.8
4.8
1.3
-15.9
17.2
4.7
0.1
0.6
4.4
5.6
Expenditure on GDP
3.9
4.3
3.9
2.5
0.0
4.7
2.7
0.0
1.2
2.8
3.0
GDP (production)
3.8
3.4
3.5
2.4
-0.5
4.6
2.8
0.3
1.2
2.8
3.0
GDP (production, 
March qtr to March qtr)
3.3
3.5
3.5
0.7
4.5
0.7
2.1
0.5
1.9
3.2
3.0
* Percentage point contribution to the growth rate of GDP.


53
Chapter 7. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Table 7.5
Summary of economic projections
(annual percent change, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
Price measures
CPI 
2.2
1.1
1.5
2.5
1.5
6.9
6.7
3.8
2.6
2.0
2.0
Labour costs
1.5
1.9
2.0
2.4
1.6
3.1
4.5
3.8
3.6
3.4
3.2
Export prices 
(in New Zealand dollars) 
4.1
3.2
1.1
6.8
-6.1
20.8
1.0
-1.7
2.7
2.6
2.4
Import prices 
(in New Zealand dollars) 
1.2
1.6
4.0
2.4
-2.4
18.9
7.0
-5.4
-0.6
-0.2
0.1
Monetary conditions
OCR (year average)
2.0
1.8
1.8
1.2
0.3
0.5
3.1
5.5
5.6
5.0
3.7
TWI (year average)
76.5
75.6
73.4
71.7
72.4
74.0
71.2
71.0
71.5
71.5
71.5
Output
GDP (production, annual 
average % change)
3.8
3.4
3.5
2.4
-0.5
4.6
2.8
0.3
1.2
2.8
3.0
Potential output (annual 
average % change)
3.2
3.2
3.1
2.8
-0.5
2.7
2.4
3.0
2.7
2.6
2.5
Output gap (% of potential 
GDP, year average)
0.3
0.5
0.8
0.4
0.3
2.3
2.7
0.0
-1.4
-1.2
-0.7
Labour market
Total employment 
(seasonally adjusted)
5.9
2.9
1.5
2.6
0.1
2.5
3.0
1.5
0.9
2.0
1.7
Unemployment rate (March 
qtr, seasonally adjusted)
4.9
4.4
4.2
4.2
4.6
3.2
3.4
4.2
5.0
4.9
4.7
Trend labour productivity 
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.3
0.0
0.0
0.2
0.6
0.9
Key balances
Government operating 
balance* (% of GDP,  
year to June)
1.5
1.9
2.4
-7.3
-1.3
-2.7
-2.5
-2.4
-1.5
-0.6
0.4
Current account balance  
(% of GDP)
-2.5
-3.1
-3.8
-2.3
-2.5
-6.5
-8.2
-6.7
-5.3
-3.9
-3.2
Terms of trade 
(SNA measure, annual 
average % change)
2.1
4.4
-2.1
2.0
-1.0
0.4
-4.9
1.5
1.4
4.1
2.5
Household saving rate  
(% of disposable income)
-1.8
-2.0
-1.3
1.4
7.6
2.7
2.1
1.3
0.5
1.1
1.3
World economy
Trading-partner GDP 
(annual average % change)
3.5
4.0
3.5
1.7
-0.5
6.1
2.7
2.9
2.8
2.8
2.9
Trading-partner CPI  
(TWI-weighted)
1.9
1.8
1.4
2.4
0.8
4.0
4.8
2.3
2.2
2.1
2.1
* Government operating balance is a model-based estimate of OBEGAL divided by nominal GDP in the projection. The estimate is partial 
because it relies on projections for some components from the Pre-Election Economic and Fiscal Update 2023.


54
Chapter 7. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Appendix 2: Chart pack
Figure 7.1
Composition of CPI inflation
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 7.2
Output gap and output gap indicators
(share of potential)
Source: NZIER, MBIE, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The output gap indicators based on information about the labour market 
are shown separately from the other indicators. For each group of indicators, the 
shaded area shows the range of values and the line shows the mean value.
Figure 7.3
Unemployment and underutilisation rates
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 7.4
OCR and nominal neutral OCR indicator suite
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area indicates the range between the maximum and minimum 
values from our suite of long-run nominal neutral OCR indicators. See chapter 4.1 
of the November 2022 Statement for more information.
Figure 7.5
GDP and potential GDP
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 7.6
Measures of core inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Core inflation measures exclude the GST increase in 2010. The shaded 
area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI inflation 
over the medium term.


55
Chapter 7. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2024
Figure 7.7
Inflation expectations
(annual, years ahead) 
Source: RBNZ Survey of Expectations (Business).
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for 
annual CPI inflation over the medium term.
Figure 7.9
House price inflation
(annual, nominal) 
Source: REINZ.
Source: Stats NZ, Global Dairy Trade, Refinitiv, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 7.12
Terms of trade, dairy and oil price indices
(index=100 in Q3 2008)
Figure 7.10
Mortgage interest rates
Source: interest.co.nz, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The rates shown for the fixed terms are the average of the advertised 
rates from ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac, shown as weekly data. The floating 
rate represents the monthly yield on floating housing debt from the RBNZ 
Income Statement survey.
Figure 7.8
Private sector wage growth
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Private sector wage growth is measured by the labour cost index, all 
salary and wage rates, private sector. Real labour cost index is deflated with 
headline CPI inflation.
Figure 7.11
New Zealand dollar exchange rates
(quarterly average) 
Source: NZFMA, RBNZ.
