BANK: RBNZ
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: Monetary Policy Statement May 2025
DATE: 27/05/2025
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/monetary-policy-statements/2025/may-0525/mps_report_may2025.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Monetary Policy
Statement. 
May 2025
B.33


ii
Policy assessment. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Policy assessment.
OCR lowered to 3.25%
The Monetary Policy Committee today voted to lower 
the OCR by 25 basis points to 3.25 percent. 
Annual consumers price index inflation increased 
to 2.5 percent in the first quarter of 2025. Inflation 
expectations across firms and households have 
also risen. However, core inflation is declining 
and there is spare productive capacity in the 
economy. These conditions are consistent 
with inflation returning to the mid-point of the 
1 to 3 percent target band over the medium term. 
The New Zealand economy is recovering after 
a period of contraction. High commodity prices 
and lower interest rates are supporting overall 
economic activity. 
Recent developments in the international 
economy are expected to reduce global 
economic growth. Both tariffs and increased 
policy uncertainty overseas are expected to 
moderate New Zealand’s economic recovery 
and reduce medium-term inflation pressures. 
However, there remains considerable uncertainty 
around these judgements. 
Inflation is within the target band, and the 
Committee is well placed to respond to domestic 
and international developments to maintain price 
stability over the medium term. 
Meitaki, thanks.
Christian Hawkesby 
Governor 
Figure i.1
Official Cash Rate (OCR)
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


iii
Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Report and supporting notes published at:
www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/monetary-policy-statement
Subscribe online: www.rbnz.govt.nz/email-updates
Copyright © 2025 Reserve Bank of New Zealand
This report is published pursuant to section 129
of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 2021. 
ISSN 1770-4829
Thank you to RBNZ staff for photography in this report. 
Cover: Kahurangi National Park. Photo: Magnus Åstebøl
Monetary Policy Framework
The Monetary Policy Committee operates and makes 
decisions under the Monetary Policy Framework that 
comprises the following key components:
•	 the Remit;
•	 the Charter;
•	 the Code of Conduct; and
•	 the monetary policy strategy.
The corresponding documents to these components 
and additional information can be accessed on our 
website under the Monetary Policy Framework.


1
Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
The projections were finalised on 22 May 2025. The Official Cash Rate (OCR) projection 
incorporates an outlook for monetary policy that is consistent with the MPC’s monetary 
policy assessment, which was finalised on 28 May 2025. 
Contents
Policy assessment	
ii
1.	
Summary record of meeting	
2
2.	 Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook	
6
	
Box A: Scenarios for the effect of tariffs on the New Zealand economy	
10
	
Box B: Introducing the Tara-ā-Umanga, Business Expectations Survey (BES)	
21
3.	 Global economy and financial markets	
24
4.	 Special topics	
33
	
4.1	 	How does uncertainty affect the New Zealand economy?	
35
	
4.2	The transmission of higher global tariffs to the New Zealand economy	
39
5.	 Economic projections	
45
6.	 Appendices	
51
	
Appendix 1: Statistical tables 	
52
	
Appendix 2: Chart pack 	
57
Monetary Policy Statement.
May 2025


Te Whanganui-a-Tara, Wellington. Photo: Nele McHattie
Summary 
record of 
meeting
Chapter 
01


3
Chapter 1. Summary record of meeting. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Chapter 1. 
Summary record of meeting
Annual consumers price index (CPI) inflation remains within the
Monetary Policy Committee’s 1 to 3 percent target band. While measures
of inflation expectations have increased, core inflation and spare productive 
capacity in the economy are consistent with inflation returning to the 
target mid‑point over the medium term. Elevated export prices and recent 
reductions in the OCR are expected to support a modest pace of growth
in the New Zealand economy, even as increased global tariffs are expected 
to slow global economic growth.
Higher global tariffs and policy 
uncertainty are expected to lower
global growth
The Committee noted that projections for global 
economic activity have weakened since the February 
Statement, reflecting the shift towards protectionist 
policies in some major economies. There have been 
downward revisions to economic growth projections 
for China and the US, reflecting the scale of tariff 
increases between these two countries. 
The Committee noted that, in addition to the direct 
effect of higher tariffs, increased policy uncertainty in 
the international economy is likely to weigh on global 
investment and consumption. As well as uncertainty 
about tariff retaliation, it was unclear how countries 
would respond with fiscal and monetary policies. 
For example, it is possible that China could respond 
to weaker economic activity with a sizeable fiscal 
stimulus. US fiscal policy could place strains on the 
sustainability of its public debt. More generally, the 
uncertain trajectory of geoeconomic fragmentation 
and the decline in the quality of macroeconomic 
institutional arrangements were likely to result in 
precautionary behaviour by firms and households. 
In aggregate, economic growth in New Zealand’s 
main trading partners is expected to remain below 
potential over 2025. 
Headline inflation within New Zealand’s trading 
partner economies has fallen over the past year. 
Projections for inflation for most of our trading 
partners have been revised down in recent quarters. 
The main exception is the US, where higher tariffs are 
expected to increase inflationary pressure.
The New Zealand economy is 
starting to recover, after contracting 
over the middle of 2024
The Committee noted that spare productive 
capacity remains in the New Zealand economy. 
This is projected to dissipate over the medium 
term as the economy recovers. Elevated export 
commodity prices and lower interest rates are 
supporting overall economic activity in the 
New Zealand economy. The Committee noted that 
the full economic effects of cuts in the OCR since 
August 2024 are yet to be fully realised.
The Committee discussed conditions in 
New Zealand’s labour market. Nominal wage growth 
is slowing, while firms report that it is easier to find 
workers. Employment growth is currently modest 
but expected to increase from the second half of the 
year in line with the broader economic recovery.
The announced increase in US tariffs will lower 
global demand for New Zealand’s exports, 
particularly from Asia, constraining domestic growth. 
Heightened global policy uncertainty is expected to 
weigh on business investment and consumption in 
New Zealand. 
On balance, the Committee expects the increase in 
global tariffs to result in less inflationary pressure in the 
New Zealand economy. However, as discussed below, 
there is significant uncertainty about this assessment, 
depending on whether the impact of tariffs proves to 
be predominantly demand- or supply-side in nature. 
The domestic monetary policy response will focus on 
the medium-term implications for inflation.


4
Chapter 1. Summary record of meeting. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Domestic fiscal policy is assessed as being broadly 
neutral from a medium-term inflation perspective, 
relative to February Statement projections. The 
change announced in Budget 2025 enabling 
businesses to bring forward depreciation allowances 
is assumed to increase investment activity. However, 
the inflationary consequences of this policy are 
assumed to be offset by an announced reduction 
in government spending. 
Annual CPI inflation is expected to 
remain in the target band, and converge 
to the mid-point
The Committee discussed domestic inflationary 
pressure. New Zealand’s annual CPI inflation 
increased to 2.5 percent in the March 2025 quarter, 
largely in line with previous projections. Most annual 
core inflation measures continued to decline in the 
March 2025 quarter, and all are now within the target 
band for headline CPI inflation. 
Annual CPI inflation is projected to increase to 
2.7 percent in Q3 2025, then return to near the 
2 percent target mid-point from 2026. The near-term 
increase in headline inflation includes higher food 
and electricity price inflation. 
Non-tradables inflation is expected to continue to 
decline, consistent with spare productive capacity in 
the economy. Annual tradables inflation is projected 
to remain around 1 percent over the medium term, 
reflecting below average global growth and falling 
inflation within our trading partners. 
The financial system remains stable
The Committee noted that most wholesale interest 
rates have fallen since the February Statement, 
resulting in lower mortgage and term deposit rates. 
The average interest rate on the stock of mortgages 
is expected to continue to decline in coming quarters 
as more mortgage holders refix at lower fixed-term 
interest rates. Close to half the stock of mortgages 
is due to reprice during the June and September 
2025 quarters. 
The Committee was briefed on financial system 
stability. While non-performing loans in the housing 
and small business sectors have increased in 
line with the past contraction in the economy, the 
banking system remains well capitalised and in a 
strong financial position to support customers. The 
Committee agreed that there is currently no material 
trade-off between meeting inflation objectives and 
maintaining financial system stability. 
The Committee was briefed on the status of the 
Large Scale Asset Purchase programme. The 
Committee noted there has been increased volatility 
in domestic wholesale interest rates, reflecting 
increased global policy uncertainty. Despite this 
volatility, wholesale interest rate markets continue 
to function, without impeding monetary policy 
transmission. 
Risks around the economic outlook
are heightened
The Committee discussed several key risks around 
the central projection. Measures of business and 
household inflation expectations have increased. 
The Committee discussed whether this increase 
reflected factors like higher food prices and current 
reporting on the inflationary effect of tariffs in the US. 
The projections assume that medium-term inflation 
expectations remain consistent with the target mid-
point. Some Committee members emphasised the 
risk that these increases reflect a more generalised 
and persistent increase in inflation expectations. 
The Committee discussed the medium-term outlook 
for import prices. Members noted that a less 
productive global economy, against a background 
of deglobalisation, presents an upside risk to the 
current import price projection. 
The Committee noted downside risks to the outlook 
for export prices. This reflects a weaker global 
growth outlook and the potential for a quicker 
international supply response to high prices from 
global meat and dairy producers. 
The Committee noted the risk that large economic 
policy shifts in overseas economies could lead to 
additional volatility in financial markets. For example, 
concerns about US debt sustainability could lead 
to increased bond yields or declines in global 
asset prices. 


5
Chapter 1. Summary record of meeting. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
There are alternative scenarios
for the domestic outlook
In addition to the uncertain scale and duration of tariff 
policies, it is unclear how these will transmit to the 
New Zealand economy. Some members emphasised 
that the costs of trade could increase more than 
currently assumed, as global supply chains adapt 
to trade barriers and geoeconomic fragmentation. 
This could result in greater domestic medium-term 
inflationary pressure than in the central projection. 
Other members emphasised that policy uncertainty 
could lower global investment, and trade diversion 
could lower import prices by more than currently 
assumed. This could, instead, lower medium-term 
inflationary pressure relative to the central projection.
Two scenarios in the May Statement highlight 
how the realisation of these risks could affect the 
outlook for the domestic economy. These scenarios 
represent just two of many paths the economy 
may take as higher tariffs and uncertainty transmit 
through the system. They are intended to broadly 
highlight the trade-offs and considerations facing the 
Committee should these risks eventuate.
The Committee noted that, in practice, a broad range 
of factors contribute to its monetary policy decisions. 
Its response to any of these risks would depend 
on economic conditions at the time, the outlook for 
inflationary pressure, and its secondary objectives of 
avoiding unnecessary instability in the economy and 
having regard to financial system stability. 
The Committee voted to reduce
the OCR to 3.25 percent
The Committee agreed on the projected central 
path for the OCR. 
The Committee discussed the options of keeping 
the OCR on hold at 3.50 percent or reducing it 
to 3.25 percent. The case for lowering the OCR 
to 3.25 percent highlighted that CPI inflation is 
in the target range and there is significant spare 
capacity in the economy. Measures of core inflation 
and wage inflation have continued to decline. In 
addition, there is a weaker outlook for domestic 
activity and inflationary pressure relative to the 
February Statement, because of international 
developments. Some members also emphasised that 
non‑tradable inflation was currently being boosted by 
administered prices. Given these factors, a 25 basis 
point decline in the OCR was seen as consistent with 
medium-term price stability. 
In considering the merits of holding the OCR 
unchanged at 3.50 percent for this meeting, some 
members noted that this would allow the Committee 
to better assess whether increased economic policy 
uncertainty was having a noticeable impact on 
household and firm behaviour. An unchanged OCR 
could also further consolidate inflation expectations 
around the target mid-point, and guard against the 
risk of higher-than expected inflation from the supply-
side effects of increased tariffs. 
On Wednesday 28 May, the Committee took the 
decision to vote on the two options. By a majority 
of 5 votes to 1, the Committee agreed to decrease 
the OCR by 25 basis points from 3.50 percent to 
3.25 percent. 
Inflation is within the target band, and the Committee 
is well placed to respond to both domestic and 
international developments to maintain price stability 
over the medium term.
Attendees:
Reserve Bank members of MPC: 
Christian Hawkesby (Chair), Karen Silk, Paul Conway 
External MPC members:
Bob Buckle, Carl Hansen, Prasanna Gai
Treasury Observer: 
Dominick Stephens
MPC Secretary: 
Adam Richardson


Greenstone River. Photo: Hamish Fitchett
Chapter 
02
Economic 
assessment 
and monetary 
policy outlook


7
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Chapter 2.
Economic assessment and 
monetary policy outlook
Key points
Inflation remains within the Monetary Policy 
Committee’s (MPC’s) 1 to 3 percent target 
band. Lower interest rates and elevated 
export prices are supporting a recovery in 
economic activity following declines during 
the middle of 2024. The economy expanded 
0.7 percent in the December 2024 quarter. 
Timely indicators of activity suggest this 
recovery has continued into 2025, although at 
a subdued pace. New Zealand’s export sector 
continues to perform strongly, with high dairy 
and beef prices supporting the agricultural 
sector. Annual Consumers Price Index (CPI) 
inflation was 2.5 percent in the year to the 
March 2025 quarter and is forecast to remain 
in the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target band over 
the medium term.
Higher global tariffs and elevated economic 
uncertainty dampens economic activity in 
New Zealand and in our trading partners. 
Changes to US trade policy and the 
responses of other countries have caused 
global economic uncertainty. The introduction 
of new tariffs is causing changes in global 
trading patterns. Uncertainty about future 
tariff levels and the global readjustment 
will likely mean some firms delay or cancel 
investment plans. As a result, the outlook for 
economic growth and inflation has decreased 
in most of New Zealand’s trading partners. 
The medium‑term effects of this shift in 
global trade practices will depend on factors 
including the degree of trade diversion, 
supply-chain adjustments, where tariff 
levels eventually settle, and financial market 
responses.
Significant spare capacity remains in the 
New Zealand economy. The output gap 
— the difference between GDP and the 
economy’s potential output — is estimated 
to be significantly negative. We assume that 
global economic uncertainty will weigh on 
the output gap in the near term, before a 
recovery begins at the end of 2025. 
A buoyant agricultural sector helps offset 
some of this global weakness. We forecast 
the unemployment rate to increase slightly 
further to 5.2 percent, before declining from 
late 2025. 
Non-tradables inflation has continued to 
decline, as have most measures of core 
inflation. Annual non‑tradables inflation 
declined from 4.5 percent in the December 
2024 quarter to 4.0 percent in the March 
2025 quarter. Annual tradables inflation 
increased to 0.3 percent in the March 2025 
quarter. Most annual core inflation measures 
continued to decline in the March 2025 
quarter. These are now all within the target 
band for headline CPI inflation. Survey 
measures of inflation expectations have 
increased, particularly at shorter terms. 
We expect annual CPI inflation to increase 
to 2.7 percent in the September 2025 
quarter, before returning close to the 
2 percent target mid-point.
Conditional on the central economic 
outlook, we project that the OCR will 
decline further, supporting the recovery in 
economic activity. The outlook for output, 
inflation, and interest rates is subject to 
considerable uncertainty. The MPC has been 
reducing the OCR since August 2024 as 
inflationary pressure has eased. Compared 
to the February Statement, the OCR is 
projected to decline to a lower level. This 
mostly reflects higher global tariffs and the 
resulting weaker outlook for global growth. 
The degree of spare capacity in the economy 
and adaptation of wage- and price-setting 
behaviour to a low-inflation environment 
are consistent with inflation remaining 
sustainably near the 2 percent target 
mid‑point. Lower interest rates are expected 
to increase demand and output in the 
economy over the medium term, contributing 
to a reduction in spare capacity over the next 
few years.


8
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Figure 2.1
Production GDP
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Production GDP is a measure of the volume of production and is expressed in 
2009/2010 prices.
Economic assessment
Economic activity has started to 
recover, following a contraction 
during the middle of 2024
GDP growth of 0.7 percent in the December 
2024 quarter marked the end of a sharp 
economic contraction during the middle 
of 2024 (figure 2.1). Primary industries and 
the services sector accounted for growth 
in the quarter. Activity in the primary sector 
increased by 1.1 percent, reflecting growth in 
the dairy and forestry sectors. Construction 
activity contracted further in the quarter, while 
retail trade and manufacturing recovered 
only slightly following sharp declines. 
We expect economic growth
to continue into 2025, but at
a slow pace
We expect the economy will keep growing 
over 2025, but at a slower pace than 
assumed in the February Statement. 
We project 0.7 percent growth for the 
2025 year. Global trade disruptions and 
high uncertainty weigh on the economic 
recovery. Slower expected growth also 
reflects recent momentum in timely indicators 
and that interest rate sensitive sectors, such 
as residential construction and retail, have 
recovered less than expected at the end 
of 2024. 
Timely indicators of activity suggest slow 
growth. The Truckometer Heavy Traffic 
Index, the Performance of Manufacturing 
Index, and the Performance of Services 
Index suggest GDP grew modestly in the 
March 2025 quarter. The Quarterly Survey of 
Business Opinion (QSBO) suggests activity 
was broadly flat. The RBNZ’s new GDP 
nowcasting model, Kiwi GDP, suggests the 
economy grew 0.6 percent in the March 
2025 quarter. Some timely indicators suggest 
growth may slow further in the June 2025 
quarter. 
In April, the US announced a range of 
tariffs for most of its trading partners 
(see chapter 3). This caused a sharp 
rise in measures of global economic 
uncertainty (see chapter 4.1). Higher tariffs 
are likely to transmit to the New Zealand 
economy through different channels (see 
chapter 4.2). These tariffs were in addition 
to previous tariffs and consisted of two 
elements: a baseline 10 percentage point 
increase to begin on 5 April (which included 
New Zealand), and further tariffs for countries 
with a large goods trade surplus with the US, 
to begin on 9 April. Most of the more severe 
tariffs have temporarily been put on hold. 


9
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Global trade policy changes and uncertainty 
are headwinds to growth in New Zealand, 
but lower domestic interest rates and 
stronger earnings for some exporting 
industries are supporting demand. OCR 
cuts to date, and expectations for further 
cuts ahead, have led to lower mortgage and 
deposit interest rates in recent months (see 
chapter 3). Lower interest rates will continue 
to transmit to economic activity over time. 
Global dairy and beef prices have increased 
over the past year. Prices for these goods 
have remained high despite growing trade 
tensions, in contrast to declines in some other 
commodity prices. This is supporting export 
sector earnings and domestic economic 
activity. In contrast, growth in real government 
spending has slowed, dampening overall 
growth in demand.
The global growth outlook
has deteriorated
The global growth outlook has weakened 
materially since the February Statement 
in response to US trade policy changes 
(see chapter 3). Consensus forecasts for 
trading-partner GDP growth have been 
revised downwards from 2.8 percent in 2025 
and 2026 to 2.5 percent and 2.6 percent, 
respectively (figure 2.2). Revisions have been 
broad-based, with the largest downward 
revisions to growth in the US and China. In 
aggregate, growth in our trading partners 
is expected to remain below potential 
over 2025. 
The effect of tariffs on growth in countries 
other than the US and China is generally 
expected to be modest but negative. This 
is consistent across most model simulations 
and external forecasts. The smaller 
magnitude of effects for these countries 
likely reflects their lower direct exposure to 
US tariffs. Instead, most impacts stem from 
indirect effects, such as reduced demand 
from key trading partners and shifts in global 
supply chains. Fiscal and monetary policy 
may also ease in many economies, offsetting 
some of the effects of weaker global 
demand. Estimates of the effect of tariffs on 
the global economy and New Zealand are 
highly uncertain. Box A presents the effects 
of just two of many possible trade scenarios 
on the New Zealand economy. 
Source: Bloomberg, RBNZ estimates.
Note: This figure shows the evolution of Bloomberg consensus forecasts for annual GDP 
growth in New Zealand’s trading partners in the 2025 and 2026 calendar years.
Figure 2.2
Evolution of trading-partner growth forecasts
(calendar year) 


10
Box A
Scenarios for the effect of tariffs on the 
New Zealand economy
Tariffs will influence the New Zealand 
economy through a range of channels 
(see chapter 4.2). Our confidence in the 
direction, magnitude, and materiality for the 
New Zealand economy of each channel varies. 
This uncertainty would remain even if we 
knew what ‘final’ tariff policy settings would be.
Scenario analysis helps us test the sensitivity 
of our economic outlook to the assumptions 
we have made regarding the effects of 
higher tariffs. This box presents just two of 
many possible paths for the New Zealand 
economy in the context of higher tariffs.
We have chosen these scenarios as they 
illustrate a key uncertainty in our economic 
outlook, which is whether the tariffs 
prove to be predominantly demand- or 
supply‑side in nature. The nature of the 
global changes in tariffs has implications for 
the trade‑offs the MPC may face. If the effects 
are predominantly demand driven, economic 
activity and inflation will tend to move in 
the same direction and the medium-term 
implications for monetary policy are relatively 
clear. If the tariffs have larger supply-side 
effects, we may see a period of weaker 
economic activity but higher inflation. In this 
situation, the MPC faces an unfavourable 
trade-off between stabilising the output gap 
and employment, and keeping inflation low 
and stable. 
As outlined in chapters 4.1 and 4.2, various 
channels could lead to higher or lower 
inflationary pressure, particularly via the 
prices of our imported goods. Tariffs reduce 
aggregate demand in the global economy. 
Higher tariffs reduce US demand for imports 
from the rest of the world. Uncertainty about 
tariff policy may also weigh on consumption 
and investment demand globally. These 
demand-side factors reduce output and 
inflationary pressure in New Zealand 
directly, by reducing the price and quantity 
of New Zealand’s exports to the US, and 
indirectly, by lowering aggregate demand in 
New Zealand’s other trading partners.
However, tariffs may also increase global 
costs of production. Some firms in the US will 
face a higher cost of imported intermediate 
inputs. Existing global supply chains may 
be disrupted and lead to less efficient 
production as firms try to avoid tariffs. 
All else equal, these supply-side factors 
reduce output in New Zealand, but increase 
inflationary pressure. 
We present two scenarios in which our 
trading partners’ GDP growth is lower than 
assumed in our central projection, but 
the extent to which this reflects weaker 
demand or supply differs (table A.1). In 
both scenarios, the negative effect of high 
uncertainty on economic activity is also larger 
than in the central projection. 
•	 In the first scenario, more significant 
increases in overseas production costs 
result in higher imported inflationary 
pressure.
•	 In the second scenario, a weaker global 
economy and beneficial trade diversion 
for our imports contribute to weaker 
demand for our exports and lower 
imported inflation than assumed in the 
central projection. 
In these scenarios, we assume that 
monetary policy in New Zealand responds 
from the December 2025 quarter, to 
return annual headline CPI inflation to its 
target mid-point over the medium term. 
That monetary policy does not respond 
immediately reflects that it is difficult to 
identify the underlying nature of such global 
shocks in real time. In practice, the MPC 
assesses and updates monetary policy 
settings through time as it learns from the 
flow of information and economic data. The 
speed and magnitude of any monetary policy 
response would depend on the strength of 
the signal from incoming data. 
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025


11
Table A.1
Key assumptions in the scenarios
Scenario 1:
Negative global supply shock and 
higher uncertainty
Scenario 2:
More negative global demand 
shock and higher uncertainty
Description
•	 In addition to weak demand, New Zealand 
faces a persistent negative global supply 
shock. Our import prices are higher due 
to reductions in the efficiency of global 
supply chains.
•	 Trading-partner growth declines more 
than the central projection assumption, 
reducing demand for our exports. Our 
import prices are lower in the near term, as 
exporters in other economies reduce their 
prices in response to weak global demand 
and divert more products to New Zealand.
World economy
•	 Trading-partner GDP growth is about an 
additional 0.5 percentage points lower in 
the next year, mainly reflecting reduced 
global supply.
•	 Trading-partner GDP growth is about an 
additional 0.5 percentage points lower in 
the next year, mainly reflecting reduced 
global demand.
Exports and imports
•	 New Zealand’s export prices are 
unchanged relative to the central 
projection as global supply and demand 
forces largely offset. Export volumes are 
lower by about 0.6 percent due to weaker 
world demand.
•	 Foreign currency prices for our imports are 
about 7 percent higher than in the central 
projection by the end of the forecast, as 
production costs persistently increase.
•	 Export prices are lower than otherwise by 
a peak of 4.5 percent. Export volumes are 
about 1.2 percent lower.
•	 Import prices are 3.5 percent lower than 
otherwise at peak, but the effect wears off 
as trade-diversion effects wane.
Other
•	 The exchange rate depreciates about 
2 percent in response to a lower outlook 
for our terms of trade.
•	 The negative effect of uncertainty on 
domestic demand is assumed to be larger 
than in the central projection.
•	 The exchange rate depreciates about 
1.5 percent in response to a weaker terms 
of trade and weaker export volumes.
•	 The negative effect of uncertainty on 
domestic demand is assumed to be larger 
than in the central projection.
Monetary policy 
response
•	 The OCR is higher from the December 
2025 quarter, to return inflation to the 
target mid-point.
•	 The OCR is lower from the December 
2025 quarter, to return inflation to the 
target mid-point.
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025


12
In the ‘negative global supply shock’ 
scenario, a higher OCR is needed to 
stabilise inflation, despite weakness 
in the economy from lower world 
output and increased uncertainty. This 
mainly reflects inflationary pressure from 
higher‑than‑otherwise import prices, and 
that this pressure is assumed to persist 
over the horizon relevant for monetary 
policy. 
In the ‘more negative global demand 
shock’ scenario, a lower OCR is needed 
to stabilise inflation. Even though lower 
imported inflation is only temporary, the 
OCR remains lower for a prolonged period 
to offset the effect of weaker offshore 
demand on New Zealand’s output gap, 
returning inflation to the 2 percent target 
mid-point. Figures A.1 to A.6 show the 
assumed paths of import and export prices 
in these scenarios, and the projections 
for business investment, the output gap, 
inflation, and the OCR. 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure A.1
Business investment
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure A.2
Import prices
(real, foreign currency terms)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure A.3
Export prices
(real, foreign currency terms)
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025


13
Many other scenarios, which we have not 
presented, are possible. Such scenarios 
include an improvement in trade relations, 
more significant offsets from overseas 
fiscal and monetary policies, or a sharper 
downturn if weaker growth resulted in 
stresses to the global financial system. 
There are also uncertainties about other 
assumptions underlying our central 
projection (as outlined in chapter 5). 
We are aware of these possibilities and 
consider the balance of risks when setting 
monetary policy. While we will continue 
our usual monitoring of the domestic and 
global economy and financial markets, we 
will be looking particularly closely at the 
following:
•	 developments in global commodity 
prices and New Zealand’s import and 
export prices;
•	 business surveys and business 
intelligence; and
•	 movements in trading-partner interest 
rates, risk premia, and the exchange 
rate.
Many countries are exposed to higher 
tariffs in similar ways to New Zealand. 
We will continue to monitor developments 
in our peer countries, and analysis and 
commentary by foreign policymakers.
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure A.4
Output gap
(share of potential, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for inflation over 
the medium term.
Figure A.5
CPI inflation
(annual)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Figure A.6
OCR
(quarterly average)
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025


14
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Headline inflation in New Zealand’s trading 
partners has declined over the past year. 
Consensus forecasts for trading-partner 
inflation have steadily been revised down 
(figure 2.3). Across both 2025 and 2026, 
inflation is expected to be lower across all 
our trading partners other than the US, where 
tariffs are expected to increase inflation. The 
downwards revisions to inflation forecasts 
have been relatively small, and there is 
considerable uncertainty about how changes 
to global trade will flow through to prices. 
Central banks have not significantly 
adjusted their monetary policy stance in 
response to the evolving trade policies. 
Financial market participants expect most 
central banks in advanced economies to 
continue reducing policy interest rates 
over the coming year. Market participants’ 
expectations for policy rates are lower in 
most economies than at the time of the 
February Statement.
Global conditions are assumed 
to contribute to lower inflation in 
New Zealand
Declining inflation in our key trading 
partners and lower global commodity 
prices are likely to contribute to lower 
tradables inflation. Since the February 
Statement, the weaker outlook for global 
demand has contributed to some commodity 
prices falling considerably, especially those 
linked to global manufacturing and trade. 
Brent crude oil prices are about 10 percent 
lower since the February Statement, due to 
a weaker demand outlook and increased 
supply commitments from OPEC+ (figure 2.4). 
Although there is always uncertainty about 
the outlook for our import prices, this 
uncertainty is heightened due to recent 
developments in global trade policy (see 
chapter 4.1).
World prices for some of New Zealand’s 
export commodities have increased, 
particularly dairy and beef. Constrained 
dairy and beef supply globally has been a 
major contributor to higher prices. There 
is a risk that weaker global growth results 
in a decline in export prices during 2025. 
Higher export prices and lower import prices 
have caused New Zealand’s terms of trade 
to increase significantly. All else equal, the 
income boost from a stronger terms of trade 
adds to inflationary pressure in New Zealand. 
Source: Bloomberg.
Figure 2.4
Brent crude oil prices
Figure 2.3
Evolution of trading-partner inflation forecasts
(calendar year)
Source: Bloomberg, RBNZ estimates.
Note: This figure shows the evolution of Bloomberg consensus forecasts for annual CPI 
inflation in New Zealand’s trading partners in the 2025 and 2026 calendar years.


15
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
The New Zealand dollar exchange rate has 
appreciated since the February Statement. 
Volatility in the New Zealand dollar 
trade‑weighted index (TWI) has increased 
since the February Statement, largely due to 
US tariff policy announcements. In the weeks 
after the US’s early April tariff announcement, 
broad US dollar weakness contributed to 
an appreciation in the New Zealand dollar 
(see chapter 3). Stronger export prices have 
also likely supported the New Zealand dollar 
exchange rate. All else equal, the stronger 
exchange rate reduces inflationary pressure 
in New Zealand.  
Household spending continues
to be weak
Consumption grew by 0.1 percent in the 
December 2024 quarter, following small 
contractions in the June and September 
2024 quarters. Weak household spending 
reflects previously restrictive interest rates, 
a weak labour market, subdued asset price 
growth, and below-average population 
growth. Household consumption is assumed 
to increase over the projection, supported 
by lower interest rates and higher population 
growth (figure 2.5). Consumption has been 
declining on a per capita basis since 2023.
Government expenditure is 
expected to decline in line with 
Budget 2025
Government expenditure (consumption and 
investment) remains high as a share of the 
economy, but is assumed to decline over 
the medium term in line with Budget 2025 
(figure 2.6). The outlook for government 
spending is lower than assumed in the 
February Statement, which was based on the 
Half-Year Economic and Fiscal Update 2024. 
The effect of the reduction in government 
spending in Budget 2025 is assumed to be 
broadly offset by an increase in business 
investment resulting from the Investment 
Boost policy. This policy is expected to 
encourage business investment by enabling 
businesses to bring forward deductions 
for depreciation to the first year of asset 
ownership. 
Private investment is expected 
to be weaker due to heightened 
global uncertainty
Business investment grew by 3.5 percent 
in the December 2024 quarter, following 
declines in the previous three quarters. 
Business investment in the December 
2024 quarter was substantially higher 
than assumed, largely due to an increase 
in intangibles and plant, machinery, and 
equipment investment. We assume that 
business investment declines over the first 
half of 2025, reflecting high global economic 
uncertainty and material spare capacity in the 
economy. 
Figure 2.6
Government consumption and investment
(share of potential, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, NZ Treasury, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.5
Private consumption
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


16
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
We have updated and extended previous 
RBNZ research on the effect of uncertainty 
on economic activity in New Zealand 
(see chapter 4.1). Consistent with previous 
research, we find that increases in 
uncertainty reduce business investment, 
household consumption, and economic 
activity. We assume a negative effect on 
economic activity, consistent with recent 
increases in uncertainty measures. High 
uncertainty is assumed to have a negative 
effect on activity over the next year, but 
this effect is assumed to wane over the 
medium term.  
Residential investment declined 3.9 percent 
in the December 2024 quarter, a sharper 
contraction than the 0.9 percent decline 
forecast in the February Statement. This is 
a continuation of the decline in residential 
investment since its peak in 2021. Declining 
residential investment reflects weak demand 
due to previously high interest rates, lower 
house prices, and slower population growth. 
Business and residential investment are 
assumed to recover over the medium term. 
Business investment is assumed to increase 
as the uncertainty shock gradually dissipates, 
lower interest rates and high export earnings 
support demand, and spare capacity in the 
economy is reduced. The new Investment 
Boost policy is also assumed to support 
business investment. Residential investment 
is assumed to recover from the second half 
of 2025 as lower interest rates, increasing 
house prices, and higher population growth 
support demand for new housing. 
There is significant spare capacity 
in the New Zealand economy
Capacity pressures declined significantly 
during 2024, but lower interest rates are 
now supporting a recovery in economic 
activity. We estimate that the output gap 
was about -1.3 percent of potential GDP 
in the March 2025 quarter. Our suite of 
capacity pressure indicators and the 
larger‑than‑expected increase in GDP in the 
December 2024 quarter are consistent with 
a less negative starting point for the output 
gap than assumed in the February Statement 
(figure 2.7). 
Figure 2.7
Output gap and indicator suite 
(share of potential, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, NZIER, MBIE, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area shows the range of indicators in the suite. The vertical line shows the 
final quarter of published GDP data.


17
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Heightened uncertainty and weaker trading 
partner growth are assumed to cause the 
output gap to become more negative in the 
near term. We assume the output gap will 
reach a low point of -1.6 percent of potential 
GDP in the September 2025 quarter. We 
then assume the output gap begins to 
recover as the effects of lower interest rates 
start to outweigh the negative impact of 
weaker global growth and higher uncertainty. 
Potential growth is expected to remain low, 
reflecting subdued productivity growth and 
slow growth in labour supply due to low net 
immigration.
Labour market conditions
have softened
Demand for labour has declined. While 
employment grew by 0.1 percent in the 
March 2025 quarter, this was slower than 
the growth in the working-age population. 
As a result, the employment rate fell for the 
seventh consecutive quarter. Job vacancies 
have remained flat in recent months and are 
well below pre‑COVID-19 levels. Fewer job 
vacancies are also contributing to a lower 
number of job transitions. Participation in the 
labour market has fallen slightly, consistent 
with some people having left the labour 
market as there are fewer job prospects.
A range of measures suggest that 
labour market capacity pressures eased 
substantially during 2024 and into early 
2025. Most measures of labour market 
tightness are below their average levels 
since 2000 (figure 2.8). Businesses continue 
to report that it is easy to find workers, and 
movement between jobs has reduced. The 
unemployment rate remained at 5.1 percent 
in the March 2025 quarter but is expected 
to increase in the near term (figure 2.9). The 
unemployment rate is assumed to peak at 
5.2 percent in the June 2025 quarter before 
declining in line with a recovery in economic 
growth. 
Low demand for labour and lower inflation 
are contributing to slower nominal wage 
growth. Annual same-job wage growth, as 
measured by the Labour Cost Index (LCI, 
ordinary and overtime, private sector) was 
2.6 percent in the March 2025 quarter. 
This is substantially lower than its peak of 
4.5 percent in early 2023. Growth in broader 
wage measures have also declined. Wage 
growth is assumed to ease further, reflecting 
the usual lags between labour market 
pressure and wage adjustments.  
Source: Stats NZ, NZIER, MBIE, RBNZ estimates.
Note: See Ball (2024), ‘Assessing and communicating labour market indicators of inflationary pressure’, Analytical Note, Reserve Bank  
of New Zealand.
Figure 2.8
Labour market indicators 


18
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Net immigration is relatively low
Following a surge in 2022 and 2023, 
net immigration had declined rapidly 
(figure 2.10). The decline in net immigration 
reflected both a decline in arrivals and an 
increase in departures. This is likely due to 
weakness in New Zealand’s labour market 
compared to other countries, most notably 
Australia. In recent months, the pace of net 
immigration has been stronger than assumed 
in the February Statement. This partially 
reflects higher international student arrivals. 
In annual terms, net immigration remains low 
compared to recent history. We assume that 
it increases over the medium term as the 
New Zealand labour market recovers.
Subdued net immigration is assumed 
to have broadly offsetting effects on 
inflationary pressure. Slower population 
growth is reducing consumption growth and 
demand for housing. However, slowing net 
immigration is also resulting in slower labour 
supply growth and therefore lower growth in 
potential output.
Inflation is expected to increase 
in the near term, then return to 
near the MPC’s 2 percent target 
mid‑point 
Annual headline CPI inflation increased 
to 2.5 percent in the March 2025 quarter.1 
Annual non-tradables inflation continued 
to decrease but was higher than expected 
in the February Statement, at 4.0 percent. 
Annual tradables inflation increased to 
0.3 percent, after being negative for the 
previous two quarters.
1	
Stats NZ announced on 1 May that increases in vehicle relicensing fees were erroneously excluded in the March 2025 quarter data. If 
these data had been included, annual headline inflation would have been 2.6 percent, not 2.5 percent. Stats NZ will not be revising the 
released data, instead the vehicle relicensing fees will be accounted for in the June 2025 quarter.	
Figure 2.10
Net immigration 
(annual, share of working-age population)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.9
Unemployment rate 
(unemployed people as a share of the labour force, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


19
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Most measures of annual core inflation 
declined further in the March 2025 quarter. 
They have declined steadily since 2023, 
consistent with emerging spare capacity 
in the economy, and are within the MPC’s 
headline inflation target band (figure 2.11). 
Declines in core inflation measures imply that 
the underlying trend in inflation is converging 
towards the 2 percent target mid-point for 
CPI inflation. 
Surveyed inflation expectations have 
increased, but most measures remain 
consistent with the MPC’s inflation target 
range. Our existing Survey of Expectations 
shows that professional forecasters’ and 
business leaders’ inflation expectations have 
risen but remain close to the 2 percent target 
mid-point (figure 2.12). Our new Business 
Expectations Survey shows similar results 
for a broad representative sample of firms 
at 1- and 2-year horizons, but higher inflation 
expectations for longer horizons (see box B). 
Households’ expectations, which tend to 
be higher, have increased more sharply at 
shorter horizons. This may reflect uncertainty 
about inflation caused by recent increases in 
global tariffs. 
Annual tradables inflation was positive 
in the March 2025 quarter, after being 
negative for the previous two quarters. 
Annual tradables inflation increased from 
-1.1 percent to 0.3 percent, in line with our 
February Statement (figure 2.13). Prices for 
some food items such as dairy, meat, and fruit 
have increased recently. This is assumed to 
support tradables inflation in the near term. 
However, these increases are more than 
offset by lower petrol prices and a higher 
New Zealand dollar exchange rate, resulting 
in a lower outlook for tradables inflation 
over the next two years than in the February 
Statement. We project annual tradables 
inflation to peak at 1.4 percent in the 
September 2025 quarter and then remain 
around pre-COVID-19 average levels.
Figure 2.12
Inflation expectations of forecasters 
and business leaders
(annual, years ahead)
Source: RBNZ’s Survey of Expectations.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for inflation over 
the medium term. 
Figure 2.13
Tradables inflation 
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.11
Headline and core inflation measures 
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The dashed lines represent the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for inflation over 
the medium term. The shaded area shows the range of core inflation measures. The core 
inflation measures include the sectoral factor model, factor model, trimmed mean (30%), 
weighted median, and CPI excluding food and energy.


20
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Annual non-tradables inflation continued 
to decline, falling from 4.5 percent in the 
December 2024 quarter to 4.0 percent 
in the March 2025 quarter (figure 2.14). 
This was higher than the 3.8 percent 
expected at the time of the February 
Statement. The upside surprise was largely 
accounted for by higher domestic airfares 
and household energy prices. While 
non‑tradables inflation remains elevated, it 
has become less broad-based over time. 
This reflects easing capacity pressures 
and price-setting behaviour adapting to 
a low-inflation environment. Government 
administered and policy-affected price 
changes, such as local council rates, are 
contributing significantly to non-tradables 
inflation at present, and are expected to 
continue to add volatility to some price 
categories over the coming year.
Spare capacity in the economy is 
expected to flow through to lower cost 
pressures and non-tradables inflation 
over time, but administered price 
increases are likely to remain high in 
the near term. Household energy price 
inflation has increased substantially over 
the past year, and will rise further in the 
near term. Increases in electricity lines 
charges announced by the Commerce 
Commission will add to electricity prices 
in the June 2025 quarter. This is on top 
of a relatively high underlying rate in this 
category recently, partially reflecting higher 
wholesale electricity prices. Additionally, 
local authority rate increases occur in the 
September quarter. While rate increases 
are likely to be lower on average than last 
year, they are still substantially higher than 
historical averages, adding significantly 
to inflation. Non-tradables inflation is 
expected to decline more slowly over 
2025 than in the February Statement, 
partly due to persistent inflation in 
administered price categories, but is lower 
thereafter due to more spare capacity in 
the economy.
Annual headline inflation is forecast to 
remain within the 1 to 3 percent target 
range, and remain near the target 
mid‑point from 2026 (figure 2.15). The 
slower decline in non-tradables inflation 
results in slightly higher near-term headline 
inflation than expected in the February 
Statement. From 2026, this is more than 
offset by more spare capacity in the 
economy, lower petrol prices, and the 
higher New Zealand dollar exchange rate. 
Interest rates are lower to offset these 
downwards pressures on inflation. Annual 
CPI inflation is assumed to increase to 
a peak of 2.7 percent in the year to the 
September 2025 quarter, before declining 
close to 2 percent from 2026.
Figure 2.14
Non-tradables inflation 
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.15
CPI inflation 
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for inflation over 
the medium term.


21
Box B
Introducing the Tara-ā-Umanga, Business 
Expectations Survey (BES)
2	
The survey scope (‘target population’) is all New Zealand businesses and organisations with 6 or more employees.	
3	
Tara-ā-Pūkenga – (Expert) Survey of Expectations is a working title for the transition period. Naming will be reviewed once BES is 
well established.	
4	
Current coverage also includes industry leaders.	
On 21 May 2025 the RBNZ launched 
the Tara‑ā-Umanga, our comprehensive, 
economy-wide, Business Expectations 
Survey (BES). The new representative 
sample survey enables population 
estimates of economy-wide expectations 
and breakdowns by business size and 
industry.2 The sample size is over 350 
responding businesses each quarter 
– a ten-fold increase compared with the 
existing Survey of Expectations (SOE). 
Our understanding of business inflation 
dynamics will be enriched over time with 
microdata research and analysis, including 
distributional and longitudinal analysis.
Our existing Survey of Expectations 
will remain with no immediate scope 
changes. The SOE sample has been 
carefully chosen to cover a range of 
professional forecasters, economists, and 
industry leaders, but it is not a random 
probability sample. This means we are 
not able to make statistical inferences 
about a wider population beyond those 
responding to the survey.
Once the BES and the SOE have 
sufficiently long overlapping timeseries, 
we will re-focus the SOE as a survey of 
professional forecasters and economists. 
Industry leaders (currently in-scope), 
representing expectations for their firms, 
will be omitted in future as the BES will 
better cover business expectations. 
We plan to transition to a three‑survey 
approach, separately covering 
households, experts, and businesses 
(table B.1).
Table B.1
Plans for RBNZ expectations surveys
Name
Coverage
Timeseries begin
Sample size
Tara-ā-Whare – Household 
Expectations Survey
Households
March quarter 1995
About 1,000 households
Tara-ā-Pūkenga – (Expert) 
Survey of Expectations3 
Professional forecasters 
and economists4 
September quarter 1987
About 40 respondents
Tara-ā-Umanga – 
Business Expectations 
Survey
Economy-wide
September quarter 2024
About 400 businesses
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025


22
Careful testing and development of the 
survey over the past year means we 
have a short historical timeseries from 
the September 2024 quarter. 1-year 
ahead mean inflation expectations from 
the BES show similar quarterly movements 
compared with the mean of SOE 
respondents. In comparison, short-horizon 
inflation expectations of households tend 
to be consistently higher, as reported 
from our Household Expectations Survey 
(figure B.1). 
Mean inflation expectations from the BES 
at 5- and 10-years ahead are materially 
higher than those for 1- and 2-years 
ahead, and those from SOE respondents. 
This reflects a materially higher share 
of firms reporting very high inflation 
expectations (e.g. 10 percent or higher) at 
these terms. In contrast, weighted median 
inflation expectations from the BES were 
2.5 percent across all horizons in the June 
2025 quarter.5 
The launch of the BES represents a 
significant uplift in our expectations data, 
but more observations are needed to 
enable us to estimate the relationship 
between these data and ultimate 
inflation outcomes. Inflation expectations 
are important because households and 
businesses reflect their expectations in 
their spending and price- and wage‑setting 
decisions. Improving the quality of our 
expectation surveys is part of the wider 
response to our 2022 review of how we 
formulate and implement our monetary 
policy. In this review, we identified 
several areas where better data could 
support high-quality monetary policy 
decision‑making.
5	
Weighted median data were not released with the initial statistics release of the BES, but we will publish these in future quarters.	
Figure B.1
1-year ahead inflation expectations
(mean, annual)
Source: RBNZ.
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025


23
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Monetary policy outlook
Conditional on the central economic 
outlook, we assume that the OCR will 
decline further, supporting the recovery 
in economic activity (figure 2.16). Higher 
export prices are adding to inflationary 
pressure. This is being offset by weak 
residential investment and household 
consumption, which is assumed to persist in 
the near term. Global trade developments 
and higher uncertainty are assumed 
to be disinflationary for New Zealand, 
meaning that additional monetary policy 
easing is required. Underlying inflationary 
pressures are assumed to ease as wage‑ 
and price‑setters continue to adapt to a 
low‑inflation environment. This allows interest 
rates to fall, supporting economic activity 
and contributing to a closing output gap and 
headline inflation near the 2 percent target 
mid-point over the medium term. Compared 
to the February Statement, the OCR is 
projected to decline to a lower level. This 
mostly reflects higher global tariffs and the 
resulting weaker outlook for global growth.
Figure 2.16
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


24
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Piha. Photo: Riki Fujii-Rajani
Chapter 
03
Global 
economy 
and financial 
markets


25
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Chapter 3.
Global economy and financial markets
Key points
Global tariffs have increased materially 
in recent months. Since the February 
Statement, the US has raised tariff rates on 
most of its trading partners and across a 
range of products (see chapter 4.2). Recent 
developments, including temporary pauses 
and partial de-escalation agreements, have 
eased tensions. However, we expect global 
tariff rates to remain elevated over the 
forecast. The outlook for global trade policy 
remains highly uncertain.
Financial market participants and economic 
forecasters expect global growth to slow, 
inflation to remain near central bank 
targets, and monetary policy to ease 
further. Elevated tariffs and heightened 
uncertainty have increased the dispersion 
of forecasts for trading‑partner growth. 
In the US and China, growth is projected 
to slow materially in 2025. In most other 
countries, growth is also forecast to be 
negatively affected, but to a lesser extent. 
Inflation across most of our trading partners 
is anticipated to remain close to target. 
Outside the US and Canada, higher tariffs 
are expected to be disinflationary over 
the medium term. Market participants’ 
expectations imply further policy rate cuts by 
major central banks. However, recent central 
banks’ communications point to a high 
degree of uncertainty in their outlooks.
Financial markets have experienced 
volatility in response to tariff 
announcements. In early April 2025, US 
equity markets fell sharply, and measures of 
implied volatility increased to levels not seen 
since March 2020. However, subsequent 
announcements of temporary tariff pauses 
supported a rebound in equity prices. Since 
the February Statement, global equity indices 
have declined modestly, credit spreads have 
widened, and sovereign yield curves have 
steepened. Commodity prices, particularly 
crude oil, have fallen due to weaker global 
demand and increased supply. In contrast, 
New Zealand’s export prices have continued 
to increase. The US dollar has weakened as 
financial market participants’ expectations 
for US growth have been revised lower 
relative to other economies, and as US policy 
uncertainty has increased.
Domestic financial conditions have 
loosened since the February Statement. 
Volatility in global financial markets 
spilled over to increased volatility in 
domestic wholesale interest rates and 
the New Zealand dollar exchange rate. 
Domestic wholesale interest rate curves 
have steepened, with shorter-term rates 
falling by more than longer-term rates. The 
New Zealand dollar has appreciated on a 
trade-weighted basis, primarily due to US 
dollar weakness. Retail interest rates, such 
as mortgage and term deposit rates, have 
decreased.


26
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Global economic conditions
Global tariffs have increased 
materially
Since the February Statement, the US 
has introduced new tariffs on imports 
from almost all of its trading partners, 
including New Zealand. This has included 
a baseline tariff increase of 10 percentage 
points on nearly all US imports, alongside 
a 25 percentage point increase on many 
Canadian and Mexican goods, and a 
30 percentage point increase on most 
Chinese imports. The US has imposed 
additional tariffs on aluminium, steel, and 
automobile imports (see chapter 4.2). 
The outlook for global tariff settings 
remains highly uncertain. This largely 
reflects the speed and extent of change 
in the tariff policies over recent months. 
In April, China was subject to a tariff of 
145 percent and responded with a retaliatory 
tariff of 125 percent on the US. Many 
countries are currently negotiating new 
trade arrangements with the US and among 
themselves, which may lead to further 
changes in tariff rates. Nonetheless, we 
expect global tariffs to remain higher over our 
forecast horizon than at the start of the year.
Global economic growth
is expected to slow
The variability in forecasts for global 
economic growth has increased in line with 
higher uncertainty. This largely reflects the 
degree to which tariff policies have changed 
over recent months, but also the complexity 
of modelling how higher global tariffs could 
affect economic activity. Ultimately, the effect 
of recent tariff changes on global growth will 
depend on the persistence of higher tariffs, 
the ability of firms to adjust, and the policy 
responses of affected economies.
Consensus forecasts are for GDP growth in 
our trading-partner economies to be slow 
over coming years (figure 3.1). However, the 
strength of growth remains uneven across 
regions. Higher global tariffs are expected 
to have the largest negative impact on the 
US and China. Growth in these economies in 
2025 is projected to slow relative to 2024. 
In contrast, growth in Australia is expected to 
strengthen modestly from current below‑trend 
rates. In Europe, growth is anticipated to 
remain broadly stable, with the adverse 
effects of higher tariffs partly offset by recently 
announced fiscal support measures. Growth is 
expected to decline across Asian economies, 
particularly those with large export sectors 
and exposure to the US.
Recent fiscal and monetary policy 
announcements in China will likely offset 
some of the negative effect of increased 
tariffs. Authorities have reiterated their 
commitment to achieve their “around 
5 percent” GDP growth target for 2025. They 
are implementing a range of fiscal measures 
to stabilise the housing market and increase 
household consumption. The People’s Bank 
of China has also eased monetary policy, with 
reductions in reserve ratio requirements and 
other policy interest rates. As New Zealand’s 
largest trading partner, the scale and 
effectiveness of China’s stimulus measures 
will likely have an important influence on the 
demand for New Zealand exports.
Figure 3.1
Trading-partner GDP growth
(annual)
Source: Haver Analytics, Bloomberg, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Projections show consensus forecasts from Bloomberg for individual economies and 
RBNZ forecasts for the world (trade-weighted).


27
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Global economic activity data do not yet 
show the broad effect of higher tariff 
rates. US import demand increased rapidly 
as businesses and consumers increased 
purchases of foreign goods prior to the 
implementation of the bulk of US tariffs. 
However, high‑frequency data of scheduled 
cargo volumes, and Chinese trade data 
for April, suggest trade between the US 
and China has fallen materially since tariffs 
were implemented. The fall in Chinese 
trade volumes with the US has been partly 
offset by an increase to other destinations. 
International surveys of manufacturing 
business conditions also suggest new orders 
and export orders are falling across many of 
our trading partners.
Tariff announcements have contributed 
to a deterioration in global household 
and business confidence and increased 
uncertainty. In recent months, business 
and consumer sentiment measures have 
declined across most of New Zealand’s 
key trading partners, with the largest falls 
observed in the US. Survey-based and 
news‑derived measures of global uncertainty 
have increased sharply. Elevated uncertainty 
and subdued confidence are assumed 
to weigh on global economic activity in 
addition to the direct effects of higher tariffs, 
as households and businesses adopt more 
cautious spending, investment, and hiring 
decisions (see chapter 4.1).
Global inflationary pressure is 
expected to remain subdued
Annual inflation in New Zealand’s trading 
partners was 1.8 percent in the March 
2025 quarter. This is lower than in 2024, 
but broadly unchanged since the February 
Statement. Inflation is expected to remain 
around this level through the remainder 
of 2025 and into 2026, although with 
differences across countries. Financial 
market participants expect the US to 
experience inflation above 2 percent, and 
forecasts for China are for lower inflation 
(figure 3.2).
Higher global tariffs are expected to be 
inflationary in the near term in the US and 
Canada. In these economies, tariffs are 
expected to increase import prices and 
headline inflation, more than offsetting the 
disinflationary effects of weaker growth. 
Consistent with this, measures of near‑term 
inflation expectations in the US have 
increased in recent months. 
Lower export demand is expected to reduce 
economic activity for most of our other 
trading partners, and place downward 
pressure on inflation over the medium 
term. Lower commodity prices are also 
contributing to the reduced outlook for 
inflation in these economies. However, the 
overall inflationary effect of higher tariffs 
remains highly uncertain among our key 
trading partners. This will depend on how 
households, businesses, and policymakers 
respond to ongoing trade developments. 
Figure 3.2
Trading-partner inflation
(annual)
Source: Haver Analytics, Bloomberg, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Projections show consensus forecasts from Bloomberg for individual 
economies and RBNZ forecasts for the world (trade-weighted).


28
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Global financial conditions
Market participants’ expectations 
for central bank policy rates
have fallen
Central bank decisions have diverged 
in recent months. Since the February 
Statement, the Reserve Bank of Australia 
(RBA), the Bank of England, and the 
European Central Bank (ECB) have lowered 
their policy interest rates, by 25, 25, and 
50 basis points, respectively. These central 
banks noted that their decisions reflected 
weaker outlooks for growth and inflation, 
partly due to higher global trade barriers. 
In contrast, the US Federal Reserve (Fed) 
and Bank of Canada (BoC) kept policy rates 
unchanged at their latest meetings. 
Major central bank communications 
continue to highlight uncertainty in their 
policy outlook. Both the Fed and the BoC 
have emphasised the challenge of setting 
monetary policy in an environment with 
upside risks to inflation and downside risks 
to growth. Similarly, a number of central 
banks have moved away from providing a 
single central projection for their economy 
and instead published illustrative scenarios 
to communicate the risks associated with 
heightened uncertainty.
Most major central banks are expected to 
ease policy further this year. Market pricing 
suggests the Fed, ECB, and RBA will reduce 
policy interest rates by around 50, 50, and 
80 basis points, respectively, by the end 
of 2025. This is a faster pace of expected 
easing than at the time of the February 
Statement, largely in response to the weaker 
global economic outlook.
Shorter-term global 
government bond yields 
have declined
Since the February Statement, 2-year 
sovereign bond yields have fallen by 
around 10 to 40 basis points across 
advanced economies (figure 3.3). These 
declines reflect market participants’ 
expectations for lower near-term policy 
rates. Meanwhile, 10-year yields are relatively 
unchanged over the same period, resulting 
in a steepening of government bond yield 
curves. Elevated economic uncertainty 
has contributed to increased volatility in 
government bond markets, prompting 
investors to demand higher compensation 
for holding longer-term bonds. This has been 
reflected in higher term premia. 
Figure 3.3
2-year government bond yields 
Source: Bloomberg.


29
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Equity markets have been 
volatile in response to tariff 
announcements
Market volatility reached high levels 
following the recent tariff announcements. 
Following the 3 April (New Zealand time) 
US tariff announcement, the MSCI Global 
Equity Index declined by 11 percent over 
5 days. Meanwhile, the VIX measure of 
implied volatility for US equities increased to 
levels last seen during the initial COVID-19 
lockdowns. Since then, equity markets have 
recovered most of these losses, supported 
by announcements to pause or reduce tariffs 
and market participants’ expectations for 
lower global policy interest rates.
Equity prices have declined, particularly 
in the US. Since the February Statement, 
the MSCI Global Equity Index has declined 
by 1 percent, while the US S&P 500 has 
declined by 3 percent (figure 3.4). Corporate 
bond spreads have also widened. These 
movements reflect a weaker global 
economic outlook, expectations of lower 
corporate earnings, and a shift away from 
riskier assets amid elevated uncertainty.
Many global commodity prices 
have fallen, and the US dollar
has weakened
Brent crude oil prices have declined 14 
percent since the February Statement, 
due to a weaker global demand outlook 
and increased supply from OPEC+. Other 
commodity price indices, including those for 
agricultural products and metals, have also 
fallen over this period. However, this decline 
has been less than the fall in oil prices. In 
contrast, prices for New Zealand’s key export 
commodities, including beef and dairy, have 
increased.
The US dollar has depreciated materially 
since the February Statement. The US 
Dollar Index (DXY), which tracks the US 
dollar against a basket of major currencies, 
has depreciated 9 percent since its peak 
in January 2025 and 6 percent since the 
February Statement (figure 3.5). 
US dollar weakness appears to reflect a 
reassessment of the US economic outlook 
and heightened policy uncertainty. After 
the US presidential election, the US dollar 
appreciated due to expectations of stronger 
economic growth and higher interest rates. 
However, the recent tariff announcements 
have prompted investors to reduce their 
expectations for US growth relative to other 
countries, thus reducing demand for US 
dollars. Tariff announcements have also 
significantly increased US policy uncertainty 
in recent months, which has reduced some 
financial market participants’ willingness to 
hold US assets. Risk perceptions around US 
assets have increased. 
Figure 3.5
US Dollar Index
Source: Bloomberg.
Figure 3.4
Global equity prices
(index=100 on 30 December 2022)
Source: Bloomberg.  
Note: Daily closing values of headline equity price indices in local currency terms. Indices 
are S&P/NZX 50 (New Zealand), Euro Stoxx 50 (euro area), S&P 500 (United States), TOPIX 
(Japan), and MSCI World (World).


30
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Figure 3.6
Financial market participants’ 
expectations for the OCR
Source: Bloomberg.
Note: The blue line shows expectations for the OCR immediately before the February 
Statement. Each data point represents market expectations of the level of the OCR at a 
given point in the future, as measured by overnight indexed swap pricing.
Domestic financial 
conditions
Domestic financial conditions have 
loosened since the February Statement. 
Volatility in global financial market 
conditions in response to US trade policy 
announcements has been a key influence 
on New Zealand’s financial markets. 
Short‑term wholesale interest rates, such 
as swap rates, have declined. This decline 
reflects financial market participants lowering 
their expectations for the OCR due to 
expectations for weaker global economic 
activity. Longer‑term wholesale interest rates 
have fallen by less, or increased in some 
cases, due to increasing term premia. The 
New Zealand dollar trade-weighted index 
(TWI) has appreciated, and volatility in the 
exchange rate has increased. The share of 
new mortgage flows on floating and 6‑month 
rates decreased significantly 
in March.
Near-term expectations for the 
OCR have decreased
Market participants expect further 
reductions to the OCR over the next year, 
and to a lower level than at the time of the 
February Statement (figure 3.6).6 Following 
the US trade policy announcement in early 
April, market participants lowered their 
expectations for the OCR this year and now 
expect the OCR to reach a trough of around 
2.8 percent in November 2025. 
Lower OCR expectations from financial 
market participants have contributed to 
lower domestic interest rate swap rates 
since the February Statement (figure 3.7).7 
Shorter-term rates, which are more sensitive 
to domestic developments, decreased by 
more than long-term swap rates, which are 
sensitive to changes in longer-term risk 
factors. This means the swap curve has 
steepened.
6	
Market participants’ expectations for the OCR can be inferred from prices for overnight indexed swap (OIS) contracts.	
7	
Interest rate swap rates are wholesale interest rates often used as a benchmark by financial institutions in setting other interest rates in 
the economy. They can provide a guide to market participants’ expectations for the policy rate over specific horizons. They involve the 
exchange of fixed and floating interest rate payments between two parties over a specified period. The level of interest rate swaps will be 
approximately equal to market participants’ expectations for average short-term market interest rates over the swap term. 	
Domestic interest rate market volatility has 
increased in line with higher uncertainty 
regarding the global economic outlook. This 
peaked in early April, contributing to a period 
of lower liquidity in global sovereign bond 
markets, including in New Zealand. Market 
liquidity subsequently improved over recent 
weeks, largely due to the announcement of a 
90-day pause to some of the US tariffs. 
Figure 3.7
New Zealand interest rate swaps
(terms in years)
Source: Bloomberg.


31
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
The New Zealand dollar has 
appreciated
The New Zealand dollar TWI has increased 
by 1.2 percent since the February 
Statement (figure 3.8). Movements in the 
exchange rate have been more volatile 
than usual (figure 3.9). The New Zealand 
dollar TWI had appreciated by around 3 
percent in late April, during the period of 
US dollar weakness. Since then, the US 
dollar appreciated slightly after China and 
the US temporarily agreed to reduce tariffs. 
This flowed through to a depreciation in the 
New Zealand dollar against the US dollar and 
other currencies that are tied to the US dollar.
Increases in New Zealand’s export prices 
over recent months have supported 
the exchange rate. A decline in market 
participants’ interest rate expectations in 
Australia relative to New Zealand has also 
supported an appreciation in the NZD/AUD 
exchange rate. Despite the appreciation 
in the New Zealand dollar TWI over recent 
months, it remains lower than it was over 
most of 2024.
Figure 3.8
New Zealand dollar trade-weighted index
(nominal)
Source: RBNZ.
Figure 3.9
VIX Index and NZD TWI volatility
Source: Bloomberg, RBNZ estimates.
Note: NZD TWI volatility is approximated as the 30-day rolling standard deviation of the 
daily log-difference in the TWI.


32
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Mortgage rates have decreased 
and the trend towards short-term 
refixing has started to reverse 
Mortgage rates have decreased since the 
February Statement, with the largest falls at 
1- and 2-year terms (figure 3.10). Advertised 
rates at these terms have fallen below 
5 percent for the first time since 2022. This 
comes as about 45 percent of mortgages are 
expected to be refixed over the June and 
September 2025 quarters. This will improve 
household cashflow over the next 6 months. 
Term deposit rates have also decreased 
across all terms. 
The trend towards shorter-term mortgage 
rates over the last year has started to 
reverse (figure 3.11). In March 2025, around 
60 percent of new mortgage flows were 
directed towards terms of less than 1-year, 
down from around 90 percent in the 
preceding 4 months.
Figure 3.10
New Zealand mortgage rates
(terms in years)
Source: interest.co.nz.
Note: The 6-month to 3-year mortgage rates shown are the average of the latest 
advertised fixed-term rates on offer from ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac for mortgages with 
a loan-to-value ratio of less than 80 percent. The 4- and 5-year mortgage rates are the 
average of the latest advertised fixed-term rates on offer from ASB, BNZ, and Westpac.
Figure 3.11
Proportion of new mortgage lending volume by tenor
Source: RBNZ.


33
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Chapter 
04
Special topics
Omanui. Photo: Sam Norling


34
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Chapter 4. 
Special topics 
Before the publication of each Statement, RBNZ staff provide 
analyses of some topical issues to the Monetary Policy Committee. 
Topics for the May Statement included:
1.	 How does uncertainty affect the New Zealand economy?
2.	 The transmission of higher global tariffs to the New Zealand economy
Special topics in the past 12 months
Topic
Date/publication
The implications of global tariffs for the New Zealand 
economy
February 2025 Statement (Chapter 4)
Outlook for some of New Zealand’s key commodity 
exports
February 2025 Statement (Chapter 4)
Trends in production sectors of the New Zealand economy
November 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)
Summary of recent business visits
November 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)
Real interest rates and their effect on the economy
November 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)
Price-setting behaviour in a low-inflation environment
August 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)
Comparing macroeconomic conditions in economies
at different stages of monetary policy easing
August 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)
Non-tradables inflation in New Zealand
May 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)
Recent trends in New Zealand’s exporting sector
May 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)


Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
How does uncertainty affect the New Zealand 
economy?
Summary
8	
See Rice A, Vehbi T, and Wong B (2018) ‘Measuring uncertainty and its impact on the New Zealand economy’, Reserve Bank of 
New Zealand Analytical Note 2018/01, Dibiasi A and Sarferaz S (2023) ‘Measuring macroeconomic uncertainty: A cross-country 
analysis’, European Economic Review Vol. 153 104413, and Andersson M, Bobasu A, and De Santis R A. (2024) ‘What are the economic 
signals from uncertainty measures?’, ECB Economic Bulletin Issue 8/2024.
•	 Increasing global uncertainty affects 
the New Zealand domestic economy 
by influencing the decisions of firms 
and households. Under high uncertainty, 
firms may delay or cancel investment 
plans. Households may increase their 
precautionary savings if they are uncertain 
about their job and income prospects.
•	 To assess the effects of greater 
uncertainty in recent months, we 
monitor and model the economic effects 
of different uncertainty measures. These 
include measures based on news articles, 
surveys, and financial market pricing.
•	 Our modelling shows that increased 
uncertainty reduces economic activity 
through lower business investment and 
household consumption. These results 
are consistent with international evidence 
and previous RBNZ research.8
•	 Higher global uncertainty negatively 
affects New Zealand’s output gap, 
reducing inflationary pressure. Our 
central projection assumes that the 
increase in global uncertainty over the 
past 6 months reduces the output gap by 
about 0.3 percentage points by the June 
2026 quarter. This effect then wanes. 
However, estimates based on different 
uncertainty measures give a wide range 
of results.
•	 All else equal, higher global uncertainty 
reduces capacity pressure in 
New Zealand’s economy. This means 
that, all else equal, lower interest rates are 
assumed to be required to achieve the 
MPC’s inflation target.


36
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Uncertainty has a range of effects 
on the New Zealand economy
New Zealand is a small open economy 
exposed to global economic uncertainty. 
Uncertainty around economic developments 
has its own economic effects, distinct from 
the underlying cause of the uncertainty. For 
example, while new tariffs directly affect 
global trade, the uncertainty around their 
level and effects will independently have 
further effects on the economy. This is 
because uncertainty influences the decisions 
of firms and households (table 4.1).
9	
This is not an exhaustive list of channels. There are many other decisions that can be affected by uncertainty and could have important 
macroeconomic implications. For example, with migration decisions the source of uncertainty is likely to influence migration flows. These 
changes could be material for small economies like New Zealand where the population is affected by net migration flows.
10	
We also considered other measures of uncertainty, but our modelling focuses on those best able to explain changes in New Zealand 
economic activity.
When uncertainty is high, most firms are 
incentivised to wait until uncertainty wanes. 
This arises as undertaking new investments 
or hiring new staff are costly decisions to 
reverse. Households are incentivised to 
increase their precautionary savings and 
reduce spending, if they become uncertain 
about their job prospects. As uncertainty 
increases, most firms and consumers 
find decision-making more difficult. This 
decreases firm and consumer confidence, 
and lowers expected future growth.
Table 4.1
Channels through which uncertainty affects the economy9
Channel
Reduces
Description
Delaying or 
abandoning 
investments
Business investment
Some firms delay investment decisions, or 
abandon existing investment plans, as they are 
less sure about future sales and profits.
Credit flows and 
costs
Credit
Business investment
Banks and other lenders reduce the supply of 
credit as they become less confident about the 
outlook for firms. This results in lower investment.
Precautionary 
savings
Consumption
Households reduce spending to increase their 
savings, as they are less sure about their future 
income, work prospects, and wealth.
Reduced hiring
Employment
Some firms delay hiring decisions as they are less 
sure about future sales and profits.
Market dynamism
Productivity
Some firms delay research and development, as 
they are less sure about future sales and profits. 
Reduced job switching may lower the quality of 
labour market matching.
Uncertainty is measured
in different ways
Measures of uncertainty have increased 
over the past 6 months. Heightened 
uncertainty about global trade policy has 
spread to broader economic uncertainty. 
Table 4.2 summarises the different measures 
used in modelling the economic effects of 
uncertainty.10


37
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Table 4.2
Measures of economic uncertainty used in RBNZ modelling
Measure
Source
Description
New Zealand QSBO 
Business Uncertainty
NZIER, RBNZ 
estimates
A measure of the difference between firms’ 
expectations for a range of outcomes in the next 
quarter, and what they end up experiencing.
New Zealand Economic 
Policy Uncertainty 
Sense Partners
A measure of uncertainty based on the proportion 
of news articles that meet specific criteria related 
to uncertainty and the economy.
GDP Forecast 
Disagreement 
(New Zealand and 
the US)
Consensus 
Economics, RBNZ 
estimates
A measure of the dispersion of 1-year ahead GDP 
forecasts across different professional forecasters. 
US VIX
Cboe Global 
Markets
A measure of market participants’ expectations 
for near-term equity price volatility using option 
contracts. Commonly used as a measure of 
investor sentiment and as a proxy for uncertainty.
US Michigan Surveys 
of Consumers
University of 
Michigan, RBNZ 
estimates
A measure based on the proportion of households 
who report an uncertain future as a reason for not 
buying cars or other durable goods.
US Economic Policy 
Uncertainty
Policyuncertainty.
com
A measure based on the frequency of terms 
relating to economic and policy uncertainty in 
news articles.
Global uncertainty measures, as proxied 
by measures of US economic uncertainty, 
have increased. The news-based economic 
policy uncertainty has increased significantly 
(figure 4.1). The VIX also increased 
significantly, although it has since begun to 
decrease. Consumer uncertainty (Michigan 
Index) and uncertainty measured by US GDP 
forecast disagreement have been increasing, 
but are still well below historical peaks.
Figure 4.1
Measures of US uncertainty
(standardised)
Source: Policyuncertainty.com, University of Michigan, Consensus Economics, Cboe 
Global Markets, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: All measures are standardised in their base frequencies from 1997 to their latest 
data point.


38
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
The QSBO (Quarterly Survey of Business 
Opinion) business uncertainty and 
news‑based New Zealand economic policy 
uncertainty measures are both at a high 
level (figure 4.2). However, the New Zealand 
GDP forecast disagreement measure has 
remained at low levels. 
Our projection incorporates 
judgement about the effects 
of higher uncertainty
We updated and extended previous 
RBNZ research that modelled the effects 
of uncertainty on New Zealand.11 Our 
modelling suggests that the average 
maximum effect of a one standard deviation 
increase in uncertainty reduces the output 
gap and household consumption by about 
-0.2 percentage points, and business 
investment by about -1.3 percentage points. 
These estimates are similar to international 
evidence for other economies (figure 4.3).
Our projection assumes higher uncertainty 
results in a 0.3 percentage point more 
negative output gap in the June 2026 
quarter, with the effect waning over the 
medium term (see chapter 5). Over the past 
3 months, some measures of uncertainty 
have increased by more than one standard 
deviation, and some by less. In particular, 
measures based on news articles have 
increased significantly more than other 
measures. Our central projection assumes an 
effect based on the average of the non‑news 
measures, accounting for the extent of 
increase in each measure. The estimated 
effect based on the news measures is larger.
We assume that higher uncertainty creates 
more spare capacity in the economy, 
reducing inflationary pressure. All else 
equal, this means that lower interest rates 
are required to achieve the MPC’s inflation 
target. However, some uncertainty measures 
changed little over the past 6 months, while 
others increased to record levels. Given 
this variation, estimates have a wide range 
11	
Our model is based on Rice A, Vehbi T, and Wong B (2018) ‘Measuring uncertainty and its impact on the New Zealand economy’, 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand Analytical Note 2018/01. We updated some modelling assumptions. For example, we added a measure of 
New Zealand’s trading-partner output gap into the model, as global economic developments may affect uncertainty (and vice versa). We 
also extended the sample period to the end of 2019. This excludes the COVID-19 lockdowns and volatility.
of results around our central assumption. 
We are monitoring timely indicators of 
the output gap, business investment, and 
consumption to determine if uncertainty 
is affecting the economy as assumed in 
our central projection.
Figure 4.2
Measures of New Zealand uncertainty
(standardised)
Note: All measures are standardised in their base frequencies from 1997 to their latest 
data point. 
Source: NZIER, Sense Partners, Consensus Economics, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 4.3
Average peak response to an 
increase in uncertainty
Source: European Commission (2024), Andersson, Bobasu, and De Santis (2024), 
Dibiasi and Sarferaz (2023), Bonciani and Oh (2019), RBNZ estimates. 
Note: The response is to a one standard deviation shock in uncertainty. Non-RBNZ 
research is for different economies and uses a range of uncertainty measures. 


39
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
The transmission of higher global tariffs to the 
New Zealand economy
Summary
•	 The US has implemented a range of 
new tariffs on imports from almost all 
countries. Some countries have retaliated. 
Tariff rates have been adjusted over 
recent weeks and are likely to continue 
changing.
•	 Higher and more volatile tariffs will affect 
the New Zealand economy through 
different channels. The macroeconomic 
effects on New Zealand through these 
channels vary, with some channels 
presenting greater uncertainty in both 
their impact and direction than others.
•	 Our central projection assumes that 
higher tariffs and uncertainty will 
result in weaker economic activity in 
New Zealand, and lower inflationary 
pressure. 
•	 Our assessment is that the most 
significant transmission channels 
from higher tariffs to the New Zealand 
economy are likely to be higher 
uncertainty and lower external demand 
due to lower trading‑partner GDP 
growth. However, other transmission 
channels could also prove significant and 
result in different economic outcomes for 
New Zealand than currently assumed. 
These include trade diversion effects, 
exchange rate movements, reduced 
demand for imports due to uncertainty, 
and the potential for higher global 
production costs. Higher tariffs on 
New Zealand exports entering the US are 
likely to directly reduce demand for our 
exports, although the effect is expected to 
be relatively small.
•	 Both the level of tariffs and economic 
effects through each channel remain 
highly uncertain. There are many future 
paths the economy could take with 
different implications for medium-term 
inflationary pressure. Box A in chapter 2 
presents just two of these possible paths.
Tariffs in the US will affect 
New Zealand through different 
channels
Tariffs are a tax imposed by a 
‘tariff‑imposing’ country on their 
imports from a ‘tariff-targeted’ country. 
Tariffs increase the price of imports in 
the tariff‑imposing country and reduce 
demand for imports from the tariff-targeted 
country (see chapter 4.1 of the February 
Statement).12 Table 4.3 summarises recent 
US tariff announcements. While some US 
tariffs have been targeted at specific goods, 
most have been implemented as a blanket 
tariff across all goods from a given country. 
12	
The pass-through to increased consumer prices varies as some producers and importers may absorb part of the increased costs.  
Currently, New Zealand goods entering the 
US are subject to a 10 percent tariff, as is 
the case for most countries. In April 2025, 
China, New Zealand’s largest trading partner, 
was subject to a tariff of 145 percent and 
responded with retaliatory tariffs on the US of 
125 percent. As of 22 May, these have been 
reduced to 30 and 10 percent, respectively. 
All tariffs are in addition to any pre-existing 
tariffs.


40
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Table 4.3
Timeline of key US tariff announcements
Date
Target
Tariff
February 2025
Mexico and 
Canada
A 25% tariff on most goods imports to the US with 
exceptions for USMCA-compliant goods.13 A 10% tariff on 
Canadian energy.
Canada implemented a 25% retaliatory tariff on some US 
goods.
China
The US increased the 10% tariff on Chinese goods to 20%.
Global
A 25% tariff on steel and aluminium.
March 2025
Global
A 25% tariff on automobiles and auto parts.
April 2025
Global
A baseline 10% tariff on US trading partners (except for 
Mexico and Canada). The baseline tariff was replaced by a 
variable rate of 11% to 50% for many trading partners. 
Later in the month, the higher variable US tariffs on goods 
were reduced to 10%, except for China.
After China’s retaliation, US tariffs on Chinese goods rose to 
145%, and China’s tariffs on US goods to 125%.
May 2025
China
Tariffs on Chinese and US goods were lowered to 30% and 
10% respectively. 
Note: Country-based tariff rates are in addition to any pre-existing tariffs. For some countries for some product-specific tariffs, levels supersede 
existing US tariffs on steel and aluminium. This is not an exhaustive list and there are various product-based exemptions. 
13	
The agreement between the US, Mexico, and Canada (USMCA) is a free trade agreement that has been in effect since 1 July 2020, replacing 
the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). This allows tariff-free trade for many goods as long as they meet specific rules. 
The economic effects of tariffs depend on 
various factors, such as how broad‑based 
they are, the substitutability of alternative 
products, and the nature of existing 
contractual relationships. The key channels 
— trade, financial and uncertainty — through 
which global tariffs will affect growth and 
inflation in New Zealand are summarised 
in table 4.4. The financial and uncertainty 
channels are covered in chapters 3 and 4.1, 
respectively. This chapter focuses on the 
trade channel and our assumptions about the 
aggregate effects across all channels. 


41
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Table 4.4
How tariffs affect growth and inflation in New Zealand 
Channel
Effect on 
NZ growth
Effect 
on NZ 
inflation
Effect on the NZ economy
Trade
Reduced US 
demand for 
imports
NZ exports
↓
↓
Higher tariffs on imports to the US directly reduce 
demand and prices for goods we sell internationally.
NZ imports14 ↓↑
↓
Tariffs also reduce demand and prices for goods we 
buy internationally. 
Indirect effects via growth in 
our trading partners
↓
↓
Declining global growth due to the tariffs and 
heightened uncertainty will reduce demand for 
New Zealand’s exports.
Trade 
diversion 
effects
NZ exports
↑
↑
NZ could experience an increase in exports to 
tariff‑imposing countries if the tariffs on our products 
are lower than those applied to other trading 
partners, making our exports relatively cheaper. 
NZ imports14 ↓↑
↓
NZ may receive cheaper imports as tariff-targeted 
exports are redirected towards NZ. 
Global production cost
↓↑
↑
Tariffs may disrupt existing supply chains, and lead 
to less efficient production as firms try to avoid tariffs. 
This may lower global productivity growth and lead to 
higher import costs over the medium term.
Financial
Exchange rate
↓↑
↓↑
Higher global uncertainty tends to cause a 
depreciation in the New Zealand dollar exchange 
rate. It may appreciate if the perceived risk of 
holding US dollars increases, or if global interest 
rates fall by more than NZ interest rates.
Interest rates
↓↑
↓↑
In the shorter term, there may be upward pressure 
on interest rates in countries imposing tariffs. Other 
countries may lower interest rates in response to 
weaker demand.
Asset prices
↓
↓
Volatility in asset prices may increase. Slower global 
growth likely weighs on asset prices.
Uncertainty
Trade policy uncertainty 
reduces business and 
consumer confidence
↓
↓
Heightened uncertainty will likely cause 
New Zealand businesses to defer or cancel 
investment plans and cause households to spend 
less.
Note: ↓↑ indicates that opposing forces create ambiguity about the direction of the net effect.
14 
In the case of import prices there will be offsetting channels to New Zealand growth. Substitution away from domestic production towards 
cheaper imports may reduce growth. But cheaper imports may also boost supply, increasing growth.


42
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Weaker US demand for imports 
will reduce prices in global 
markets
US consumers and businesses will 
pay higher prices for imported goods 
and therefore reduce how much they 
import. This will have a direct effect on 
New Zealand‑US trade. Prior to tariffs, 
New Zealand’s goods exports to the US 
were worth about NZD 9 billion annually, 
around 9 percent of our total export value. 
New Zealand’s exports particularly exposed 
to US tariffs include wine, meat, and some 
manufactured goods. 
Weaker US imports from other countries 
will also influence global markets for 
New Zealand’s exports and imports. All else 
equal, weaker US demand will mean lower 
global prices for products the US typically 
imports. New Zealand exporters selling these 
products may receive lower prices in global 
markets, while New Zealand importers may 
be able to buy products more cheaply. 
US goods imports accounted for about 
14 percent of total global goods imports 
prior to tariff changes. However, when 
accounting for the particular mix of goods 
New Zealand sells overseas, the US share 
of global import demand in New Zealand’s 
goods export markets is only 10 percent on 
average.15 This suggests that New Zealand’s 
export markets are relatively less prone 
to price reductions because of US tariffs 
compared to other countries. In part, 
this is because the US does not import 
significant amounts of dairy products, one 
of New Zealand’s major exports. Some 
other countries’ export products are more 
dependent on US import demand. For 
example, the US share of global import 
demand for the goods Ireland exports is 
19 percent on average.
15	
Based on 2023 data from the UN Comtrade Database. The 2023 Comtrade database does not include data from all countries, with some 
excluded due to reporting gaps or geopolitical factors.
The US accounted for around 16 percent 
of global imports in New Zealand’s 
goods import markets. This suggests 
New Zealand’s imports are comparatively 
more exposed to price falls in global markets 
because of weaker US demand for imports. 
US tariffs may help lift New Zealand’s terms 
of trade. However, it is difficult to assess 
the full magnitude of this effect as direct 
exposures may not fully represent the final 
effects as trade patterns adapt. 
Weaker global growth will reduce 
demand in New Zealand’s export 
and import markets
Reduced US demand for imports globally 
will reduce growth in New Zealand’s trading 
partner economies. Higher uncertainty 
about future trade policies will also weigh 
on growth in New Zealand’s trading partners 
through the same channels as discussed in 
chapter 4.1. This will flow through to weaker 
demand for New Zealand’s exports, and 
lower than otherwise import prices. 


43
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Trade diversion may affect 
New Zealand’s exports and 
imports, but the net effect is 
uncertain
The New Zealand economy might also be 
impacted through trade diversion. Trade 
diversion can change trade patterns, and 
occurs when importers and exporters face 
different tariff rates across countries. For 
example, US tariffs on Chinese products 
encourage Chinese exporters to sell 
manufactured goods in markets other than 
the US. Similarly, tariffs on the US incentivise 
Chinese beef importers to buy beef from 
countries other than the US, such as 
New Zealand. In isolation, this would benefit 
New Zealand through cheaper manufactured 
goods and increased demand for beef. 
But, US importers will also compete more 
for manufactured goods in markets other 
than China’s that are subject to lower tariffs 
(e.g. Vietnam). US exporters will compete 
more with New Zealand to sell beef in other 
markets (e.g. Japan). 
Trade diversion could affect prices 
in New Zealand’s import and export 
markets. In the above example, prices for 
manufactured goods might go up in the 
Vietnamese market and down in the Chinese 
market. Beef prices might go up in China but 
down in Japan. 
Trade flows would adjust and there would 
be little net impact on prices if there were 
no frictions in global markets. However, 
there are material frictions to global 
trade. Transport costs differ across trade 
routes; products and brands from different 
countries are not perfectly substitutable; 
and differences in languages and customs 
can make new trade relationships difficult to 
establish.
For New Zealand, the net impact of trade 
diversion depends on price changes in 
our key import and export markets, and 
how export and import volumes adjust 
in response. Our assessment is that trade 
diversion is likely to lower import prices 
and increase export prices. We also expect 
changes in where New Zealand sends its 
exports and sources its imports. However, 
how material these factors are for prices and 
volumes remains uncertain. 
Global production costs may 
increase, although the impact may 
be limited for New Zealand
Tariffs increase the cost of imported 
intermediate inputs required to produce 
output in the tariff-imposing country. In 
response, firms in the tariff-imposing country 
may adjust their production processes to 
reduce their use of tariffed inputs. These 
adjustments may be preferable to paying the 
tariff, but will reduce efficiency and increase 
production costs. Production costs will be 
higher, particularly for US producers.
Higher production costs and less efficient 
global production networks could spill over 
into other countries. Firms producing for the 
US market may shift production to countries 
where production is less efficient but subject 
to lower tariffs. However, ‘global production 
costs’ are not one thing that is experienced 
in the same way by all countries. Production 
costs for products destined for New Zealand, 
for example from Asia, don’t have to rise 
significantly, even if average production costs 
for US-destined products rise strongly. Where 
markets are competitive, New Zealand 
buyers and those who supply them will 
continue to have strong incentives to secure 
and produce goods where it is cheapest. 
There are other factors that may add to 
higher production costs in the long term, 
such as lower capital investment resulting 
in lower potential growth, and adjustments 
in shipping routes due to changing trade 
patterns. 
Our assessment is that the increase 
in global production costs faced by 
New Zealand due to tariffs will be limited. 
This reflects that production inputs subject 
to tariffs abroad represent only a small part 
of the value of New Zealand production 
and spending, and that the supply of goods 
from elsewhere to New Zealand may not be 
materially affected. 


44
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Our central projection assumes 
that US tariffs will reduce growth 
and inflationary pressure in the 
New Zealand economy
We assume that, on net, higher US tariffs 
act like a negative demand shock for 
New Zealand, reducing economic activity 
and inflationary pressure. Our current 
assessment is that tariffs will likely reduce 
demand for New Zealand’s exports. Weaker 
export demand and the direct effect of high 
uncertainty weigh on domestic demand, 
and reduce overall inflationary pressure in 
New Zealand. Table 4.5 summarises the 
assessed effect of the transmission channels 
on prices in New Zealand.
We assume that different channels that affect 
the cost of New Zealand’s imports – acting 
like a supply shock – net out to have only 
small overall effects. The channels that may 
affect our import prices are more mixed. Some 
channels are likely to increase prices, while 
others could see them fall. It is difficult at this 
stage to assess which of these channels will 
be more important.
Our assessment is that higher global 
tariffs and uncertainty will result in weaker 
economic activity in New Zealand, lower 
imported inflation, and reduced inflationary 
pressure. We used a range of models and 
external estimates to inform the direction and 
magnitude of these judgements. We assume 
that the most important transmission channels 
affecting the New Zealand economy are 
higher uncertainty and lower external demand 
due to lower trading-partner GDP. However, 
there are a range of other channels that may 
result in different outcomes than we anticipate, 
including trade diversion effects, the potential 
for higher global production costs, and 
exchange rate movements. For example, some 
trade models predict that the New Zealand 
dollar should depreciate as a result of the 
tariff increases, but the New Zealand dollar 
has appreciated in recent months, reducing 
inflationary pressure.
Tariff settings and how those settings 
transmit through each channel remain highly 
uncertain. The central projection in chapter 5 
reflects our assumptions about these different 
channels. Possible scenarios include a larger 
reduction, no reduction at all, or an increase 
in inflationary pressure. Box A in chapter 2 
presents alternative scenarios and how they 
may affect New Zealand.
Table 4.5
Assessed effect of tariffs on demand and supply in the New Zealand economy
Demand
Supply
Channels increasing inflationary pressure
Trade diversion may increase prices for NZ exporters (+)
Channels increasing inflationary pressure
Supply chain disruption increases inefficiencies (+)
Higher input costs for tariff-imposing economies (+)
Channels reducing inflationary pressure
High global uncertainty reduces domestic demand (---)
Lower world GDP reduces export demand (---)
Higher US tariffs reduce US import demand for products 
we export (-)
A higher TWI makes NZ exports more expensive and less 
competitive (--)
Channels reducing inflationary pressure
Lower trading-partner GDP reduces NZ’s import prices (--)
Trade diversion decreases prices for NZ imports (-)
Higher US tariffs reduce US import demand for products 
we import (-)
A higher TWI makes NZ imports cheaper (--)
Note:   + small inflationary impact   ++ medium inflationary impact   +++ large inflationary impact   
	
- small disinflationary impact   -- medium disinflationary impact   --- large disinflationary impact


45
Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Chapter 
05
Economic 
projections
Marlborough Sounds. Photo: Ben Harris


46
Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Chapter 5.
Economic projections
This chapter summarises the central economic projections 
that MPC considered when making its policy assessment. The 
projections were finalised on 22 May 2025.
Significant spare capacity has emerged in 
the New Zealand economy over the past 
year. This has reduced inflation, which is 
within the target band. Lower interest rates 
have begun to support economic growth, 
although timely indicators of activity suggest 
that GDP growth is lower than expected.
The central projection assumes US tariff 
policies as of 22 May. US trade policy is 
unpredictable, and its effects on the world 
economy are uncertain. Two alternative 
scenarios are outlined in chapter 2, box A.
We assume lower growth in our trading 
partners weighs on export demand 
(see chapter 4.2). We also assume higher 
global economic uncertainty causes 
weaker‑than‑otherwise business investment 
and household consumption in New Zealand 
(see chapter 4.1).
Although the global growth outlook has 
deteriorated, recent New Zealand export 
demand has been stronger than expected. 
All else equal, higher export prices since the 
February Statement are assumed to add to 
inflationary pressure. However, this is partially 
offset by a higher New Zealand dollar 
exchange rate.
Headline inflation is projected to increase 
but stay within the target band in 2025, 
before returning near the target mid-point 
in early 2026. The increase in headline 
inflation is accounted for by tradables 
components, including food prices. 
Non‑tradables inflation has continued 
to decrease, and is approaching a level 
consistent with headline inflation near the 
2 percent target mid-point.
The New Zealand labour market has 
continued to weaken. The unemployment 
rate remained at 5.1 percent in the March 
2025 quarter, while the employment rate and 
participation rate decreased. We project the 
unemployment rate to increase in the near 
term, before decreasing over the medium 
term as the output gap recovers. Same‑job 
wage growth has decreased to a level 
consistent with headline inflation near the 
target mid‑point.
We project the OCR will continue to 
be reduced. The negative output gap is 
putting downward pressure on inflation. 
This is offsetting price‑setting behaviour, 
which is still elevated following the recent 
period of higher inflation. We assume that 
price‑setting behaviour continues to adapt to 
a low‑inflation environment over the medium 
term.
The central projection represents what 
we judge to be the most likely path for 
the economy, conditional on a range 
of assumptions. However, it is one of 
many possible paths. Global economic 
developments and the evolution of the 
domestic economy are likely to be different 
to our central assumptions. As events 
develop, our central assumptions will 
change, and we will update the outlook for 
monetary policy.


47
Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Table 5.1 
Key projection assumptions
Key assumptions
Global factors
•	 The central projection assumes US tariff policies as of 22 May 2025.
•	 We assume tariff policies reduce growth in New Zealand’s trading partners by about 
0.5 percentage points over the next year. This is expected to dampen demand for 
New Zealand’s exports, all else equal. We used a range of models and external 
estimates to inform the direction and magnitude of this judgement.
•	 Prices for New Zealand’s key commodities have increased substantially over the 
past 6 months, in part due to low global supply for beef and dairy. This means our 
outlook for export prices is higher than at the February Statement, despite the 
weaker outlook for global growth. 
•	 World policy interest rates are expected to decrease more quickly than at the 
February Statement. All else equal, this puts upward pressure on the New Zealand 
dollar and decreases tradables inflation in New Zealand.
•	 The New Zealand dollar trade-weighted index (TWI) has appreciated about 
2 percent since the February Statement and is assumed to remain at 69.0 over 
the projection.
Economic 
uncertainty
•	 Measures of economic uncertainty have increased substantially since the February 
Statement. Policy uncertainty associated with global trade developments is 
assumed to have material negative effects on business investment and household 
consumption in New Zealand, over and above the usual effect of weaker global 
growth.
•	 We assume that the global uncertainty shock observed in the past few months has 
an impulse of about -0.3 percentage points on the output gap by the June 2026 
quarter, with the effect waning thereafter (see chapter 4.1).
Domestic 
capacity 
pressures
•	 The output gap is assumed to remain low for the remainder of 2025 (-1.6 percent of 
potential GDP in the September 2025 quarter). We assume that recent weakness 
in some components of GDP, such as consumption and residential investment, 
persists. Weaker global growth and higher uncertainty also contribute to a wider 
output gap.
•	 The output gap is assumed to start recovering in the December 2025 quarter, 
in response to declining interest rates and the subsiding negative influence of 
uncertainty (figure 6.2).
Economic growth
Production
•	 We assume that GDP growth was 0.4 percent in the March 2025 quarter, and 
declines to 0.3 percent in the June 2025 quarter. The recovery in economic activity 
in 2025 is forecast to be slower than in the February Statement, partly due to the 
weaker global economy and high uncertainty.
•	 Our forecasts for near-term GDP growth account for possible residual seasonality 
in the headline production measure. Although the headline measure is seasonally 
adjusted, it currently appears to have a remaining predictable seasonal pattern. This 
likely reflects challenges with seasonal adjustment following the COVID-19 period 
and shifts in the industry composition of the economy into industries with strong 
seasonality. Reported quarterly GDP growth may be overstated in December and 
March quarters and understated in June and September quarters. 
•	 GDP is expected to increase more quickly than potential GDP from 2026 onwards, 
supported by lower interest rates, waning uncertainty, and recovering international 
demand. Growth is assumed to be broadly in line with potential over the medium term.


48
Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Economic growth (continued)
Consumption
•	 Consumption growth has been below its trend over the past couple of years. We 
assume subdued consumption growth has continued in the first half of 2025, largely 
due to its persistence and response to heightened uncertainty. Over the medium 
term, consumption grows faster than previously assumed as lower interest rates 
encourage household spending.
Business 
investment
•	 Business investment has declined by less than previously assumed over the last 
2 years. Business investment increased unexpectedly at the end of 2024.
•	 We assume business investment will remain subdued in the near term due to the 
negative output gap and elevated uncertainty.
•	 Business investment is expected to recover over the medium term as the effect of 
uncertainty is assumed to fade and the output gap closes.
•	 We assume the Investment Boost policy causes business investment to be 
about 2.5 percent higher over the projection. This estimate is calibrated based 
on Treasury’s estimate of a 0.8 percent increase in the capital stock over a 
5-year period.
Residential 
investment
•	 Residential investment has continued to fall over the past year. Timely indicators 
including dwelling consents and ready-mixed concrete have shown early signs 
of recovery in the March 2025 quarter. House sales have been increasing since 
early 2023.
•	 We assume residential investment will begin to increase in late 2025 in response 
to lower mortgage rates and increasing house prices.
Government
•	 Government spending is assumed to be consistent with the fiscal forecasts in 
Budget 2025.
•	 Government investment is lower in the near term than assumed in the February 
Statement, given the lower starting point in the December 2024 GDP release. 
But it is higher in the medium term due to revisions in planned capital spending 
in Budget 2025. 
•	 Government consumption is lower over the projection than assumed in the February 
Statement, consistent with the downward revision in Budget 2025.
•	 On net, lower government spending reduces inflationary pressure. 
Exports and 
imports
•	 Export volumes were significantly stronger than expected in the December 2024 
quarter, accounted for by both goods and services exports. This strength appears to 
have continued in the March 2025 quarter. Higher goods export volumes have been 
broad-based across trade partners and goods categories. Over the medium term, 
we assume this strength does not persist to permanently higher export volumes 
(see chapter 4.2 of the May 2024 Statement). 
•	 Goods and services export volumes are assumed to return to a similar share of 
potential GDP as assumed in the February Statement. This accounts for lower global 
growth, the appreciation of the New Zealand dollar, and higher export prices in 
foreign currency terms.
•	 Services exports are assumed to decline in the near term and grow slightly more 
quickly than potential GDP over the medium term. Lower global growth and the 
higher New Zealand dollar exchange rate weigh on tourism exports relative to the 
February Statement.
•	 Import volumes were stronger than expected in the December 2024 quarter, 
consistent with higher business investment in that quarter. Import volumes are 
assumed to evolve in line with other components of GDP over the medium term.


49
Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Labour market
Employment 
and wages 
•	 Conditions in the New Zealand labour market continued to ease in the March 
2025 quarter. Although the unemployment rate was unchanged at 5.1 percent, the 
employment rate and labour force participation rate fell in the quarter.
•	 We assume the unemployment rate will reach its peak at 5.2 percent in the June 
2025 quarter and remain at this level until the September 2025 quarter, before 
gradually declining. Greater excess capacity relative to the February Statement 
leads to a slightly higher unemployment rate over the medium term.
•	 Same-job wage growth decreased to 2.6 percent in the March 2025 quarter. It is 
assumed to ease due to current weak labour market conditions, consistent with low 
and stable inflation.
Migration
•	 Net immigration increased in the March 2025 quarter and was higher than we 
assumed in the February Statement. As a result, we assume New Zealand has 
passed the trough of this immigration cycle. 
•	 We assume working-age net immigration will decrease slightly until the end of 2025. 
This reflects weak labour market conditions in New Zealand, especially relative to 
Australia. As the labour market recovers, net working-age immigration is assumed to 
gradually increase towards about 32,000 people per year.
Inflation
Headline 
inflation
•	 Annual headline CPI inflation increased to 2.5 percent in the March 2025 quarter. 
Stats NZ announced on 1 May that increases in vehicle relicensing fees were 
erroneously excluded in the March 2025 quarter data. If these data had been 
included, annual headline inflation would have been 2.6 percent. The price increase 
will instead be recorded in the June 2025 quarter, and our forecast accounts for this.
•	 Annual headline inflation is expected to increase to 2.7 percent in the September 
2025 quarter before declining to near the target mid-point in the March 2026 
quarter.
Non-tradables
•	 Annual non-tradables inflation decreased to 4.0 percent in the March 2025 quarter, 
but was higher than expected in the February Statement. We expect the negative 
output gap to continue to reduce non-tradables inflation as price-setting behaviour 
continues to adapt to a low-inflation environment. We project annual non-tradables 
inflation to stabilise around 3 percent from early 2026.
•	 Administered and policy-affected price changes are having a significant influence 
on non-tradables inflation, and this is likely to continue over 2025. These include 
prices such as council rates, electricity lines charges, education fees, and vehicle 
relicensing fees. In part, this reflects catch-up following relatively low increases 
in central and local government charges during the recent high inflation period. 
Central and local government charges, as measured in the Consumers Price Index, 
increased 10.7 percent in the year to March 2025. Annual non-tradables inflation 
excluding government charges was 3.0 percent in the March 2025 quarter.
Tradables
•	 Annual tradables inflation is expected to increase to 1.4 percent in annual terms in 
the September 2025 quarter before gradually decreasing. In the near term, higher 
food prices are likely to outweigh lower prices in other tradables items, such as 
petrol. 
•	 In the medium term, lower petrol prices and a stronger New Zealand dollar exchange 
rate are expected to put downward pressure on tradables inflation. Oil prices have 
declined about 10 percent since the February Statement. Weaker economic growth in 
our trading partners also results in slightly lower non-oil import prices.


50
Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Figure 5.3
Unemployment rate
(unemployed people as a share of the labour force,
seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Charts
Figure 5.1
Inflation components
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Dotted lines show the projections from the February Statement. The 
shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI 
inflation over the medium term.
Figure 5.2
Private sector LCI wage inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 5.4
House price growth
(annual)
Source: CoreLogic, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 5.5
Production GDP
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 5.6
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


51
Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
 Chapter 
06
Appendices
Māhia. Photo: Matthew Brunton


Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Chapter 6.
Appendices
Appendix 1: Statistical tables
Table 6.1
Key forecast variables
GDP growth 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Annual
Unemployment 
rate
TWI
OCR
2023
Mar
-0.1
1.2
6.7
3.4
71.3
4.5
Jun
0.8
1.1
6.0
3.6
71.0
5.3
Sep
0.0
1.8
5.6
3.9
70.6
5.5
Dec
0.2
0.5
4.7
4.0
70.8
5.5
2024
Mar
0.4
0.6
4.0
4.4
71.6
5.5
Jun
-1.1
0.4
3.3
4.6
71.4
5.5
Sep
-1.1
0.6
2.2
4.8
70.9
5.4
Dec
0.6
0.5
2.2
5.1
69.5
4.6
2025
Mar
0.4
0.9
2.5
5.1
67.8
4.0
Jun
0.3
0.5
2.6
5.2
69.0
3.4
Sep
0.2
0.8
2.7
5.2
69.0
3.1
Dec
0.9
0.2
2.4
5.1
69.0
2.9
2026
Mar
0.8
0.5
1.9
5.0
69.0
2.9
Jun
0.7
0.5
1.9
4.9
69.0
2.9
Sep
0.7
0.9
2.1
4.8
69.0
2.9
Dec
0.7
0.3
2.1
4.7
69.0
2.9
2027
Mar
0.7
0.5
2.2
4.6
69.0
3.0
Jun
0.8
0.4
2.1
4.5
69.0
3.0
Sep
0.7
0.9
2.1
4.4
69.0
3.1
Dec
0.7
0.2
2.0
4.4
69.0
3.1
2028
Mar
0.6
0.5
2.0
4.3
69.0
3.1
Jun
0.6
0.4
2.0
4.3
69.0
3.1


53
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Table 6.2
Measures of inflation and inflation expectations
2023
2024
2025
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Inflation (annual rates)
CPI
5.6
4.7
4.0
3.3
2.2
2.2
2.5
CPI non-tradables
6.3
5.9
5.8
5.4
4.9
4.5
4.0
CPI tradables
4.7
3.0
1.6
0.3
-1.6
-1.1
0.3
Sectoral factor model
estimate of core inflation
5.3
4.6
4.1
3.5
3.3
3.0
2.9
CPI trimmed mean (30% measure)
5.5
5.0
4.5
3.8
2.7
2.5
2.2
CPI weighted median
5.0
4.4
4.4
3.5
2.8
2.6
2.2
GDP deflator (expenditure)
6.4
3.5
3.8
3.0
2.9
4.7
Inflation expectations 
– Survey of Expectations
(Tara-ā-Pūkenga)
1 year ahead
4.2
3.6
3.2
2.7
2.4
2.0
2.1
2.4
2 years ahead
2.8
2.8
2.5
2.3
2.0
2.1
2.1
2.3
5 years ahead
2.3
2.4
2.3
2.3
2.1
2.2
2.1
2.2
10 years ahead
2.2
2.3
2.2
2.2
2.0
2.2
2.1
2.2
Inflation expectations – RBNZ 
Business Expectations Survey 
(Tara-ā-Umanga)
1 year ahead
2.2
2.1
2.3
2.4
2 years ahead
2.2
2.2
2.5
2.5
5 years ahead
2.8
2.8
3.0
3.1
10 years ahead
3.1
3.3
3.7
3.9
Inflation expectations – RBNZ 
Household Expectations Survey 
(Tara-ā-Whare)
1 year ahead
6.0
5.5
5.1
5.3
4.1
4.1
4.9
5.6
2 years ahead
3.3
3.2
3.6
3.6
3.1
3.7
3.9
4.7
5 years ahead
1.8
2.1
3.6
3.0
3.4
3.4
3.6
3.7


54
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Table 6.3
Measures of labour market conditions	
(seasonally adjusted, changes expressed in annual percent terms, unless specified otherwise)	
2023
2024
2025
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Household Labour Force Survey
Unemployment rate
3.9
4.0
4.4
4.6
4.8
5.1
5.1
Underutilisation rate
10.4
10.7
11.2
11.8
11.6
12.1
12.3
Labour force participation rate
72.0
71.9
71.5
71.6
71.1
70.9
70.8
Employment rate 
(% of working-age population)
69.2
69.0
68.4
68.3
67.7
67.3
67.2
Employment growth
3.0
2.8
1.0
0.1
-0.6
-1.2
-0.7
Average weekly hours worked
33.5
33.7
33.8
33.2
33.3
33.2
33.0
Number unemployed
(thousand people)
119
123
134
143
148
156
156
Number employed 
(million people)
2.94
2.95
2.93
2.94
2.92
2.91
2.91
Labour force (million people)
3.06
3.07
3.07
3.08
3.07
3.07
3.07
Extended labour force
(million people)
3.15
3.16
3.17
3.18
3.16
3.17
3.18
Working-age population
(million people, age 15+ years)
4.24
4.27
4.29
4.30
4.31
4.33
4.34
Quarterly Employment Survey — QES
Filled jobs growth
6.1
4.2
3.6
-0.2
-1.4
-0.9
-1.8
Average hourly earnings growth 
(private sector, ordinary time)
7.1
6.6
4.9
4.0
3.2
4.0
3.8
Other data sources
Labour Cost Index growth, adjusted 
(private sector, ordinary and overtime)
4.1
3.9
3.8
3.6
3.3
3.0
2.6
Labour Cost Index growth, unadjusted
(private sector, ordinary time)
5.7
5.7
5.2
4.8
4.5
3.9
3.7
Estimated net working-age 
immigration (thousands, quarterly)
23.9
13.4
8.0
5.3
1.3
3.5
7.8
Change in All Vacancies Index* 
-27.9
-27.6
-27.3
-33.4
-31.4
-27.2
-21.7
Note: The All Vacancies Index is produced by MBIE as part of the monthly Jobs Online report, which shows changes in job vacancies advertised 
by businesses on internet job boards. The unadjusted labour cost index (LCI) is an analytical index that reflects quality change in addition to price 
change (whereas the official LCI measures price changes only). For definitions of underutilisation, the extended labour force, and related concepts, 
see Statistics New Zealand (2016), ʻIntroducing underutilisation in the labour marketʼ. 
* The All Vacancies Index is a non-seasonally adjusted series.


55
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Table 6.4
Composition of real GDP growth
(annual average percent change, seasonally adjusted, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
Final consumption expenditure
Private
4.8
4.5
2.4
0.2
6.4
3.3
1.0
0.1
1.8
2.8
2.7
Public authority
3.8
3.3
5.5
7.0
8.0
2.6
2.0
-0.9
-0.8
-0.1
0.5
Total
4.6
4.3
3.1
1.8
6.8
3.2
1.3
-0.2
1.1
2.1
2.2
Gross fixed capital formation
Residential
-1.8
-0.1
2.7
2.2
2.6
-2.0
-5.5
-11.7
-1.7
12.5
11.5
Other
9.8
7.0
2.8
-2.3
11.3
5.0
0.2
-3.3
-0.9
6.6
5.6
Total
6.6
5.2
2.8
-1.2
9.1
3.3
-1.1
-5.1
-1.0
7.8
6.8
Final domestic 
expenditure
5.0
4.5
3.0
1.1
7.3
3.2
0.7
-1.3
0.7
3.4
3.3
Changes in 
inventories*
0.2
-0.2
-0.2
-0.3
0.6
0.3
-1.6
0.3
0.8
0.0
0.0
Gross national 
expenditure
5.5
4.3
2.7
-0.1
8.5
3.7
-0.8
-0.8
1.2
3.4
3.3
Exports of goods 
and services
3.8
3.3
0.2
-17.9
2.5
5.6
8.3
3.9
3.2
1.3
2.2
Imports of goods 
and services
7.8
4.8
1.4
-15.8
17.1
4.5
-1.2
2.3
1.5
3.7
3.9
Expenditure on GDP
4.3
3.9
2.4
0.2
4.6
3.9
1.4
-0.6
1.6
2.8
2.8
GDP (production)
3.4
3.5
2.3
-0.3
4.6
3.5
1.4
-1.1
1.5
2.8
2.9
GDP (production, 
March qtr to March qtr)
3.5
3.5
0.7
4.7
0.5
3.0
1.4
-1.1
2.2
2.8
2.8
* Percentage point contribution to the growth rate of GDP.


56
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Table 6.5
Summary of economic projections
(annual percent change, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
Price measures
CPI 
1.1
1.5
2.5
1.5
6.9
6.7
4.0
2.5
1.9
2.2
2.0
Labour costs
1.9
2.0
2.4
1.6
3.1
4.5
3.8
2.6
2.0
2.2
2.2
Export prices
(in New Zealand dollars) 
3.4
1.3
7.0
-5.9
21.0
1.2
-2.1
10.1
0.4
0.1
1.3
Import prices
(in New Zealand dollars) 
1.7
4.1
2.5
-2.3
19.0
8.2
-3.7
2.8
-3.4
0.5
1.1
Monetary conditions
OCR (year average)
1.8
1.8
1.2
0.3
0.5
3.1
5.5
4.9
3.1
2.9
3.1
TWI (year average)
75.6
73.4
71.7
72.4
74.0
71.2
71.0
69.9
69.0
69.0
69.0
Output
GDP (production, annual 
average % change)
3.4
3.5
2.3
-0.3
4.6
3.5
1.4
-1.1
1.5
2.8
2.9
Potential output (annual 
average % change)
3.2
3.1
2.6
0.0
2.0
3.4
2.7
1.7
1.6
2.1
2.4
Output gap (% of potential 
GDP, year average)
0.4
0.8
0.5
0.1
2.7
2.9
1.6
-1.1
-1.2
-0.5
0.0
Labour market
Total employment (seasonally 
adjusted)
2.9
1.5
2.6
0.2
2.5
3.1
1.0
-0.7
1.8
2.4
2.1
Unemployment rate (March qtr, 
seasonally adjusted)
4.4
4.2
4.2
4.6
3.2
3.4
4.4
5.1
5.0
4.6
4.3
Trend labour productivity 
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.2
0.2
0.3
0.4
Key balances
Current account balance 
(% of GDP)
-3.1
-3.9
-2.4
-2.6
-6.7
-8.6
-6.6
-5.3
-2.3
-2.7
-3.2
Terms of trade
(SNA measure, annual 
average % change)
4.5
-2.1
2.0
-1.0
0.4
-5.1
-1.3
4.2
7.4
0.0
-0.1
Household saving rate 
(% of disposable income)
-2.0
-1.3
1.4
7.6
2.4
-3.0
-1.8
-1.5
-0.6
-1.2
-1.9
World economy
Trading-partner GDP 
(annual average % change)
4.0
3.5
1.8
-0.4
6.3
3.0
3.2
2.9
2.1
2.9
2.9
Trading-partner CPI 
(TWI-weighted)
1.9
1.4
2.4
0.8
4.1
4.8
2.2
1.8
2.3
1.9
2.1
 


57
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Appendix 2: Chart pack
Figure 6.1
Composition of CPI inflation
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 6.2
Output gap and output gap indicators
(share of potential)
Source: NZIER, MBIE, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The output gap indicators based on information from labour market surveys 
are shown separately from the other indicators. For each group of indicators, the 
shaded area shows the range of values and the line shows the mean value. The 
output gap estimate in the final quarter is based on our near-term GDP estimate.
Figure 6.3
Unemployment and underutilisation rates
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 6.4
OCR and nominal neutral OCR indicator suite
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area indicates the range between the maximum and minimum 
values from our suite of long-run nominal neutral OCR indicators. See Castaing et 
al. (2024), ‘Estimates of New Zealand’s nominal neutral interest rate’, Bulletin, 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand.
Figure 6.5
GDP and potential GDP
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.6
Measures of core inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Core inflation measures exclude the GST increase in 2010. The shaded 
area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI inflation 
over the medium term.


58
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
Figure 6.7
Inflation expectations
(annual, years ahead) 
Source: RBNZ Survey of Expectations.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for 
annual CPI inflation over the medium term.
Figure 6.9
House price inflation
(annual) 
Source: REINZ.
Source: Stats NZ, Global Dairy Trade, Bloomberg, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.12
Terms of trade, dairy, and oil price indices
(index = 100 in the September 2008 quarter, quarterly average)
Figure 6.10
Mortgage interest rates
Source: interest.co.nz, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The rates shown for the fixed terms are the average of the advertised 
rates from ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac, shown as weekly data. The floating 
rate represents the monthly yield on floating housing debt from the RBNZ 
Income Statement survey.
Figure 6.8
Private sector wage growth
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 6.11
New Zealand dollar exchange rates
(monthly average) 
Source: NZFMA, RBNZ.


59
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2025
