BANK: RBNZ
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: Monetary Policy Statement August 2025
DATE: 19/08/2025
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/monetary-policy-statements/2025/aug-20825/mps-report-aug-2025.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Monetary Policy
Statement. 
August 2025
B.33


ii
Policy assessment. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Policy assessment.
OCR lowered to 3%
The Monetary Policy Committee today voted to lower 
the OCR by 25 basis points to 3 percent. 
Annual consumers price index inflation is 
currently around the top of the Monetary Policy 
Committee’s 1 to 3 percent target band. However, 
with spare capacity in the economy and declining 
domestic inflation pressure, headline inflation is 
expected to return to around the 2 percent target 
mid-point by mid-2026. 
New Zealand’s economic recovery stalled 
in the second quarter of this year. Spending 
by households and businesses has been 
constrained by global economic policy 
uncertainty, falling employment, higher prices for 
some essentials, and declining house prices. 
There are upside and downside risks to the 
economic outlook. Cautious behaviour by 
households and businesses could further 
dampen economic growth. Alternatively, the 
economic recovery could accelerate as the full 
effects of interest rate reductions flow through 
the economy. 
The Monetary Policy Committee today voted to 
decrease the Official Cash Rate (OCR) by 25 basis 
points to 3 percent. Further data on the speed of 
New Zealand’s economic recovery will influence 
the future path of the OCR. If medium‑term inflation 
pressures continue to ease as expected, there is 
scope to lower the OCR further. 
Christian Hawkesby 
Governor 
Figure i.1
Official Cash Rate (OCR)
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


iii
Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Report and supporting notes published at:
www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary‑policy/monetary‑policy‑statement
Subscribe online: www.rbnz.govt.nz/email‑updates
Copyright © 2025 Reserve Bank of New Zealand
This report is published pursuant to section 129
of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 2021. 
ISSN 1770‑4829
Thank you to RBNZ staff for photography in this report. 
Cover: Ururangi, Slope Point. Photo: Paul Conway
Monetary Policy Framework
The Monetary Policy Committee operates and makes 
decisions under the Monetary Policy Framework that 
comprises the following key components:
•	 the Remit;
•	 the Charter;
•	 the Code of Conduct; and
•	 the monetary policy strategy.
The corresponding documents to these components 
and additional information can be accessed on our 
website under the Monetary Policy Framework.


1
Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
The projections were finalised on 14 August 2025. The Official Cash Rate (OCR) projection 
incorporates an outlook for monetary policy that is consistent with the MPC’s monetary 
policy assessment, which was finalised on 20 August 2025. 
Contents
Policy assessment	
ii
1.	
Summary record of meeting	
2
2.	 Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook	
6
	
Box A: Summary of recent business visits	
9
	
Box B: The effect of higher global tariffs on the New Zealand economy	
14
3.	 Global economy and financial markets	
22
4.	 Special topics	
31
	
4.1	 	Household sector developments and outlook	
33
	
4.2		Assessing developments in inflation expectations	
37
5.	 Economic projections	
41
6.	 Appendices	
48
	
Appendix 1: Statistical tables 	
49
	
Appendix 2: Chart pack 	
54
Monetary Policy Statement.
August 2025


Governors Bay. Photo: Cameron Grubb
Summary 
record of 
meeting
Chapter 
01


3
Chapter 1. Summary record of meeting. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Chapter 1. 
Summary record of meeting
Annual consumers price index inflation remains within the Monetary 
Policy Committee’s 1 to 3 percent target band. Recent increases in food 
prices and administered prices have contributed to near-term inflationary 
pressure. However, domestic activity has been subdued and there remains 
significant spare productive capacity in the economy. Headline inflation is 
expected to return to around the 2 percent target mid-point by mid-2026. 
If medium‑term inflation pressures continue to ease as expected, there is 
scope to lower the OCR further.
Annual CPI inflation remains within 
the target band 
Annual consumers price index (CPI) inflation increased to 
2.7 percent in the June 2025 quarter. Headline inflation is 
expected to reach to 3.0 percent in the September 2025 
quarter, reflecting large increases in administered prices, 
food prices, and the prices of other tradable goods and 
services.
Surveyed measures of medium-term inflation expectations 
remain near 2 percent, consistent with the mid-point of 
the target band. Non-tradables inflation has continued 
to decline in aggregate. Measures of core inflation have 
declined and are within the target band. Headline inflation 
is expected to converge to the mid-point of the target 
range over the next year as tradables inflation pressures 
dissipate and significant spare capacity continues to 
reduce domestic price pressures. 
Near-term inflation expectations have increased, particularly 
for households. Household inflation expectations have risen 
across several advanced economies and may be influenced 
by global factors such as increased trade restrictions, as well 
as relatively large increases in some prices such as those for 
food and energy. 
Tariffs and economic policy uncertainty 
are dampening the global economic 
outlook
Evidence to date suggests that the global economy is 
responding broadly as expected to trade restrictions and 
policy uncertainty. Growth in some of our trading partners, 
particularly China, was higher than expected in the second 
quarter of 2025 but is expected to moderate in the coming 
quarters. Headline inflation has increased moderately in 
some advanced economies but is declining in most of our 
Asian trading partners.
Tariffs are causing changes to global trading patterns but 
have so far had a limited effect on aggregate global trade 
volumes. To date, there is no evidence of major disruption 
to global supply chains, or a material impact on the prices 
of New Zealand’s imports or exports. The Committee noted 
that it continues to expect that the increase in global trade 
restrictions will result in less inflationary pressure in the 
New Zealand economy.
The effective tariff rate on New Zealand exports to the 
United States is higher than anticipated at the time of the 
May Statement. Some firms and industries may experience 
more challenging export conditions as a result. The 
medium-term implications for New Zealand will depend 
on how global demand responds to increased trade 
restrictions and economic policy uncertainty.  
Economic growth in New Zealand is 
expected to recover gradually
High-frequency indicators suggest that the New Zealand 
economy contracted in the second quarter of 2025 
and was weaker than expected at the time of the May 
Statement. Growth is expected to resume in the September 
quarter, consistent with a recovery in some economic 
indicators for July. A key judgement for the Committee’s 
economic assessment was the extent to which spare 
capacity in the New Zealand economy is likely to persist. 
The Committee discussed constraints on household wealth 
and discretionary income. Employment and hours worked 
have declined, and wage inflation has slowed sharply over 
the last year. Household dissaving since the start of 2022 
has reduced savings buffers. At the same time, inflation in 
some essential expenditure components such as food, gas, 
electricity, and council rates has been much higher than the 
general rate of inflation. These factors were noted as likely 
to contribute to a slower recovery in domestic spending 
than would otherwise be the case. 


4
Chapter 1. Summary record of meeting. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
House prices have declined to a level within the Reserve 
Bank’s range of sustainable house price estimates. 
Housing is a key component of household wealth, which 
influences household spending. Ongoing weakness in 
the housing market is contributing to subdued residential 
construction and household consumption. 
The Committee discussed the fiscal outlook. Declining 
government spending as a share of the economy is 
expected to reduce inflationary pressure in the medium 
term. This is consistent with the economic and fiscal 
projections published in the Budget Economic and 
Fiscal Update 2025.
The Committee acknowledged regional and sectoral 
divergences in economic activity. House price growth 
has varied considerably across regions. High commodity 
export prices are supporting activity in the agricultural 
sector, resulting in stronger spending in rural areas. 
However, to date, many agricultural businesses have 
used higher export revenues to pay down debt, limiting 
the pass-through to consumption and investment.   
There is significant spare capacity 
in the New Zealand economy
A broad range of indicators suggest that significant 
spare capacity in the New Zealand economy persists. 
Unemployment has increased, as have measures of 
labour underutilisation, and firms are reporting that it is 
relatively easy to find labour. Firms are also reporting low 
levels of capacity utilisation. The Committee noted that 
while credit is generally available, growth in business 
lending has been slow. 
The Committee discussed slow growth in the productive 
capacity of New Zealand’s economy. Potential output 
growth has slowed, reflecting subdued investment, 
low productivity growth, and historically low population 
growth through net immigration. The Committee noted 
that appropriate monetary policy settings would support 
sustainable long-run investment and growth. 
Monetary policy continues to transmit 
through the financial system
The Committee noted that wholesale interest rates 
have fallen since the May Statement, resulting in 
lower mortgage and term deposit rates, particularly at 
shorter terms. The average interest rate on the stock 
of mortgages is expected to continue to decline over 
the coming year, as about half of existing mortgages 
are expected to re-fix onto lower rates over the next 
six months. This will reduce debt servicing costs for 
households as past reductions in the OCR continue to 
transmit through the financial system. 
Long-term bond yields have increased internationally 
over the first half of the year, with higher term premia 
reflecting geoeconomic uncertainty and elevated 
debt levels. Despite subdued domestic activity, the 
New Zealand dollar TWI has been relatively stable 
through this period, in part due to policy developments 
and declining short-term interest rate expectations in the 
United States. Equity prices in the United States have 
been elevated, but this has largely been attributable to 
the out-performance of a few large technology firms. 
The financial system remains stable
The Committee was briefed on financial system stability. 
Subdued demand and low profitability are contributing 
to financial stress for some businesses. Non-performing 
loans for households and businesses have increased but 
remain low relative to previous cycle peaks. Increased 
provisions and strong capital buffers mean that banks 
are well-prepared to absorb any losses. The Committee 
noted that monetary policy settings that support growth in 
the economy will also contribute to financial stability.
There are upside and downside 
risks to the economic outlook
The Committee expects headline inflation to remain 
within the target band over the forecast horizon. 
However, with inflation projected to increase to 3.0 
percent in the September quarter, there is a material 
possibility that it rises above the target band. The 
period in which this is most likely to occur is too soon 
for monetary policy to have any meaningful effect. 
However, if inflation were to remain higher for longer 
than expected, there is a risk that this influences inflation 
expectations and wage- and price-setting behaviour over 
the medium term.
The Committee noted that increases in administered 
prices, such as local council rates and some energy 
charges, have contributed to higher-than-otherwise 
non-tradables inflation. Some members emphasised 
that these prices represent rising costs for businesses 
and may spill over to generalised non-tradables inflation, 
particularly in the near term. Other members emphasised 
spare capacity and weak demand, which would limit the 
ability of firms to pass on cost pressures to consumers. 
Some members also drew attention to slow growth in 
parts of the economy that are most sensitive to interest 
rates. Residential construction, house prices, and retail 
activity have not materially recovered, despite monetary 
easing to date. On a quarterly basis, non-tradables 
inflation excluding central and local government 
charges is consistent with inflation at or below the target 
mid‑point. Some members suggested that this may 
represent a downside risk to medium-term inflation. 
Other members emphasised that previous reductions in 
the OCR continue to transmit through the financial system 
and will take time to have their full effect on activity and 
inflation. Growth in interest-rate-sensitive sectors of the 
economy is projected to recover over the remainder of 
this year. 


5
Chapter 1. Summary record of meeting. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
The Committee discussed the extent to which uncertainty 
associated with global trade restrictions is likely to limit 
domestic demand and inflationary pressure in the medium 
term. Consumption and investment demand appear to 
have weakened in the second quarter of 2025, partly 
in response to heightened trade policy uncertainty. The 
effects of uncertainty on domestic activity are assumed 
to persist over the remainder of the year. Some members 
emphasised the fact that some measures of uncertainty 
have improved considerably since May and noted a 
possibility that the domestic economy recovers more 
rapidly as the effects of uncertainty dissipate. Other 
members highlighted that excess supply in China and 
some parts of emerging Asia has the potential to lower 
tradable inflation in New Zealand over the medium term.  
Some members also emphasised the risk that 
precautionary behaviour by New Zealand households 
and businesses may result in a weaker consumption 
and investment outlook than assumed, particularly in 
the context of slow growth in household wealth and 
discretionary incomes and low firm profitability. In this 
environment, businesses that are uncertain about 
potential future demand are less willing to invest, which 
in turn lowers potential growth and could further prolong 
uncertainty about future incomes and wealth. It is possible 
that pessimistic sentiment, together with the initial negative 
effects of the global tariff shock, have dampened the 
effects of the reduction in the OCR since last August. 
The Committee noted limits to the ability of monetary 
policy to influence expectations of long-term growth. 
Some members emphasised that near-term support from 
monetary policy is most effective when combined with 
regulatory and policy settings that promote innovation and 
investment to support productivity growth.  
The Committee voted to reduce the 
OCR to 3 percent
The projected path of the OCR reflects the Committee’s 
central expectation of the path needed to ensure that 
inflation settles sustainably near the target mid-point. 
Uncertainty about the future path of the OCR is reflected in 
the Committee’s discussion of upside and downside risks 
to the outlook. Some members considered the balance 
of risk to be to the upside relative to the projected path, 
while others considered the balance of risk to be to the 
downside.
The Committee discussed three policy options: keeping 
the OCR on hold at 3.25 percent; cutting the OCR by 25 
basis points to 3 percent; or cutting by 50 basis points to 
2.75 percent. 
The case for holding the OCR steady at 3.25 percent 
focused on positive influences on growth. Global 
economic activity outside of the United States has so 
far proven resilient in the face of new trade barriers, and 
global policy uncertainty has reduced from its peaks in 
April and May. The full extent of recent monetary easing 
is yet to fully transmit through the economy. Although 
high-frequency indicators suggest weak economic activity 
in the June 2025 quarter, available indicators for July 
suggest some improvement. With inflation approaching 
the top of the target band, and near-term inflation 
expectations rising, it could be prudent to pause to 
observe incoming data. One member gave relatively more 
weight to this view.
The case for lowering the OCR by 50 basis points to 
2.75 percent emphasised declining inflationary pressure 
and significant spare capacity. Some members put 
relatively more weight on the risk that the negative 
consequences of global policy uncertainty on domestic 
consumption and investment are self-reinforcing and 
therefore more persistent. A larger reduction in the OCR 
might disrupt such a dynamic and generate clearer signals 
that support consumption and investment, whereas 
a gradual reduction in the OCR might not provide the 
same positive signalling effect. These members also 
emphasised that weakness in the labour market and 
excess capacity limits the upside risk to inflation should the 
economy recover more quickly than projected.
The case for lowering the OCR by 25 basis points to 
3 percent was based on the upside and downside risks 
around the central projection being broadly balanced. 
Financial conditions are continuing to respond to past 
reductions in the OCR. They are also influenced by 
expectations of the future path of the OCR, which provides 
sufficient signalling effects. If medium-term inflation 
pressures continue to ease in line with the Committee’s 
central projection, the Committee expects to lower the 
OCR further. Reducing the OCR by 25 basis points at 
this meeting provides the opportunity to adjust this view 
incrementally in response to new information. 
On Wednesday 20 August, the Committee voted on the 
options of either reducing the OCR by 25 basis points or 
reducing the OCR by 50 basis points. By a majority of 
4 votes to 2, the Committee agreed to decrease the OCR 
by 25 basis points to 3 percent.   
Attendees:
Reserve Bank members of MPC:
Christian Hawkesby (Chair), Karen Silk, Paul Conway
External MPC members:
Bob Buckle, Carl Hansen, Prasanna Gai
Treasury Observer: 
James Beard
MPC Secretary: 
Evelyn Truong


Wellington. Photo: Nele McHattie
Chapter 
02
Economic 
assessment 
and monetary 
policy outlook


7
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Chapter 2.
Economic assessment and 
monetary policy outlook
Key points
Inflation is within the Monetary Policy 
Committee’s 1 to 3 percent target range. 
Lower interest rates and elevated export 
commodity prices are supporting a recovery 
in economic activity. However, the recovery 
has been uneven, with some sectors 
performing well while others are struggling. 
High dairy, meat, and horticulture prices are 
supporting the agricultural sector, while activity 
remains subdued in many industries reliant on 
domestic demand. Annual Consumers Price 
Index (CPI) inflation was 2.7 percent in the year 
to the June 2025 quarter.
Higher global tariffs and elevated economic 
uncertainty are dampening economic 
activity in New Zealand and in our trading 
partners. The introduction of new tariffs is 
causing changes in global trading patterns. 
Higher tariffs are likely to dampen growth 
in our major trading partners. However, it is 
hard to assess the degree and timing of this 
at present, as some economies have been 
purchasing more imported goods than usual in 
anticipation of higher tariffs. High uncertainty 
about global trade policies has contributed to 
some firms and consumers delaying spending, 
both overseas and in New Zealand. We have 
not yet seen a material effect of tariff changes 
on the prices of New Zealand’s imports or 
exports. The medium‑term effects of changing 
global trade practices will depend on a range 
of factors, including the degree of trade 
diversion and supply‑chain adjustments.
The New Zealand economy expanded in 
both the December 2024 and March 2025 
quarters, but timely indicators of activity 
suggest the economy contracted slightly in 
the June 2025 quarter. Over the past couple 
of years, restrictive interest rates, slower 
growth in government spending, falling net 
immigration, and subdued global growth 
have dampened demand in New Zealand. 
We expect GDP growth to increase over the 
coming year, as lower interest rates continue 
to transmit to higher demand and the effects 
of global economic uncertainty wane. 
The New Zealand economy has significant 
spare capacity. The output gap — the 
difference between GDP and the economy’s 
potential output — is estimated to be around 
‑1.8 percent at present. Spare capacity in the 
labour market continues to increase. The 
unemployment rate rose to 5.2 percent in the 
June 2025 quarter, and most other measures 
of spare capacity in the labour market also 
increased. 
Non‑tradables inflation has continued 
to decline due to spare capacity in the 
economy. Annual non‑tradables inflation 
declined to 3.7 percent in the June 2025 
quarter, despite high inflation in administered 
prices. Annual tradables inflation increased 
to 1.2 percent in the June 2025 quarter, in 
part due to increasing food price inflation. 
Annual core inflation measures have declined 
substantially over the past couple of years, 
but remain in the top half of our target range. 
Survey measures of inflation expectations 
have increased, particularly at shorter terms. 
We expect annual CPI inflation to increase 
to 3 percent in the September 2025 quarter, 
before declining back to near 2 percent from 
the middle of 2026.
Conditional on the central economic outlook, 
we project that the OCR will decline further. 
The MPC has been reducing the OCR since 
August 2024 as inflationary pressures have 
eased. Lower interest rates will support the 
output gap to close over the medium term, 
and hence annual inflation to settle near the 
2 percent target mid‑point. Compared to 
the May Statement, the OCR is projected to 
decline to a lower level, mostly reflecting a 
weaker expected pace of GDP growth and 
hence more spare capacity in the economy. 
The outlook for output, inflation, and interest 
rates are subject to considerable uncertainty.


8
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Figure 2.1
Production GDP
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Production GDP is a measure of the volume of production and is expressed in 
2009/2010 prices.
Economic assessment
Economic activity continued to 
expand in early 2025
The New Zealand economy expanded by 
0.8 percent in the March 2025 quarter, 
following 0.5 percent growth in the 
previous quarter (figure 2.1). However, GDP 
remained 0.7 percent lower than a year 
earlier, because of the sharp contraction 
during the middle of 2024. Growth was 
broad‑based across industries in the 
March 2025 quarter. More export‑oriented 
industries grew strongly, including 
agricultural and parts of manufacturing.  
However, the level of activity remains low in 
many industries reliant on domestic demand, 
such as retail and construction. Uneven 
activity across industries is consistent 
with what we heard from our recent round 
of discussions with businesses across 
New Zealand (see box A).
Economic growth may have stalled 
over the June 2025 quarter
Timely indicators of activity suggest 
the economy contracted slightly in the 
June 2025 quarter. A range of indicators 
of economic activity either weakened 
or remained consistent with economic 
contraction over the June 2025 quarter. 
These include the Performance of 
Manufacturing Index, the Performance of 
Services Index, the Quarterly Survey of 
Business Opinion (QSBO), the Truckometer 
Heavy Traffic Index, and electronic card 
transactions. Employment and hours worked 
also declined in the quarter. The Reserve 
Bank’s GDP nowcasting model, Kiwi‑GDP, 
also suggests GDP may have declined in the 
June 2025 quarter. In our recent discussions 
with firms, most reported that the economic 
recovery has been slower than they had 
expected at the start of the year.
We assume that GDP contracted by 
0.3 percent in the June 2025 quarter, 
but that growth will increase over the 
second half of 2025. We assume that weak 
economic activity in the June 2025 quarter 
partly reflects temporary factors, such as a 
decline in export volumes following strength 
earlier in the year and high global economic 
uncertainty over this period. Timely indicators 
suggest that economic activity will increase in 
the September 2025 quarter. Our projection 
for GDP growth over the second half of 2025 
is similar to the May Statement, with GDP 
growth increasing as lower interest rates 
continue to transmit to domestic demand, 
high export commodity prices support 
incomes, and the effect of temporary factors 
weighing on activity wane. The level of GDP 
is assumed to be slightly lower over the 
projection period than at the time of the 
May Statement.


9
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Box A 
Summary of recent business visits
1	
Our discussions with businesses occurred prior to the announced increase in the US tariff rate on New Zealand imports from 10 to 
15 percent.
We regularly meet with a range of 
businesses to improve our industry 
knowledge and understanding of 
economic conditions. Over July, Reserve 
Bank and Treasury staff spoke with 
businesses across Auckland, Waikato, Bay 
of Plenty, Wellington, Nelson, Marlborough, 
and Christchurch. 
Overall, businesses reported that 
demand and activity remain weak, 
with continued weakness expected 
in non‑primary sectors. Demand for 
New Zealand meat, dairy, and horticulture 
products has continued to be strong, and 
exporter incomes have been supported 
by favourable exchange rates and 
higher commodity prices. In contrast, 
manufacturing, construction, and retail 
firms continued to report weak demand. 
Many firms reported that the economic 
recovery had been slower than they 
had expected, with the recovery being 
described as patchy. 
Businesses are facing rising costs, but 
to a lesser extent than last year. Most 
businesses said cost increases had slowed 
down, but they expect costs to remain at 
an elevated level. Costs for energy, council 
rates, imported materials, and transport 
were reported as increasing. Some firms 
noted their insurance costs had fallen 
slightly, albeit following sharp increases 
in recent years. Businesses continued to 
report difficulty passing on cost increases 
to customers. Exporters were an exception 
to this, particularly those selling premium 
or niche products. Increasing costs and 
a reduced ability to increase prices 
has squeezed profit margins for many 
businesses outside the primary sector.  
Labour market conditions remain soft. 
Some businesses have reduced staff 
numbers or hours, and some others are 
planning to do so. Many reported that 
the number of applicants for roles had 
remained high. Easing labour market 
conditions were leading to smaller wage 
increases than in recent years.  
Investment intentions remain weak as 
businesses are uncertain about the 
economic outlook. Larger businesses 
with stronger balance sheets or those 
in stronger‑performing export sectors 
reported cautiously continuing investment. 
More domestically oriented businesses, or 
those with weaker balance sheets, were 
more focused on managing costs amid 
subdued demand. These reports differ 
somewhat from the increase in investment 
intentions reported in the June 2025 
quarter QSBO. 
Most exporting firms said that the global 
economic environment is increasingly 
difficult, and costly, to navigate. US tariff 
policy was highlighted by exporters as a 
top issue. The effect of US tariff policy has 
been mixed, with the largest impacts still 
to be realised. However, some exporters 
were optimistic, that due to the relatively 
low tariff on New Zealand goods, their 
products could become relatively more 
competitive, increasing demand.1
Overall, feedback from businesses 
supports our near‑term projections for 
economic activity and inflation. Weak 
overall demand is consistent with our 
assumption that GDP contracted slightly 
in the June 2025 quarter. Reduced 
pricing power is consistent with continued 
declines in inflation for products and 
services sold by businesses. 


10
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Household spending is growing 
at a subdued pace 
Household consumption growth 
has increased but remains subdued. 
Consumption grew by 1 percent in the year 
to the March 2025 quarter, broadly in line 
with population growth. This is the highest 
annual growth rate since the first half of 
2023, but a slow pace relative to historical 
averages. Weak household spending 
reflects previously restrictive interest rates, 
a weak labour market, subdued house price 
growth, and below‑average population 
growth. Household consumption growth 
is assumed to increase further over the 
projection, supported by lower interest rates 
and higher population growth (figure 2.2). 
How household spending responds to lower 
interest rates and other drivers, such as 
income and wealth, will have an important 
influence on economic activity and inflation 
over the medium term (see chapter 4.1).
Government expenditure is 
declining
Government expenditure (consumption 
and investment) has declined as a share 
of the economy over the past year, and is 
assumed to continue to decline over the 
medium term (figure 2.3). Our projections 
are consistent with Budget 2025. Real 
government consumption is assumed to 
decrease as a share of the economy, more 
than offsetting growth in real government 
investment.
Private investment is expected to 
be subdued this year, but increase 
over the medium term
Business investment grew in the March 
2025 and December 2024 quarters, 
unwinding a large decline in the September 
2024 quarter. We assume that business 
investment declined in the June 2025 
quarter, reflecting high global economic 
uncertainty and significant spare capacity 
in the economy. Business investment is 
expected to increase over the medium 
term as the effects of uncertainty wane and 
GDP growth strengthens. The Investment 
Boost policy announced in Budget 2025 is 
expected to encourage business investment, 
because it reduces the effective cost of 
purchasing new investment assets.
Residential investment increased 2 percent 
in the March 2025 quarter following six 
consecutive quarters of decline. We expect 
residential investment to remain broadly 
stable over 2025. Over the medium term, 
we assume that residential investment 
increases, supported by lower interest 
rates, higher population growth, and modest 
increases in real house prices (see chapter 
4.1). Government initiatives to improve 
housing supply are also assumed to support 
residential investment over the medium term.
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.2
Private consumption
(seasonally adjusted)
Figure 2.3
Government consumption and investment
(share of potential GDP, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, NZ Treasury, RBNZ estimates.


11
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Net immigration has slowed
Net immigration to New Zealand has 
fallen from historically high rates in late 
2023 to close to zero (figure 2.4). Lower 
net immigration is partly in response to 
weakening economic and labour market 
conditions in New Zealand, especially 
relative to Australia. Migrant arrivals have 
declined, and the number of New Zealand 
residents emigrating has increased. 
Slower population growth is weighing on 
consumption growth and housing demand, 
but is also reducing growth in labour supply. 
Our projections assume that annual potential 
growth has declined from 2.8 percent in 
2023 to 1.4 percent in 2025, largely due to 
slower population growth. Potential growth is 
assumed to increase over the medium term 
as population growth increases and labour 
productivity growth improves gradually.
The New Zealand economy has 
significant spare capacity
Significant spare capacity in the 
New Zealand economy opened up during 
the middle of 2024, and the degree of 
spare capacity has remained broadly 
stable since. We estimate that the output 
gap is about ‑1.8 percent of potential GDP 
in the September 2025 quarter (figure 2.5). 
Our estimate of the output gap is slightly 
lower than assumed in the May Statement, 
consistent with our weaker GDP forecast and 
continued declines in our suite of capacity 
pressure indicators.
The output gap is assumed to close over 
the medium term, beginning from late 
2025. We assume that GDP growth will 
begin to exceed potential growth as lower 
interest rates continue to transmit to stronger 
demand, and the dampening effect of high 
global economic uncertainty wanes.
The labour market has 
weakened further
Demand for labour has decreased due 
to earlier declines in economic activity. 
Employment declined by 0.1 percent in 
the June 2025 quarter. Employment was 
0.9 percent lower in the June 2025 quarter 
than a year earlier, while the working‑age 
population grew by 1.2 percent over the 
same period. Job vacancies have remained 
broadly flat over the past year, and are well 
below pre‑COVID‑19 levels. Participation in 
the labour market has fallen, consistent with 
some people having left the labour market 
due to poorer job prospects.
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.4
Net immigration
(annual, share of working‑age population)
Figure 2.5
Output gap and indicator suite
(share of potential, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, NZIER, MBIE, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area shows the range of indicators in the suite. The vertical line shows the 
final quarter of published GDP data.


12
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
A suite of measures suggests that 
labour market capacity pressures eased 
substantially during 2024 and over the 
first half of 2025. Most measures of labour 
market tightness are below their average 
levels since 2000 (figure 2.6). Businesses 
continue to report that it is easy to find 
workers, and movement between jobs has 
reduced. The unemployment rate increased 
to 5.2 percent in the June 2025 quarter, and 
is assumed to increase slightly further in 
the near term (figure 2.7). Over the medium 
term, the unemployment rate is projected 
to decline as economic growth recovers. 
The relationship between vacancies and 
unemployment, as illustrated by a Beveridge 
curve, has been broadly similar to history 
over recent years, with the unemployment 
rate rising as vacancies declined (figure 2.8).
Figure 2.6
Labour market indicators
Source: Stats NZ, NZIER, MBIE, RBNZ estimates.
Note: See Ball (2024), Assessing and communicating labour market indicators of inflationary pressure.
Figure 2.7
Unemployment rate  
(unemployed people as a share of the labour force, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


13
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Spare capacity in the labour market and 
lower inflation are contributing to slower 
nominal wage growth. Annual same‑job 
wage growth, as measured by the Labour 
Cost Index (LCI, ordinary and overtime, 
private sector) was 2.3 percent in the 
June 2025 quarter, down from a peak of 
4.5 percent in early 2023. Wage growth is 
assumed to ease slightly further over the 
remainder of this year, and remain broadly 
stable thereafter.
2	
 For more discussion about the likely effects of tariffs and uncertainty on New Zealand’s economy, see Conway (2025), Tariffs, turbulence, 
and monetary policy.
Higher global tariffs are reducing 
expected economic activity in 
New Zealand’s trading partners
Higher global tariffs and elevated economic 
uncertainty have reduced expected 
economic activity in New Zealand’s trading 
partners. The introduction of new tariffs is 
causing changes in global trading patterns. 
Higher tariffs are likely to dampen growth 
in our major trading partners. However, it 
is hard to assess the degree or timing of 
this at present, as some economies have 
purchased more imported goods than usual 
in anticipation of higher tariffs (see box B).2
Source: Stats NZ, MBIE, ANZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The vacancy rate is defined as the job vacancies index divided by the labour force. Colours reflect different periods in recent history 
(kikorangi | blue: pre‑global financial crisis (GFC); māwhero | pink: GFC; onewhero | brown: post‑GFC; uku | orange: after COVID‑19).
Figure 2.8
Job vacancies and unemployment (Beveridge curve)
(seasonally adjusted)
Vacancy rate (index)
Unemployment rate (%)


14
Box B
The effect of higher global tariffs on the 
New Zealand economy
3	
The agreement between the US, Mexico, and Canada (USMCA) is a free trade agreement that has been in effect since 1 July 2020, replacing 
the North American Free Trade Agreement (NAFTA). This allows tariff‑free trade for many goods as long as they meet specific rules.
Since the May Statement, the US 
has announced a range of tariff rate 
adjustments. On 31 July 2025, the 
US announced a revised schedule of 
country‑specific tariffs, replacing the rates 
announced on 2 April 2025. Under the 
updated schedule, the tariff on imports 
from New Zealand increased from 10 
to 15 percent. US tariffs on imports from 
most of New Zealand’s other key trading 
partners were set between 15 percent and 
20 percent, while Australia and Singapore 
remained at the 10 percent baseline. Some 
economies face much higher tariff rates, 
such as the 39 percent tariff on Switzerland.
US imports from Canada and Mexico that 
are USMCA‑compliant remain tariff-free, 
while tariffs for non‑qualifying imports 
are set at 35 percent for Canada and 
25 percent for Mexico.3 On 12 August 
2025, the US extended the suspension of 
additional tariffs on imports from China for 
90 days, maintaining the tariff pause agreed 
in May 2025. The extension delays planned 
tariff increases by both countries while 
negotiations continue.
The US has engaged in bilateral 
negotiations with many of its trading 
partners, including the UK, Japan, the 
European Union, and Indonesia. In many 
cases, these arrangements established tariff 
rates below the April 2025 announcements 
and include provisions such as investment 
clauses, expanded quotas for US exports, 
and the removal of selected tariff and export 
restrictions.
In the May Statement we outlined the 
channels through which US tariff policies 
could affect the New Zealand economy 
(table B.1). Overall, we expected US tariff 
policies to represent a net negative demand 
shock for New Zealand, reducing economic 
activity and inflationary pressure. 
Table B.1
Summary of the transmission channels of higher global tariffs to New Zealand
Key assumptions
Global 
economy
•	 Weaker US import demand and elevated uncertainty reduce global trade and 
growth in New Zealand’s trading‑partner economies.
•	 Tariffs disrupt global supply chains – initially through short‑term adjustment 
frictions, and over the medium term through shifts in global production patterns. 
This reduces global production efficiency, lowers productivity, and places 
upward pressure on production costs. 
•	 Tariff‑imposing countries face higher input costs, with trade diversion occurring 
as US import demand shifts toward countries facing lower tariff rates.
New Zealand 
economy
•	 Heightened uncertainty leads businesses to delay or cancel investment plans 
and causes households to reduce spending. 
•	 Export volumes decline due to weaker US demand and global growth. 
•	 Export prices fall in response to softer global demand and the reallocation of 
supply toward markets not imposing tariffs. 
•	 Import prices decline due to weaker global economic activity and the diversion 
of products away from the US.
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025


15
Our assumptions remain broadly 
consistent with recent developments. 
In most cases, it is too early to accurately 
assess the effects of the tariff changes. 
However, so far there is no evidence to 
suggest that tariffs are having materially 
different effects than we assumed in the 
May Statement.
Global trade patterns have been 
adapting to higher tariffs 
US import demand remained robust 
in the period leading up to the April 
tariff policy announcements. This likely 
reflected some front‑loading of imports to 
build inventories in anticipation of higher 
costs. Since tariffs took effect, US imports 
have declined.
There are indications of trade diversion 
occurring. US imports from China have 
declined, while US imports from selected 
Asian economies have increased. Over 
the same period, China’s total exports 
have remained robust, as reduced exports 
to the US have been broadly offset by 
increased exports to those same Asian 
economies (see chapter 3). The speed and 
scale of recent trade flow shifts suggest 
that some trade is being rerouted through 
other economies in response to tariff 
differentials.
Global supply chains are functioning well. 
Global supply chain pressure indicators 
are at low levels (figure B.1). Supply chains 
are likely to adjust over the medium term 
as production shifts geographically. 
US producer prices have increased 
in some sectors, but the effect on 
New Zealand is expected to be limited. 
Most affected products are not significant 
within the composition of New Zealand’s 
imports from the US. 
Global growth in the first half of 2025 
was stronger than expected, but we 
continue to anticipate a decline in global 
growth due to tariff policy (see chapter 3). 
Near‑term outcomes, such as resilient 
US import demand and trade diversion 
through changes in trade routes, likely 
reflect temporary adjustments. It will 
take time for global economic activity to 
adjust to the new tariff regime, and for the 
underlying impacts on growth, trade, and 
prices to become evident.
It remains too early to observe 
clear tariff effects on the 
New Zealand economy
It is too early to assess the effects of 
higher tariffs on New Zealand’s imports 
and exports. Higher US import demand 
ahead of the implementation of tariffs 
may have partly contributed to stronger 
goods export volumes in the March 2025 
quarter. However, it is highly uncertain 
how US import demand will evolve over 
the medium term. Stable supply chain 
conditions and broadly unchanged global 
producer prices this year suggest limited 
effects on New Zealand imports to date, 
but this could change over time. 
Figure B.1
Measures of global supply chain pressure
Source: Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY), Citi Research, Bloomberg.
Note: FRBNY Global Supply Chain Pressure Index is a composite of global transportation 
cost and manufacturing PMI indicators standardised over 1997 to the latest data point. Citi 
Global Supply Chain Pressure Index is a composite of shipping costs, PMI delivery times, 
backlogs, input prices, and inventory measures, normalised to its historical average.
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025


16
Overall, uncertainty measures have 
declined since the May Statement, 
broadly as assumed in the May 
Statement (figures B.2 and B.3).4 Measures 
based on news articles remain elevated 
compared to historical averages, while 
most non-news measures have decreased 
to relatively low levels. Timely indicators 
of economic activity suggest that GDP 
contracted in the June 2025 quarter, which 
may in part reflect heightened global 
economic uncertainty. However, it is too 
early to assess the effect of uncertainty 
on business investment and household 
spending as June 2025 quarter data are 
not yet available. Survey measures point 
to an increase in business investment 
intentions, although our discussions with 
businesses indicated more subdued 
investment plans (see box A). Some 
indicators point to subdued household 
spending growth, such as electronic card 
transactions, house price growth, and 
consumer confidence. 
4	
See chapter 4.1 in the May Statement for more discussion of the effect of uncertainty on the New Zealand economy.
Figure B.2
Measures of New Zealand uncertainty
(standardised)
Source: NZIER, Sense Partners, Consensus Economics, RBNZ estimates.
Note: All measures are standardised in their base frequencies from 1997 to their latest 
data point.
Figure B.3
Measures of US uncertainty 
(standardised)
Source: Policyuncertainty.com, University of Michigan, Consensus Economics, Cboe 
Global Markets, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: All measures are standardised in their base frequencies from 1997 to their latest 
data point.
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025


17
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
The global growth outlook has stabilised 
since the May Statement (see chapter 3). 
Consensus forecasts were initially sharply 
downgraded following the announcement 
of higher tariff rates by the US in early 
April 2025 (figure 2.9). However, forecasts 
have since been revised up slightly, as the 
implementation of some higher tariff rates 
was delayed, and expectations for future tariff 
rates decreased and became less uncertain. 
Stronger GDP growth rates in the June 2025 
quarter and expectations for additional 
fiscal stimulus in some economies have 
also contributed to slightly higher expected 
growth.
Headline inflation in New Zealand’s trading 
partners has declined over the past year 
(figure 2.10). The outlook for inflation in 
New Zealand’s trading partners has fallen 
over the past couple of months. Higher US 
tariffs will place upward pressure on inflation 
in the US via higher import costs. However, 
lower global growth may put downward 
pressure on inflation elsewhere.
Higher tariffs and uncertainty are 
assumed to reduce inflationary 
pressure in New Zealand
Declining inflation in most of our trading 
partners, weaker global growth, and high 
global uncertainty are likely to reduce 
inflationary pressure in New Zealand. 
Our assumptions about the effects of tariffs 
and uncertainty are similar to those in the 
May Statement, but the effects on the 
New Zealand economy are highly uncertain 
(see box B). 
New Zealand goods export prices and 
volumes are declining following strength 
over the start of 2025. Merchandise trade 
data suggest that goods export volumes 
declined in the June 2025 quarter, reversing 
a large increase in the March 2025 quarter. 
This recent decline appears broad-based 
across different export categories. Some 
of the strength in export volumes in early 
2025 may have been due to front‑loading 
of purchases by importers seeking to build 
inventories in the face of uncertainty about 
global tariff policy. 
Figure 2.10
Trading‑partner CPI inflation
(annual)
Source: Bloomberg, Haver Analytics, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Projections show consensus forecasts from Bloomberg. Trading‑partner aggregate is 
based on 17 of New Zealand’s largest trading partners.
Figure 2.9
Evolution of trading‑partner growth forecasts
(calendar year) 
Source: Bloomberg, RBNZ estimates.
Note: This figure shows the evolution of Bloomberg consensus forecasts for annual GDP 
growth in New Zealand’s trading partners in the 2025 and 2026 calendar years.


18
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Figure 2.12
Headline and core inflation measures
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ.
Note: The dashed lines represent the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for inflation over 
the medium term. The shaded area shows the range of core inflation measures. The core 
inflation measures include the sectoral factor model, factor model, trimmed mean (30%), 
weighted median, and CPI excluding food and energy.
Over the past year, prices for New Zealand’s 
exports have increased substantially, 
reflecting both increasing demand and 
reduced global supply for some of our key 
export commodities (figure 2.11). High export 
prices, for agricultural products in particular, 
are supporting incomes and spending in 
New Zealand. However, export prices are 
assumed to decline from the September 
2025 quarter, consistent with declines in 
timely indicators of export prices, particularly 
for dairy. 
The New Zealand dollar exchange rate 
is slightly lower than at the time of the 
May Statement, while international oil 
prices are slightly higher. The lower 
New Zealand dollar exchange rate reflects 
both global factors and lower interest rates in 
New Zealand (see chapter 3). International 
oil prices increased briefly during the 
escalation in conflict between Iran and Israel 
in June 2025, and have since settled at a 
slightly higher level than at the time of the 
May Statement.
Inflation is expected to increase 
in the September 2025 quarter, 
before returning to near the 
MPC’s 2 percent target mid‑point
Annual headline CPI inflation increased 
to 2.7 percent in the June 2025 quarter.5 
Annual non‑tradables inflation decreased 
to 3.7 percent, as expected in the May 
Statement. Annual tradables inflation 
increased to 1.2 percent, higher than 
expected in the May Statement.
Annual core inflation measures have 
declined significantly in recent years, but 
remain in the top half of our target range 
(figure 2.12). Movements in annual core 
inflation measures were mixed in the June 
2025 quarter, remaining unchanged at 
2.5 percent on average. Quarterly measures 
of core inflation declined in the June 2025 
quarter, and on average are at a rate 
consistent with 2 percent inflation 
if sustained. 
5	
Stats NZ announced on 1 May that increases in vehicle relicensing fees were erroneously not included in the March 2025 quarter data. If 
these data had been included, annual headline inflation would have been 2.6 percent, not 2.5 percent. Stats NZ did not revise the released 
data, but instead accounted for higher vehicle relicensing fees in the June quarter.
 
Figure 2.11
New Zealand export prices
(real, foreign currency terms)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


19
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Survey measures of short‑term inflation 
expectations have increased since the 
start of the year (figure 2.13). The increase 
in short‑term inflation expectations of 
professional forecasters and businesses 
has been small, and consistent with the 
increase in annual CPI inflation over the 
first half of 2025. However, household 
inflation expectations have increased more 
sharply. Household inflation expectations 
have increased sharply in many economies, 
which may reflect uncertainty amongst 
some households about the effect of 
recent increases in global tariffs on inflation 
(see chapter 4.2). Longer‑term inflation 
expectations of professional forecasters 
and business leaders from our Survey of 
Expectations have increased slightly but 
remain near 2 percent.
Annual tradables inflation increased to 
1.2 percent in the June 2025 quarter from 
0.3 percent in the March 2025 quarter 
(figure 2.14). This was higher than our 
May Statement forecast. Higher inflation 
for food items (including dairy, meat, and 
fruit) and recreation (including overseas 
accommodation and streaming services) 
accounted for the increase in tradables 
inflation. Annual tradables inflation is 
expected to increase further in the 
September 2025 quarter, but then decline 
slightly over the medium term as inflation in 
food and recreation categories eases.
Figure 2.13
Inflation expectations 1 year ahead
(mean, annual)
Source: RBNZ.
Figure 2.14
Tradables inflation 
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


20
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Annual non‑tradables inflation has 
continued to decline, falling from 
4.0 percent in the March 2025 quarter 
to 3.7 percent in the June 2025 quarter 
(figure 2.15). This was as expected at the 
time of the May Statement. Non‑tradables 
inflation has been declining since 2023 
as capacity pressures have eased, and as 
price‑setting behaviour has been adapting 
to a low‑inflation environment. Inflation 
in administered prices is contributing 
significantly to non‑tradables inflation, and 
at 10.8 percent in the year to the June 2025 
quarter is at its highest level since at least 
1990 (figure 2.16).6 Inflation in non‑tradables 
categories that are relatively sensitive 
to monetary policy has fallen to below 
pre‑COVID‑19 rates.7 For instance, annual 
new dwelling construction inflation declined 
to 0.8 percent in the June 2025 quarter, its 
lowest level since 2009.
Spare capacity in the economy is expected 
to flow through to lower non‑tradables 
inflation over the coming year. We expect 
further reductions in inflation rates across a 
range of non‑tradables inflation categories. 
Inflation for labour‑intensive services is likely 
to decline, consistent with lower growth in 
labour costs. Rental inflation is expected to 
ease further. Rental inflation for new tenants 
has declined significantly, reflecting low 
population and income growth, and this will 
feed through to lower inflation for the stock 
of rentals over time.
Inflation for items less sensitive to 
monetary policy is high but expected to 
ease over time. Household energy price 
inflation has increased substantially over 
the past year, partially reflecting higher 
wholesale electricity prices. Increases in 
electricity lines charges regulated by the 
Commerce Commission added significantly 
to electricity prices in the June 2025 quarter. 
Insurance inflation has fallen from high rates 
experienced following severe storms and 
floods in 2023 and is likely to decline further 
over the rest of this year. 
6	
This is based on the ‘central and local government charges’ series produced by Stats NZ. It incorporates a wide range of prices set or 
heavily influenced by central or local government. Items contributing to high inflation in this series at present include local authority rates, 
electricity, university fees, and vehicle relicensing fees.
7	
See Åstebøl and Patel (2025), Sectoral heterogeneity in monetary policy pass‑through in New Zealand.
Local authority rate increases — which 
take effect in September quarters — are 
contributing significantly to non‑tradables 
inflation. While rate increases for 2025 are 
lower on average than last year, they are still 
substantially higher than historical averages. 
We expect administered price inflation to 
ease over time in line with lower general 
inflation, but inflation in this category may 
remain higher than other non‑tradables 
categories for some time. 
Figure 2.16
Composition of non‑tradables inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Administered inflation is measured using the ‘central and local government charges’ 
series produced by Stats NZ.
Figure 2.15
Non‑tradables inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


21
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Annual headline inflation is forecast to 
increase to 3 percent in the September 
2025 quarter, before returning to near the 
2 percent target mid‑point by the middle of 
2026 (figure 2.17). CPI inflation is expected 
to be slightly higher over the next 12 months 
compared to the May Statement. This reflects 
a higher outlook for tradables inflation 
more than offsetting a lower outlook for 
non‑tradables inflation over this period.
Monetary policy outlook
Conditional on the central economic 
outlook, we assume that the OCR will 
decline further (figure 2.18). The MPC has 
been reducing the OCR since August 2024 
as inflationary pressures have eased. Lower 
interest rates will support the output gap 
to close over the medium term, and hence 
annual inflation to settle near the 2 percent 
target mid‑point. Compared to the May 
Statement, the OCR is projected to decline 
to a lower level, mostly reflecting a weaker 
expected pace of GDP growth and hence 
more spare capacity in the economy. The 
outlook for output, inflation, and interest rates 
are subject to considerable uncertainty.
Figure 2.17
CPI inflation 
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for inflation over 
the medium term.
Figure 2.18
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


22
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Chapter 
03
Global 
economy 
and financial 
markets
Kaimanawa Forest Park. Photo: Sean Weenink


23
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Chapter 3.
Global economy and financial markets
Key points
US tariff rates have been volatile and 
remain elevated. Since the May Statement, 
the US has conducted trade negotiations 
with many countries, but the average US 
effective tariff rate is broadly in line with 
our assumptions in May. Global trade has 
remained robust despite increased tariffs, 
although trade is expected to weaken over 
the second half of 2025. 
Consensus forecasters expect global 
growth to weaken and inflation to 
diverge among countries. Global growth 
forecasts have been revised higher since 
the May Statement, mainly accounted for 
by a stronger growth outlook for China. 
However, growth in New Zealand’s main 
trading partners is still expected to be lower 
this year than was expected prior to US 
tariff announcements. Outside the US and 
Canada, higher tariffs are still expected to 
be disinflationary over the medium term. In 
the US, tariffs have had a minor inflationary 
impact so far, although this effect is expected 
to increase.
Financial market sentiment has improved 
following heightened volatility earlier this 
year. US equity prices have increased, with 
particularly large gains in large technology 
companies. Oil prices have increased slightly 
since the May Statement, having stabilised 
following elevated volatility in June during 
the conflict between Iran and Israel. The 
US dollar (USD) has continued to depreciate 
against a basket of currencies since the 
May Statement.
Domestic financial conditions have 
continued to ease in response to a lower 
OCR, although the pace of easing in 
financial conditions has slowed over recent 
months. Domestic wholesale rates have 
declined modestly, reflecting both global 
factors and weak domestic macroeconomic 
data (see chapter 2). The New Zealand 
dollar (NZD) trade‑weighted index (TWI) 
has depreciated but remains stronger than 
at the start of the year. Mortgage and term 
deposit rates have also continued to decline 
across most terms.


24
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Global economic conditions
8	
Over recent months, more goods exported from Canada and Mexico to the US have been recognised as compliant with the USMCA.
US tariff rates have been volatile 
and are settling at significantly 
higher rates
Global trade uncertainty has fallen 
but remains elevated. Recent US tariff 
announcements have provided some clarity. 
The US has conducted trade negotiations 
with many of its trading partners since 
the May Statement. While several major 
economies secured tariff rates lower than 
those announced on 2 April 2025, others 
now face higher tariff rates than previously 
announced, including New Zealand. Overall, 
the average US effective tariff rate is broadly 
in line with our assumptions in the May 
Statement, with some regional differences 
(see box B, chapter 2). For example, 
countries across Asia (excluding China) now 
face higher tariffs than we assumed, while the 
effective tariff rates in Mexico and Canada 
are lower.8 So far, only a small number of 
countries have responded with increased 
tariff rates on the US.
Global trade has remained robust despite 
higher tariffs. US imports declined in the 
June 2025 quarter from elevated levels in 
March, but were only marginally weaker than 
December 2024 levels. In China, a large 
decline in exports to the US has been offset 
by increased exports to other countries, 
particularly in Southeast Asia and the euro 
area. This is likely in part the result of a weaker 
Chinese yuan and shipments to the US being 
rerouted through intermediate countries. With 
elevated tariff levels set to persist following 
the 31 July 2025 announcements, global trade 
is expected to weaken over the second half 
of 2025. 
Global growth expectations 
have been revised higher but 
remain weak
Bloomberg consensus forecasts for 
aggregate GDP growth across our 
trading‑partner economies have improved 
marginally since the May Statement, largely 
due to stronger growth expectations for 
China. Consensus expectations for annual 
growth for our trading partners in 2025 has 
increased to 2.6 percent, from 2.5 percent at 
the time of the May Statement (see figure 3.1). 
However, higher global trade barriers are still 
expected to lower global growth rates over 
coming years. Consensus forecasts remain 
weaker than prior to the tariff announcements 
in early April.
Figure 3.1
Trading‑partner GDP growth
(annual)
Source: Haver Analytics, Bloomberg, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Projections show consensus forecasts from Bloomberg. Trading‑partner aggregate is 
based on 16 of New Zealand’s largest trading partners.


25
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Consensus forecasts for GDP growth in 
China have improved. Annual GDP growth 
is expected to be 4.8 percent in 2025, 
higher than was expected prior to US tariff 
announcements in April 2025. The outlook 
has been supported by better‑than‑expected 
economic data over the first half of 2025, 
robust export growth, and increased 
confidence in the ability of fiscal policy to 
offset the impact of higher tariffs.
Economic growth in the US has slowed 
over recent quarters. Uncertainty has 
been elevated among businesses and 
consumers for much of this year, largely 
stemming from trade and other government 
policies.  This has coincided with lower 
confidence and a material weakening in 
household consumption over the first half 
of 2025. Quarterly real consumer spending 
growth has moderated from 1 percent in the 
December 2024 quarter to about 0.4 percent 
in the June 2025 quarter (figure 3.2). 
Likewise, labour market indicators have 
softened as firms have held back on hiring. 
Growth in the labour force has slowed amid 
lower net immigration flows. 
Global inflation has eased in 
recent months, but is expected 
to diverge among countries over 
coming quarters
Global inflation has continued to decline 
through 2025. Annual inflation in our 
trading partner economies declined 
0.2 percentage points to 1.6 percent in the 
year to the June 2025 quarter (figure 3.3). 
Core inflation, which excludes energy and 
food prices, has continued to decline in 
many advanced economies. However, goods 
inflation has increased in some regions. In 
emerging Asia, inflation has remained low.
Consumer prices in the US have shown 
a minor impact from tariffs so far. Annual 
core CPI inflation was 3.1 percent in July, up 
from 2.9 percent in June. While the increase 
contained some signs of tariff‑related cost 
increases passing through to consumer 
prices, this transmission has been slower 
and weaker than previously expected by 
consensus forecasters.
New Zealand trade‑weighted global 
headline inflation is expected to increase 
over the second half of 2025, although 
with regional differences. In Australia, 
headline inflation is expected to increase as 
cost‑of‑living support measures come to an 
end. In the US, higher tariffs are expected to 
continue feeding through to consumer prices 
over coming quarters. In China, inflation is 
expected to increase from very low levels 
amid looser fiscal policy settings. In contrast, 
inflation in the euro area is projected to 
continue declining due to easing wage 
pressures.
Figure 3.2
US GDP and personal consumption 
expenditure growth
(quarterly)
Source: Haver Analytics.
Figure 3.3
Trading‑partner inflation
(annual)
Source: Haver Analytics, Bloomberg.
Note: Projections show consensus forecasts from Bloomberg. Trading‑partner aggregate is 
based on 17 of New Zealand’s largest trading partners.


26
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Global financial conditions
Most central banks have kept 
their policy rates unchanged 
over recent months
Financial market participants’ expectations 
of further monetary policy easing vary across 
regions (figure 3.4). In Canada and the euro 
area, little further easing is priced over the 
next 12 months as their policy rates are now 
close to central bank estimates of neutral. In 
both regions, central banks have kept their 
policy rates unchanged at recent meetings. In 
contrast, market participants are pricing further 
easing in Australia, the UK, and the US over 
the remainder of this year and into next year. 
This would reduce the restrictiveness of their 
monetary policy stances.  
Changes in sovereign bond yields have 
varied across countries since the May 
Statement. 10‑year US Treasury bond yields 
have fallen about 30 basis points since the 
May Statement, in line with lower policy rate 
expectations in the US. In Germany, equivalent 
yields have increased about 15 basis points 
due to increased plans for debt issuance.
Global equity prices have increased
Global equity markets have strengthened 
since the May Statement, supported by a 
recovery in risk sentiment (see figure 3.5). 
While US trade policy developments have 
continued to influence market pricing, recent 
announcements have had a smaller impact 
than those earlier in the year. Japanese 
equities rose nearly 9 percent following the 
finalisation of a US–Japan tariff agreement. 
Market optimism appeared to be due to 
a lower effective tariff rate and a specific 
exemption for Japanese vehicle exports. 
In contrast, the US–EU deal has weighed on 
European equities relative to other markets 
and are little changed since the 
May Statement.
The US S&P 500 has increased 10 percent 
since the May Statement. Strong performance 
has been led by large technology companies 
that have benefited from AI‑related earnings 
and increased earnings expectations. 
Non-technology focused companies have 
also benefited from a rise in investor risk 
sentiment. However, price‑to‑earnings 
ratios suggest that heightened US policy 
uncertainty and expectations of a weaker US 
economy continue to weigh on valuations 
compared with levels prior to the US tariff 
announcements in April 2025.
Figure 3.5
Global equity prices
(index = 100 on 30 December 2022)
Source: Bloomberg.
Note: Daily closing values of headline equity price indices in local currency terms. Indices 
are S&P/NZX 50 (New Zealand), Euro Stoxx 50 (euro area), S&P 500 (United States), TOPIX 
(Japan), and MSCI World (World).
Figure 3.4
Market‑implied path of policy rates
Source: Bloomberg. 


27
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Oil prices have increased, and the 
USD has continued to depreciate
Brent crude oil prices are about 2 percent 
higher than at the time of the May 
Statement. Conflict between Iran and 
Israel in June led prices to rise by about 
20 percent compared to the time of the May 
Statement, although they declined following 
the announcement of a ceasefire. More 
broadly, oil prices have faced downwards 
pressure this year from weaker global 
growth expectations and increasing supply 
commitments from OPEC+.
The USD has continued to depreciate 
since the May Statement. The US Dollar 
Index (DXY), which tracks the USD against 
a basket of major currencies, is 1.5 percent 
lower over this period and has depreciated 
by around 10 percent since the start of 2025. 
The depreciation earlier this year appears to 
have been due to global investors reducing 
their exposure to the USD amid heightened 
uncertainty around US policy. The Bank 
for International Settlements noted this 
was largely a result of increased hedging 
activity among non‑US investors. Since the 
May Statement, the USD has stabilised and 
recent changes in the value of the USD 
appear more aligned with traditional drivers. 
Expectations for more policy rate cuts in the 
US relative to other major economies has 
supported the depreciation in the USD over 
this period. 


28
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Figure 3.6
Financial market participants’ 
expectations for the OCR
Source: Bloomberg.
The blue line shows expectations for the OCR immediately before the May Statement. Each data 
point represents market expectations of the level of the OCR at a given point in the future, as 
measured by overnight indexed swap pricing.
Domestic financial conditions
Domestic financial conditions have 
continued to ease, supported by the lower 
OCR. Wholesale interest rates, such as swap 
rates, have declined modestly, reflecting 
declines in global interest rates and weak 
domestic macroeconomic data. Financial 
market participants have lowered their 
expectations for the OCR over 2026. The 
NZD has depreciated on a trade‑weighted 
basis. Most retail mortgage and term deposit 
rates have declined. Term deposit rates have 
fallen by more than equivalent wholesale 
rates, contributing to lower‑than‑otherwise 
bank funding costs.  
Expectations for the OCR over the 
medium term have decreased 
Market participants expect further 
reductions in the OCR over the next year, 
and to a lower level than at the time of 
the May Statement (figure 3.6). Market 
participants’ expectations for the OCR at the 
August and October 2025 meetings have 
increased. This is consistent with a slightly 
slower pace of monetary policy easing over 
the near term than expected at the May 
Statement. However, market participants 
now expect the OCR will trough around 
2.7 percent in the June 2026 quarter, lower 
and later than expected at the time of the 
May Statement. This is in part due to weaker 
domestic economic conditions. 
Swap rates have declined slightly since 
the May Statement (figure 3.7). Most of this 
decline occurred in the first week of August, 
following a reduction in global interest rates 
after weaker‑than‑expected US labour 
market data for July 2025.  
Wholesale interest rate curves have 
steepened significantly over the past year. 
This steepening of the yield curve reflects 
the contrasting impacts of domestic and 
global factors on different parts of the curve. 
Domestically, expectations for monetary 
policy easing have been a key driver of 
lower short‑term wholesale interest rates. 
In contrast, higher global long-term rates 
have put upward pressure on longer-term 
domestic wholesale interest rates, reflecting 
rising global term premia due to heightened 
uncertainty.  
Source: Bloomberg.
Figure 3.7
New Zealand interest rate swaps 


29
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
The New Zealand dollar has 
depreciated 
As of 14 August, the NZD TWI had 
depreciated by 0.4 percent since the May 
Statement (figure 3.8). This largely reflects 
global factors, including stronger‑than-
expected US GDP data for the June 2025 
quarter and the July 2025 monetary 
policy decisions in Australia and the 
US. An appreciation in the euro due to 
accommodative fiscal policy has also put 
downwards pressure on the NZD TWI. 
Weaker domestic economic data have 
also contributed to a broad‑based decline 
in the TWI. 
However, the NZD TWI has appreciated 
by around 2.1 percent since the start of 
2025. Despite recent moves, the USD has 
generally been weak in 2025. This was 
most pronounced in April 2025 following 
US tariff announcements. The USD, along 
with the currencies closely linked to it (the 
Chinese yuan, the Hong Kong dollar, and the 
Vietnamese dong) account for 40 percent of 
New Zealand’s TWI basket. 
Mortgage rates have declined, and 
mortgage holders are increasingly 
fixing for longer terms 
Mortgage rates are slightly lower than at 
the time of the May Statement (figure 3.9). 
The largest decline was at the 6‑month term. 
The declines in 1‑ and 2‑year mortgage 
rates have been smaller, although these 
terms had the lowest rates at the time 
of the May Statement. The trend toward 
short‑term mortgage fixing that began during 
the second half of 2024 contributed to a 
significant increase in the proportion of fixed 
mortgage lending repricing over recent 
quarters. However, this trend has started 
to reverse in recent months (figure 3.10). 
The proportion of fixed mortgage lending 
repricing each quarter is expected to fall over 
coming quarters as mortgages fixed for 1 year 
or more begin to make up a greater share of 
the stock of mortgages.  
Figure 3.8
New Zealand dollar trade‑weighted index
(nominal)
Source: RBNZ.
Figure 3.9
New Zealand mortgage rates 
Source: interest.co.nz, RBNZ. 
Note: The average mortgage yield is the monthly yield on the total stock of residential 
mortgages for registered banks. The other rates are the average of the advertised 
fixed‑term rates on offer from ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac for mortgages with a 
loan‑to‑value ratio of less than 80 percent. 
Figure 3.10
Proportion of new mortgage lending volume by tenor
Source: RBNZ. 


30
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Our estimate of bank funding spreads has 
been stable. Strong bank funding positions 
and weak credit growth have reduced the 
need for banks to compete aggressively 
for term deposit funding. As a result, term 
deposit rates have declined by more than 
the equivalent wholesale interest rates over 
the first half of 2025 (figure 3.11). Lower term 
deposit spreads have offset the increase 
in relative costs of deposits held in on-call 
accounts, resulting in lower‑than‑otherwise 
bank funding spreads and a period of stable 
bank funding conditions. 
We do not expect the Depositor 
Compensation Scheme to have a material 
impact on financial conditions over the 
horizons relevant for monetary policy. By 
reducing the risks to eligible deposits, the 
scheme incentivises depositors to spread 
deposits across multiple institutions. This 
may support funding for some smaller firms. 
There may also be some small adjustment 
in deposit rates: for example, to absorb the 
scheme levy or in response to the extra 
protection provided by the scheme. Overall, 
these effects are likely to be at the margin 
and we do not expect any material effect on 
credit availability or financial conditions.  
Figure 3.11
Term deposit spreads to wholesale rates 
(8‑week moving average)
Source: interest.co.nz, Bloomberg, RBNZ estimates. 


31
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Chapter 
04
Special topics
Egmont National Park. Photo: Lucas Chen


32
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Chapter 4. 
Special topics 
Before the publication of each Statement, RBNZ staff provide 
analyses of some topical issues to the Monetary Policy Committee. 
Topics for the August Statement included:
1.	 Household sector developments and outlook
2.	 Assessing developments in inflation expectations
Special topics in the past 12 months
Topic
Date/publication
How does uncertainty affect the New Zealand economy?
May 2025 Statement (Chapter 4)
The transmission of higher global tariffs to the 
New Zealand economy
May 2025 Statement (Chapter 4)
The implications of global tariffs for the New Zealand 
economy
February 2025 Statement (Chapter 4)
Outlook for some of New Zealand’s key commodity 
exports
February 2025 Statement (Chapter 4)
Trends in production sectors of the New Zealand economy
November 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)
Summary of recent business visits
November 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)
Real interest rates and their effect on the economy
November 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)
Price‑setting behaviour in a low‑inflation environment
August 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)
Comparing macroeconomic conditions in economies
at different stages of monetary policy easing
August 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)


33
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Household sector developments and outlook
Summary
•	 Private consumption and residential 
investment together account for about 
two‑thirds of economic activity in 
New Zealand. Both are important for the 
transmission of monetary policy, and how 
they respond to lower interest rates is a 
key aspect of the inflation outlook. 
•	 Since the MPC began lowering the OCR, 
consumption has increased broadly as 
expected. While consumption growth 
is currently subdued, declines in real 
and nominal interest rates over the past 
year will support higher growth over the 
medium term. 
•	 Residential investment has declined 
more than expected since 2022 
but now appears to be stabilising. 
Residential investment is expected to 
begin increasing from late 2025 because 
of lower interest rates, increasing 
population growth, and increasing real 
house prices.
•	 Historically, consumption and 
residential investment in New Zealand 
have been tightly linked to house price 
cycles. House price inflation has been 
lower than previously assumed over the 
past year. 
Figure 4.1
Private consumption 
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
How have consumption and 
residential investment evolved 
compared to our forecasts? 
Private consumption has grown broadly as 
expected since the August 2024 Statement 
(figure 4.1). Forecast errors have been 
relatively small, especially in the context of 
substantial data revisions by Stats NZ. In the 
September 2024 quarter GDP release, the 
level of consumption was revised upwards 
materially from 2022 (see box A in the 
February 2025 Statement). 


34
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
However, residential investment has been 
weaker than expected. Residential investment 
has decreased by more than we expected 
since the August 2024 Statement, partly 
reflecting historical revisions (figure 4.2). 
Residential investment appears to have 
reached about its trough in early to mid-2025. 
This is consistent with usual lags between 
residential investment and new building 
consents. The number of new building 
consents per month has been broadly 
unchanged over the past year. However, 
residential investment has fallen by more than 
expected, and by more than what historical 
relationships with building consents would 
suggest.9 The larger‑than‑expected fall in 
residential investment is consistent with real 
house prices being weaker than we expected 
over the same period.
Factors influencing household 
spending
Real interest rates have fallen quickly since 
late last year. When interest rates are lowered, 
the drop in returns makes saving less attractive, 
and households switch to consuming more 
instead. Lower interest rates also reduce 
debt‑servicing costs, freeing up income to 
spend more on consumer goods and services. 
A range of real interest rate measures has been 
falling sharply from the last quarter of 2024 
(figure 4.3). Lower interest rates take time to fully 
transmit to household spending, and will further 
support consumption over the medium term.
Mortgage holders continue to refix onto lower 
rates. Nominal interest rates on new mortgages 
fell substantially in the second half of 2024 
(figure 3.9). Longer-term interest rates declined. 
However, in anticipation of further mortgage 
rate declines, a large share of households fixed 
for shorter terms at relatively high interest rates 
during 2024 (figure 3.10). This shift delayed 
the impact of lower mortgage rates at longer 
terms on household debt‑servicing costs. More 
recently, households have begun to fix for 
longer terms at lower rates, meaning that less 
of their income will be spent on servicing their 
mortgages.
9	
The weakness in residential investment relative to building consents may be explained by an increase in the delay between the issuance of 
consents and the commencement of construction, an increase in the time taken to complete building projects, and an increase in the share of 
consents that are issued but never completed.
Household income growth is weak, reflecting 
falling employment and declining wage 
growth. Real household disposable income is 
made up of nominal income from labour and 
other sources deflated by consumer prices. 
At an aggregate level it has been relatively 
stagnant since 2021 (figure 4.4).  On a per 
capita basis, real incomes declined over this 
period. This has limited household spending.
Figure 4.2
Residential investment 
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 4.3
Real interest rates
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: The New Zealand Structural Inflation Model (NZSIM) is the Reserve Bank’s central 
forecasting model. The real interest rate measure in NZSIM uses a mortgage rate measure 
based on the OCR plus a representative spread between mortgage rates and wholesale 
rates at popular borrowing terms. The average of 20 combinations includes combinations 
of five nominal interest rates and four measures of inflation expectations (see chapter 4.3 
in the November 2024 Statement). This average has been rescaled to have the same 
mean and standard deviation as the NZSIM real rate over this period for comparability.


35
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
In aggregate, household consumption 
has exceeded household income since 
the beginning of 2022. Historically, 
New Zealand households have, in aggregate, 
tended to spend more than they earn 
(figure 4.5). However, households managed 
to save during the COVID‑19 pandemic, 
when spending opportunities were limited 
by pandemic‑related restrictions and the 
government provided income support. 
Since then, the aggregate household 
saving rate has now declined back to 
pre‑COVID‑19 levels. This implies that 
there is less scope for growing household 
consumption in the absence of an increase 
in income growth. Another factor that could 
constrain consumption is that inflation for 
less discretionary spending such as for food, 
electricity, and council rates is relatively 
high. This leaves less income available for 
discretionary spending.
Housing dominates household assets in 
New Zealand, and so declining real house 
prices are reducing household wealth. 
Annual house price growth has been lower 
than annual CPI inflation since mid‑2022. 
As a result, real household wealth has been 
declining over the same period (figure 4.6). 
Growth in wealth from other sources is also 
currently low.
Household wealth can be an important 
determinant of household spending. 
Households tend to spend more and save 
less when their net wealth increases. House 
prices are also an important determinant of 
residential investment. When house prices 
rise relative to the cost of building houses, it 
encourages the construction of new houses. 
Low population growth, reflecting low 
net immigration, is reducing growth in 
aggregate household income, spending, 
and rents. Reserve Bank research has 
found that increases in net immigration flows 
support residential investment, rents, and 
overall economic activity in New Zealand.10 
Annual net immigration has fallen from a peak 
of around 2.6 percent of the working‑age 
10	
See for example Bentley, Cassino and Ngo (2023), What Drives Rents in New Zealand? National and Regional Analysis; Smith and 
Thoenissen (2018), Migration and Business Cycle Dynamics; Javed, Power and Richardson (2025), Immigration and the New Zealand 
economy (forthcoming).
population in mid‑2023 to around 0.2 percent 
in mid‑2025 (figure 2.4). Slower population 
growth has been an important contributor 
to recent subdued aggregate consumption 
growth. Net immigration is assumed to 
increase slowly over the medium term, 
reflecting New Zealand’s relatively weak 
labour market.
Figure 4.4
Composition of real household sector income growth
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.  
Note: For illustrative purposes, compared to the categories reported by Stats NZ we have 
recategorised interest payments on rental properties into net interest income instead of 
business income. Net HHDI represents net household disposable income. 
Figure 4.5
Household sector real net disposable 
income, consumption, and saving
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


36
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
The outlook for consumption 
and residential investment 
Our projection assumes that consumption 
and residential investment will rise 
considerably over the medium term, 
enabling the output gap to close. However, 
it is uncertain whether consumption and 
residential investment will increase by as 
much as we assume. As discussed above, 
house prices and household wealth are 
important drivers of household spending. 
Historically, house price cycles have 
correlated reasonably closely with those 
in consumption and residential investment 
(figure 4.7). 
Annual consumption growth is expected 
to increase to almost 3 percent in 2026, 
in response to lower interest rates. 
Consumption growth is assumed to increase 
over the coming year as lower interest rates 
transmit to spending, income, and wealth 
broadly in line with historical relationships. 
However, given that house prices have been 
lower than expected over the past year, there 
is some risk that house price growth remains 
subdued and consumption growth will be 
lower as a result. In contrast, if house price 
growth increases more quickly than assumed, 
consumption growth could be higher. 
Residential investment is expected to 
remain around current levels, increasing 
only from late 2025. Building consents 
have been broadly flat over the past year, 
suggesting that residential investment will 
be broadly flat over 2025. The projection 
assumes that residential investment will then 
recover over 2026 and 2027 as house prices 
and population growth increase. 
Figure 4.7
Cyclical gaps of real house prices, 
consumption, and residential investment
(deviation from trend)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Gaps are the deviations from the assumed long‑run trends used in the Reserve Bank’s 
main forecasting model, NZSIM.
Figure 4.6
Real household wealth
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Compared to the categories reported by Stats NZ, we have recategorised the implied 
value of rental property from equity in unincorporated businesses to housing and land, and  
the value of loans on rental properties from equity in unincorporated business to loans. 
Components of net wealth are not available for the March 2025 quarter.


37
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Assessing developments in inflation expectations
Summary
•	 Inflation expectations can play an 
important role in shaping how inflation 
will evolve, as they influence how 
businesses set their prices and approach 
wage negotiations. At shorter horizons, 
inflation expectations measured from 
household and business surveys tend to 
move with changes in actual CPI inflation.  
•	 Surveyed inflation expectations have 
increased since the start of 2025. Across 
most survey measures the increases are 
small and can be explained by the recent 
increase in annual CPI inflation. 
•	 However, mean 1‑year‑ahead household 
inflation expectations have increased 
beyond what can be explained by recent 
inflation outcomes alone. This trend has 
been observed across several advanced 
economies, suggesting the influence of 
common global factors such as tariffs or 
heightened geopolitical tensions. Higher 
food or other ‘salient’ prices may also be 
a factor. However, our analysis suggests 
they can explain only a small part of 
the recent rise in household inflation 
expectations in New Zealand. 
•	 We monitor a broad set of indicators 
to assess inflationary pressures in the 
economy. Our analysis suggests that 
modelled ‘adaptive’ measures — derived 
from past inflation outcomes — perform 
best at predicting non‑tradables inflation.  
11	
Measures from the new Tara‑ā‑Umanga Business Expectations Survey have also increased. Given the relatively short history of this survey, it is not yet possible to 
say whether this is normal. Therefore, these data are not included in the analysis.
Household inflation expectations 
have increased sharply
Inflation expectations influence how 
inflation will evolve. Expectations of higher 
future inflation can motivate businesses to 
set higher prices and workers to demand 
higher wages, leading to higher actual 
inflation. Longer‑term inflation expectations 
reflect the credibility of the central bank in 
meeting its inflation target.
Across all surveys, short‑term inflation 
expectations have increased since the 
beginning of the year, most notably among 
households. Long‑term inflation expectations 
have remained near 2 percent in our 
Survey of Expectations across professional 
forecasters and business leaders, 
while 5‑year‑ahead household inflation 
expectations rose further in the third quarter 
of 2025.11
Figure 4.8
New Zealand surveyed inflation expectations and 
predicted values based on past CPI inflation
(annual)
Source: RBNZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Dotted lines indicate fitted values. Fitted values are derived from equations 
estimated with lags of annual CPI inflation.


38
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Movements in shorter‑term inflation 
expectations usually correlate well with 
recent inflation outcomes. This correlation 
has continued for expectations from the RBNZ 
Survey of Expectations (figure 4.8). However, 
since the start of 2025, 1‑year‑ahead 
household inflation expectations have 
increased significantly more than would be 
expected based on actual inflation.12 
There are several possible 
reasons for elevated 1‑year‑ahead 
household inflation expectations 
First, households may focus 
disproportionately on ‘salient prices’ when 
forming their inflation expectations.13 
Salient prices are the prices of frequently 
purchased or highly visible items such as 
food, petrol, energy, or council rates. Our 
analysis suggests that salient prices explain a 
small portion of the recent rise in household 
inflation expectations. 
12	
Median 1‑year‑ahead household inflation expectations have increased by less than mean expectations and stayed flat at 4 percent since the 
March 2025 quarter. This reflects an increase in the share of households expecting high inflation rates.
13	
For example, see Brassil et al. (2024) and D’Acunto et al. (2024).
14	
See Bayarmagnai (2023), Rational inattention to inflation among New Zealand households.
Second, households may remain more 
price‑sensitive and attentive to prices given 
recent high inflation. Previous Reserve Bank 
research found that households pay more 
attention to inflation developments during 
times of high inflation.14 This may amplify the 
normal impact of price increases on their 
expectations.
Third, some households may see global 
factors such as tariffs or geopolitical 
tensions adding to inflationary pressures. 
This is plausible given that household inflation 
expectations have also recently increased in 
some other small open advanced economies 
(figure 4.9). We anticipate that higher US tariffs 
will reduce inflation pressures slightly 
in New Zealand. However, global media 
reports frequently focus on tariffs leading 
to price increases in other parts of the 
world, which may be nudging up inflation 
expectations here.
Figure 4.9
Surveyed household inflation expectations and fitted values
(annual)
Source: Melbourne Institute, Bank of Canada, Konjunktur Institutet, Norges Bank, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Dotted lines indicate fitted values derived from equations estimated with lags of headline inflation. Solid lines are the published 
household 1‑year ahead inflation expectations considered by the country’s central bank.
a. Australia
b. Canada
c. Norway
d. Sweden


39
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
It is best to use a broad set of 
‘price‑setting’ measures to assess 
inflationary pressures 
We used a Phillips curve equation to 
investigate the predictive power of various 
indicators of inflationary pressures for 
non‑tradables inflation.15 We assessed 
the forecast performance of surveyed 
inflation expectations measures, as well as 
various modelled ‘adaptive’ measures of 
price‑setting behaviour. These measures 
are modelled on the assumption that 
price-setting behaviour adapts over time 
to changes in actual inflation.16 We also 
assessed cost expectations and selling 
price measures from the Quarterly Survey 
of Business Opinion and ANZ Business 
Outlook surveys.
Elevated household inflation expectations 
do not necessarily mean higher inflationary 
pressure. Adaptive measures of price‑setting 
behaviour that give more weight to recent 
inflation have performed best at forecasting 
non‑tradables inflation one quarter ahead. 
This finding aligns with previous analysis by 
Kendall and Sing (2025). We also find that 
surveyed cost expectations and selling price 
variables provided the most signalling power 
during the COVID‑19 surge and subsequent 
decline in inflation. This suggests they may 
be helpful for signalling large changes in 
inflationary pressure. Surveyed measures 
of inflation expectations had less predictive 
power than other indicators, with the 
household measure performing slightly 
worse than the others.17
15	
This Philips curve equation models non‑tradables inflation as a function of its own lag, the output gap, real wages, and a measure of 
price‑setting behaviour or inflation expectations. It is similar to the Phillips curve equation in the Reserve Bank’s core forecasting model, 
NZSIM. 
16	
For more details, see Kendall and Sing (2025), How well do different measures of price‑setting behaviour explain non‑tradables 
inflation? 
17	
This result differs from those found in previous RBNZ research by Chadwick and Smith (2023), Great Expectations: performance of 
survey inflation expectations at improving model‑based inflation forecasts, likely due to differences in the functional form of the 
regression equations, the forecast horizons evaluated, the indicators included in the exercise, and the sample periods examined.
It is best to use a broad set of measures 
to assess inflationary pressures in the 
economy, rather than relying on any one 
measure. Our analysis suggests that most of 
the variation in non‑tradables inflation can be 
explained by its lagged value and changes in 
the output gap. Adding the various indicators 
of price‑setting behaviour and inflation 
expectations helped improve near‑term 
forecasts only slightly. 
Recent increases in surveyed 
inflation expectations reduce the 
downside risk to our assumptions 
of price‑setting behaviour
Along with the output gap, price-setting 
behaviour is a key driver of non‑tradables 
inflation in the Reserve Bank’s core 
forecasting model, NZSIM. In the 
August 2024 Statement, we revised our 
assumptions for price‑setting behaviour over 
the medium term to respond faster to falling 
inflation. This was because our modelling 
exercises showed that adaptive measures, 
which are more sensitive to recent inflation, 
performed best at explaining non‑tradables 
inflation. This change led to a lower path for 
inflationary pressure in the projection. At 
the time, we noted that survey measures of 
inflation expectations had been declining 
even more rapidly than these measures, 
which was a possible downside risk. 


40
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
The recent increase in household inflation 
expectations has brought it more in line 
with the range suggested by our modelled 
measures of price‑setting behaviour 
(figure 4.10). While the 1‑year‑ahead 
household inflation expectations measure is 
not one of our strongest indicators for how 
price‑setting behaviour evolves, we consider 
it alongside our range of adaptive and other 
survey measures. The recent increase in 
household inflation expectations removes 
some of the downside risk to our assumption 
for price‑setting behaviour in NZSIM that the 
survey measures previously presented (see 
chapter 4.1 in the August 2024 Statement 
for further discussion).
Figure 4.10
Indicators of price‑setting behaviour 
and inflation expectations
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: Measures have been standardised over history to make them comparable given 
differences in historical averages and degrees of variability between measures. Price-setting 
behaviour shows the current assumption used in our projections. The vertical axis shows 
how many standard deviations away from its historical average each measure is, where zero 
indicates the historical average. The shaded area shows the range of modelled measures, 
which include adaptive measures of the form used in NZSIM with varying sensitivities to 
recent inflation, and a measure based on the simple average of headline inflation over the 
past 3 years. 


41
Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Chapter 
05
Economic 
projections
Lake Wakatipu. Photo: Rebecca Williams


42
Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Chapter 5.
Economic projections
This chapter summarises the economic projections that 
the MPC considered when making their policy assessment. 
The projections were finalised on 14 August 2025.
Significant spare capacity has emerged in 
the New Zealand economy over the past 
year. A broad range of data suggests that 
economic activity contracted in the June 
2025 quarter. Spare capacity is assumed 
to have increased further in the June 2025 
quarter and is putting substantial downward 
pressure on core inflation. Headline inflation 
has increased recently, accounted for by 
higher prices for traded goods and services, 
but this is not expected to persist. Lower 
interest rates are supporting economic 
growth, which will contribute to the output 
gap closing over the medium term.
These projections assume global tariff 
policy as of 14 August. Higher US and 
retaliatory tariffs are expected to cause 
lower-than-otherwise world economic 
growth, and have an overall small 
disinflationary effect in New Zealand. US 
trade policy is highly changeable, and its 
effects on the world economy are uncertain.
We assume elevated global economic 
uncertainty causes weaker‑than‑otherwise 
business investment and household 
consumption in New Zealand. To date, 
indicators of economic uncertainty have 
declined broadly as assumed in the May 
Statement. However, it is possible that 
economic uncertainty has had a greater 
negative effect on New Zealand’s economic 
activity than assumed. 
Prices for New Zealand’s exports are high, 
supporting exporter incomes. All else 
equal, high export prices add to inflationary 
pressure and support economic activity. 
Annual CPI inflation is expected to increase 
to the top of the 1 to 3 percent target band 
in the September 2025 quarter, but is 
expected to decrease toward the target 
mid‑point over the next year. The increase 
in CPI inflation is accounted for by tradables 
components including dairy and meat prices, 
which do not typically contribute to persistent 
inflationary pressure. Non‑tradables 
inflation has continued to decrease, and 
is approaching a level consistent with CPI 
inflation near the 2 percent target mid‑point.
The New Zealand labour market has 
continued to weaken. The unemployment 
rate increased to 5.2 percent in the June 
2025 quarter, while the employment rate 
and participation rate decreased. We project 
the unemployment rate to increase slightly 
further in the near term, before decreasing 
over the projection in line with the recovering 
output gap. Same‑job wage growth has 
decreased to a level consistent with headline 
inflation near the target mid‑point.
We project the OCR will continue to be 
reduced. The negative output gap is putting 
downward pressure on inflation. This is 
offsetting price‑setting behaviour, which 
remains elevated following the recent period 
of higher inflation. Price‑setting behaviour 
is assumed to continue to adapt to a 
low‑inflation environment over the medium 
term. Lower interest rates are required to 
support the output gap to close over the 
projection, so that CPI inflation settles at the 
2 percent target mid‑point.
These projections represent what we 
believe to be the most likely path for 
the economy, conditional on a range of 
assumptions. However, it is only one of 
many possible paths. Global economic 
developments and the evolution of the 
domestic economy are likely to be different 
to our assumptions. 


43
Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Table 5.1 
Key projection assumptions
Key assumptions
Domestic 
capacity 
pressures
•	 The output gap is assumed to remain low for the remainder of 2025 (‑1.8 percent of 
potential GDP in the September 2025 quarter). This is about 0.2 percentage points 
lower than assumed in the May Statement.
•	 Potential causes of this weakness include:
	-
a greater‑than‑assumed effect from elevated uncertainty; 
	-
a reduction in government investment and consumption;
	-
slower‑ or weaker‑than‑assumed monetary policy transmission;
	-
a lower neutral interest rate than we have assumed;
	-
an uneven recovery across sectors;
	-
some combination of the above or other factors.
•	 It is not possible to isolate which of these has been the cause in real time. However, 
weaker economic activity is assumed to result in less inflationary pressure over the 
medium term than assumed in the May Statement.
•	 We assume that lower interest rates and high export prices will support higher 
growth over the next year.
Global factors
•	 The projection assumes US tariff policy will cause lower‑than‑otherwise 
trading‑partner economic growth, and is slightly disinflationary for New Zealand 
overall.
•	 We assume tariff policies reduce growth in New Zealand’s trading partners by about 
0.5 percentage points over the next year. This is expected to dampen demand for 
New Zealand’s exports, all else equal.
•	 However, prices for New Zealand’s key export commodities have increased 
significantly in the past year. Fiscal stimulus in China has contributed to demand for 
New Zealand’s exports, and constrained supply of dairy and meat products in the 
global market has also contributed to higher prices. We assume New Zealand’s 
export prices will decrease gradually in real terms towards their long‑term average 
over the medium term.
•	 Import prices, as measured in the System of National Accounts, were higher than we 
had assumed in the March 2025 quarter. We continue to assume import prices will 
decrease in real terms over the medium term.
•	 We assume the Dubai crude oil price remains at US$67 per barrel, in line with 
current futures pricing.
•	 World policy interest rates are expected to decrease more quickly than at the time 
of the May Statement. All else equal, this puts upward pressure on the New Zealand 
dollar and decreases tradables inflation in New Zealand.
•	 The New Zealand dollar trade‑weighted index (TWI) is assumed to remain at 68.0 
over the projection.
Economic 
uncertainty
•	 In the May Statement, we accounted for a substantial increase in measures of 
economic uncertainty that had occurred following US tariff announcements. 
Economic uncertainty was assumed to have material negative effects on business 
investment and household consumption in New Zealand, over and above the usual 
effect of weaker global growth.
•	 Our projections maintain a similar assumption, allowing for updated starting points 
in March 2025 quarter GDP data. We assume the effect of uncertainty on the 
output gap is less persistent than in the May Statement, consistent with declines in 
non‑news based uncertainty measures.


44
Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Economic growth
Production
•	 We assume that GDP growth was ‑0.3 percent in the June 2025 quarter, and remains 
relatively subdued at 0.3 percent in the September 2025 quarter. 
•	 Our forecasts for near‑term GDP growth account for possible residual seasonality 
in the headline production measure. Although the headline measure is seasonally 
adjusted, it currently appears to have a remaining predictable seasonal pattern. This 
likely reflects challenges with seasonal adjustment following the COVID‑19 period 
and shifts in the industry composition of the economy into industries with strong 
seasonality. Reported quarterly GDP growth may be overstated in December and 
March quarters and understated in June and September quarters.
•	 GDP is expected to increase more quickly than potential GDP from the December 
2025 quarter onwards, supported by lower interest rates, waning uncertainty, and 
the lagged effect of high export prices. The output gap is assumed to close by the 
beginning of 2028.
Consumption
•	 Consumption began to increase in late 2024 in response to lower interest rates. 
Consumption growth appears to have slowed in the June 2025 quarter, possibly in 
part due to heightened uncertainty caused by US trade policy.
•	 Consumption remains significantly below its trend level. We expect consumption 
to return to trend over the medium term as uncertainty wanes, lower interest rates 
encourage household spending, and house prices gradually increase.
•	 Our forecasts for near‑term consumption account for a possible misallocation 
between consumption and exports of travel services. It appears that consumption 
was understated in the December 2024 quarter and overstated in the March 2025 
quarter, with offsetting impacts in exports of travel services. We assume this issue 
does not affect total GDP.
•	 House prices have decreased over the past few months, below our expectation of 
modest growth in the May Statement. Lower house prices are assumed to contribute 
to lower‑than‑otherwise consumption growth, which reduces inflationary pressure. 
•	 House prices are within our suite of sustainable house price estimates, which means 
current house prices are consistent with long‑term fundamental factors. However, 
asset price valuation is inherently uncertain. Our estimates of the sustainable house 
price level are particularly sensitive to expectations of long‑term interest rates. 
We assume house prices will grow in line with wages in the medium term, after 
accounting for near‑term momentum.
Business 
investment
•	 Business investment increased unexpectedly at the end of 2024 and the start of 
2025, mainly accounted for by investment in plant, machinery, and equipment.
•	 We assume business investment will decline in the near term in response to the 
negative output gap and elevated uncertainty.
•	 Business investment is expected to recover over the medium term as the effect 
of uncertainty wanes and the output gap closes. The Investment Boost policy is 
assumed to support business investment over the projection.
Residential 
investment
•	 Residential investment has decreased about 22 percent since 2022, but increased 
slightly in the March 2025 quarter following six quarters of consecutive contraction. 
Timely indicators suggest activity in home building will remain broadly stable this year.
•	 We assume residential investment will begin to increase in 2026 in response to 
lower mortgage rates and increasing real house prices.


45
Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Government
•	 Government spending is assumed to be consistent with the fiscal forecasts in 
Budget 2025, updated for new data released for the March 2025 quarter.
•	 Government investment has decreased in 2025, contributing to the slowdown in 
economic activity. Government investment is projected to increase in 2026.
•	 Government consumption was higher in the March 2025 quarter than projected 
in Budget 2025. This flows through to a higher-than-otherwise projection for 
government consumption in the medium term. We assume that government 
consumption declines over the rest of 2025.
•	 Government spending contributes a similar amount to inflationary pressure over the 
medium term relative to the May Statement. 
Exports and 
imports
•	 Export volumes were lower than assumed in the March 2025 quarter, primarily 
because of lower‑than‑expected services export volumes. Following this, monthly 
merchandise trade data suggests goods export volumes have decreased more than 
expected in the June 2025 quarter. This has led to a lower starting point for export 
volumes, which we assume will recover at a slightly faster pace than potential GDP 
over the medium term.
•	 Import volumes are assumed to evolve in line with other components of GDP over 
the medium term.
Labour market
Employment 
and wages 
•	 The New Zealand labour market continued to weaken in the June 2025 quarter. The 
unemployment rate increased to 5.2 percent, and the employment rate and labour 
force participation rate declined.
•	 We assume the unemployment rate will reach its peak at 5.3 percent in the 
September 2025 quarter before gradually declining. Greater excess capacity 
relative to the May Statement leads to a slightly higher unemployment rate over the 
medium term.
•	 Annual same‑job wage growth decreased to 2.3 percent in the June 2025 quarter  
(LCI – private sector salary and wage rates, ordinary and overtime).  Same‑job wage 
growth is assumed to decrease slightly further due to current weak labour market 
conditions.
Migration
•	 Net working‑age immigration in the March 2025 quarter was revised lower and only 
increased slightly in the June 2025 quarter. We assume a gradual increase in net 
working‑age immigration over the medium term, to an annual rate of about 30,000, 
as the labour market recovers.


46
Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Inflation 
Headline 
inflation
•	 Annual CPI inflation increased to 2.7 percent in the June 2025 quarter. Annual 
inflation excluding administered prices was 2.0 percent in the June 2025 quarter.
•	 Annual CPI inflation is expected to increase to 3.0 percent in the September 2025 
quarter before declining to near the target mid‑point in the June 2026 quarter.
Non‑tradables
•	 Annual non‑tradables inflation decreased to 3.7 percent in the June 2025 quarter, 
in line with the May Statement. We expect the negative output gap to continue to 
reduce non‑tradables inflation as price‑setting behaviour continues to adapt to a 
low‑inflation environment. We project annual non‑tradables inflation will decrease to 
2.7 percent in 2026, before stabilising at about 3 percent from 2027.
•	 Administered and policy‑affected price changes are having a significant influence 
on non‑tradables inflation at present. These include prices such as council rates, 
electricity prices, university fees, and vehicle relicensing fees. In part, this reflects 
catch‑up following relatively low increases in administered prices during the 2021 
to 2023 high inflation period. Central and local government charges, as measured 
in the CPI, increased 10.8 percent in the year to the June 2025 quarter. Annual 
non‑tradables inflation excluding government charges was 2.6 percent in the June 
2025 quarter.
Tradables
•	 Annual tradables inflation increased to 1.2 percent in the June 2025 quarter. 
Tradables inflation is expected to increase further in the near term, before gradually 
decreasing. Higher food prices have been the main contributor to higher tradables 
inflation, but are not expected to contribute to persistent inflationary pressure.
•	 In the medium term, annual tradables inflation is assumed to gradually decline to 
around 0.6 percent. Slowing economic growth in our trading partners is expected to 
contribute to easing tradables inflation over the medium term.


47
Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Figure 5.3
Unemployment rate
(unemployed people as a share of the labour force,
seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Charts
Figure 5.1
Inflation components
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Dotted lines show the projections from the May Statement. The shaded 
area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI inflation 
over the medium term.
Figure 5.2
Private sector LCI wage inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 5.4
Real house prices and sustainable indicators
(index)
Source: CoreLogic, RBNZ estimates.
Note: See Brunton (2021), Measures for assessing the sustainability of house 
prices in New Zealand. The indicator range may be revised over time due to 
certain inputs being unobservable, such as neutral interest rates. The indicator 
range has been projected in line with our projections for wages and population 
growth. The projection assumes the neutral interest rate remains at its current level.
Figure 5.5
Production GDP
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 5.6
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
48
Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
 Chapter 
06
Appendices
Motutere Beach. Photo: Caitlin Davies


49
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Chapter 6.
Appendices
Appendix 1: Statistical tables
Table 6.1
Key forecast variables
GDP growth 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Annual
Unemployment 
rate
TWI
OCR
2023
Mar
-0.2
1.2
6.7
3.5
71.3
4.5
Jun
0.8
1.1
6.0
3.7
71.0
5.3
Sep
0.2
1.8
5.6
3.9
70.6
5.5
Dec
0.2
0.5
4.7
4.0
70.8
5.5
2024
Mar
0.1
0.6
4.0
4.4
71.6
5.5
Jun
-1.0
0.4
3.3
4.7
71.4
5.5
Sep
-1.0
0.6
2.2
4.9
70.9
5.4
Dec
0.5
0.5
2.2
5.1
69.5
4.6
2025
Mar
0.8
0.9
2.5
5.1
67.8
4.0
Jun
-0.3
0.5
2.7
5.2
69.1
3.4
Sep
0.3
0.9
3.0
5.3
68.8
3.1
Dec
0.8
0.3
2.7
5.2
68.0
2.7
2026
Mar
0.7
0.5
2.3
5.2
68.0
2.5
Jun
0.6
0.5
2.2
5.1
68.0
2.6
Sep
0.6
0.9
2.2
5.0
68.0
2.6
Dec
0.7
0.3
2.2
4.9
68.0
2.6
2027
Mar
0.8
0.4
2.1
4.8
68.0
2.7
Jun
0.8
0.4
2.0
4.7
68.0
2.7
Sep
0.8
0.9
2.0
4.6
68.0
2.8
Dec
0.7
0.3
2.0
4.5
68.0
2.8
2028
Mar
0.7
0.4
2.0
4.4
68.0
2.8
Jun
0.6
0.4
2.0
4.4
68.0
2.8
Sep
0.6
0.9
2.0
4.3
68.0
2.8


50
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Table 6.2
Measures of inflation and inflation expectations
2023
2024
2025
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Inflation (annual rates)
CPI
4.7
4.0
3.3
2.2
2.2
2.5
2.7
CPI non‑tradables
5.9
5.8
5.4
4.9
4.5
4.0
3.7
CPI tradables
3.0
1.6
0.3
‑1.6
‑1.1
0.3
1.2
Sectoral factor model
estimate of core inflation
4.6
4.1
3.5
3.3
3.0
2.9
2.8
CPI trimmed mean (30% measure)
5.0
4.5
3.8
2.7
2.5
2.2
2.4
CPI weighted median
4.4
4.4
3.5
2.8
2.6
2.2
2.2
GDP deflator (expenditure)
3.5
3.9
3.3
3.2
5.1
4.4
Inflation expectations 
Survey of Expectations
Tara‑ā‑Pūkenga (SOE)
1 year ahead
3.6
3.2
2.7
2.4
2.0
2.1
2.4
2.4
2 years ahead
2.8
2.5
2.3
2.0
2.1
2.1
2.3
2.3
5 years ahead
2.4
2.3
2.3
2.1
2.2
2.1
2.2
2.3
10 years ahead
2.3
2.2
2.2
2.0
2.2
2.1
2.2
2.2
Inflation expectations 
RBNZ Business Expectations Survey 
Tara‑ā‑Umanga (BES)
1 year ahead
2.2
2.1
2.3
2.4
2.5
2 years ahead
2.2
2.2
2.5
2.5
2.6
5 years ahead
2.8
2.8
3.0
3.1
3.2
10 years ahead
3.1
3.3
3.7
3.9
3.6
Inflation expectations 
RBNZ Household Expectations Survey 
Tara‑ā‑Whare (HES)
1 year ahead
5.5
5.1
5.3
4.1
4.1
4.9
5.6
6.0
2 years ahead
3.2
3.6
3.6
3.1
3.7
3.9
4.7
4.6
5 years ahead
2.1
3.6
3.0
3.4
3.4
3.6
3.7
4.1


51
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Table 6.3
Measures of labour market conditions	
(seasonally adjusted, changes expressed in annual percent terms, unless specified otherwise)	
2023
2024
2025
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Household Labour Force Survey
Unemployment rate
4.0
4.4
4.7
4.9
5.1
5.1
5.2
Underutilisation rate
10.8
11.3
11.9
11.7
12.2
12.4
12.8
Labour force participation rate
71.9
71.5
71.6
71.1
70.9
70.7
70.5
Employment rate 
(% of working‑age population)
69.0
68.3
68.3
67.6
67.3
67.1
66.8
Employment growth
2.7
0.9
0.1
-0.6
-1.2
-0.7
-0.9
Average weekly hours worked
33.6
33.8
33.3
33.3
33.1
33.0
32.7
Number unemployed
(thousand people)
123
134
143
148
156
156
158
Number employed 
(million people)
2.92
2.90
2.91
2.89
2.88
2.88
2.88
Labour force (million people)
3.04
3.04
3.05
3.04
3.04
3.04
3.04
Extended labour force
(million people)
3.13
3.14
3.16
3.14
3.14
3.15
3.16
Working‑age population
(million people, age 15+ years)
4.23
4.25
4.26
4.28
4.29
4.30
4.31
Quarterly Employment Survey — QES
Filled jobs growth
4.2
3.6
-0.2
-1.4
-0.9
-1.8
-1.2
Average hourly earnings growth 
(private sector, ordinary time)
6.6
4.9
3.9
3.2
4.0
3.8
4.6
Other data sources
Labour Cost Index growth, adjusted 
(private sector, ordinary and overtime)
3.9
3.8
3.6
3.3
3.0
2.6
2.3
Labour Cost Index growth, unadjusted
(private sector, ordinary time)
5.7
5.2
4.8
4.5
3.9
3.7
3.5
Estimated net working‑age 
immigration (thousands, quarterly)
13.4
8.0
5.3
1.3
3.5
2.1
3.2
Change in All Vacancies Index* 
-27.6
-27.3
-33.4
-31.4
-27.2
-21.7
-7.6
Note: The All Vacancies Index is produced by MBIE as part of the monthly Jobs Online report, which shows changes in job vacancies advertised 
by businesses on internet job boards. The unadjusted labour cost index (LCI) is an analytical index that reflects quality change in addition to price 
change (whereas the official LCI measures price changes only). For definitions of underutilisation, the extended labour force, and related concepts, 
see Statistics New Zealand (2016), Introducing underutilisation in the labour market. 
* The All Vacancies Index is a non‑seasonally adjusted series.


52
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Table 6.4
Composition of real GDP growth
(annual average percent change, seasonally adjusted, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
Final consumption expenditure
Private
4.8
4.5
2.4
0.2
6.4
3.3
1.0
0.2
2.2
2.6
2.7
Public authority
3.8
3.3
5.5
7.0
8.0
2.6
2.0
-0.8
-0.4
-0.2
0.5
Total
4.6
4.3
3.1
1.8
6.8
3.2
1.3
0.0
1.5
2.0
2.2
Gross fixed capital formation
Residential
-1.8
-0.1
2.7
2.2
2.6
-2.0
-5.5
-12.6
-2.2
8.2
12.5
Other
9.8
7.0
2.8
-2.3
11.3
5.0
0.2
-3.2
0.0
5.5
5.5
Total
6.6
5.2
2.8
-1.2
9.1
3.3
-1.1
-5.2
-0.4
6.0
6.9
Final domestic 
expenditure
5.0
4.5
3.0
1.1
7.3
3.2
0.7
-1.2
1.1
2.8
3.3
Stockbuilding*
0.2
-0.2
-0.2
-0.3
0.6
0.3
-1.5
0.2
0.8
0.0
0.0
Gross national 
expenditure
5.5
4.3
2.7
-0.1
8.4
3.7
-0.7
-1.0
1.9
2.8
3.3
Exports of goods 
and services
3.8
3.3
0.2
-17.9
2.5
5.6
8.3
2.6
1.7
3.3
2.9
Imports of goods 
and services
7.8
4.8
1.4
-15.7
17.1
4.5
-1.2
1.6
3.0
3.8
3.9
Expenditure on GDP
4.3
3.9
2.4
0.2
4.6
3.9
1.5
-0.9
1.5
2.6
3.0
GDP (production)
3.4
3.5
2.3
-0.3
4.6
3.5
1.4
-1.0
1.1
2.7
3.0
GDP (production, 
March qtr to March qtr)
3.5
3.5
0.7
4.7
0.5
3.0
1.3
-0.7
1.5
2.8
3.0
* Percentage point contribution to the growth rate of GDP.


53
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Table 6.5
Summary of economic projections
(annual percent change, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
Price measures
CPI 
1.1
1.5
2.5
1.5
6.9
6.7
4.0
2.5
2.3
2.1
2.0
Labour costs
1.9
2.0
2.4
1.6
3.1
4.5
3.8
2.6
2.1
2.0
2.0
Export prices
(in New Zealand dollars) 
3.4
1.3
7.0
-6.0
20.8
1.1
-2.1
11.1
0.8
0.2
1.4
Import prices
(in New Zealand dollars) 
1.6
4.1
2.4
-2.4
18.7
7.9
-3.7
6.7
-2.6
-0.3
1.0
Monetary conditions
OCR (year average)
1.8
1.8
1.2
0.3
0.5
3.1
5.5
4.9
3.0
2.6
2.8
TWI (year average)
75.6
73.4
71.7
72.4
74.0
71.2
71.0
69.9
68.5
68.0
68.0
Output
GDP (production, annual 
average % change)
3.4
3.5
2.3
-0.3
4.6
3.5
1.4
-1.0
1.1
2.7
3.0
Potential output (annual 
average % change)
3.2
3.1
2.5
0.0
1.9
3.3
2.7
1.7
1.5
2.0
2.4
Output gap (% of potential 
GDP, year average)
0.4
0.7
0.5
0.1
2.8
2.9
1.7
-1.1
-1.5
-0.8
-0.2
Labour market
Total employment 
(seasonally adjusted)
2.9
1.3
2.4
0.0
2.3
2.9
0.9
-0.7
0.8
2.6
2.3
Unemployment rate (March 
qtr, seasonally adjusted)
4.4
4.2
4.2
4.6
3.3
3.5
4.4
5.1
5.2
4.8
4.4
Trend labour productivity 
0.7
0.8
1.0
1.0
0.9
0.6
0.5
0.5
0.4
0.4
0.4
Key balances
Current account balance 
(% of GDP)
-3.1
-3.9
-2.4
-2.6
-6.7
-8.6
-6.6
-5.7
-4.7
-4.3
-4.4
Terms of trade
(SNA measure, annual 
average % change)
4.5
-2.1
2.0
-1.0
0.4
-5.0
-1.3
3.1
5.3
0.8
0.3
Household saving rate 
(% of disposable income)
-2.0
-1.3
1.4
7.6
2.4
-3.0
-1.6
-2.4
-0.5
-0.9
-1.3
World economy
Trading‑partner GDP 
(annual average % change)
4.0
3.5
1.8
-0.4
6.3
3.0
3.2
3.0
2.4
2.8
2.8
Trading‑partner CPI 
(TWI‑weighted)
1.9
1.4
2.4
0.8
4.1
4.8
2.2
1.8
2.1
1.9
2.1
 


54
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Appendix 2: Chart pack
Figure 6.1
Composition of CPI inflation
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 6.2
Output gap and output gap indicators
(share of potential)
Source: NZIER, MBIE, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The output gap indicators based on information from labour market surveys 
are shown separately from the other indicators. For each group of indicators, the 
shaded area shows the range of values and the line shows the mean value. The 
output gap estimate in the final quarter is based on our near‑term GDP estimate.
Figure 6.3
Unemployment and underutilisation rates
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 6.4
OCR and nominal neutral OCR indicator suite
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area indicates the range between the maximum and minimum 
values from our suite of long‑run nominal neutral OCR indicators. See Castaing et al. 
(2024), Estimates of New Zealand’s nominal neutral interest rate.
Figure 6.5
GDP and potential GDP
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.6
Measures of core inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for 
annual CPI inflation over the medium term.


55
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
Figure 6.7
Inflation expectations
(annual, years ahead) 
Source: RBNZ Survey of Expectations.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for 
annual CPI inflation over the medium term.
Figure 6.9
House price inflation
(annual) 
Source: REINZ.
Source: Stats NZ, Global Dairy Trade, Bloomberg, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.12
Terms of trade, dairy, and oil price indices
(index = 100 in the September 2008 quarter, quarterly average)
Figure 6.10
Mortgage interest rates
Source: interest.co.nz, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The rates shown for the fixed terms are the average of the advertised 
rates from ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac, shown as weekly data. The floating 
rate represents the monthly yield on floating housing debt from the RBNZ 
Income Statement survey.
Figure 6.8
Private sector wage growth
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 6.11
New Zealand dollar exchange rates
(monthly average) 
Source: NZFMA, RBNZ.


56
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. August 2025
