BANK: RBNZ
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: Monetary Policy Statement February 2025
DATE: 18/02/2025
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/monetary-policy-statements/2025/feb-19224/mps_report_feb2025.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Monetary Policy
Statement. 
February 2025
B.33


ii
Policy assessment. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Policy assessment.
OCR 3.75% — OCR reduced further as 
inflation abates
The Monetary Policy Committee today agreed to reduce  
the Official Cash Rate by 50 basis points to 3.75 percent.
Annual consumer price inflation remains near the 
mid-point of the Monetary Policy Committee’s 
1 to 3 percent target band. Firms’ inflation 
expectations are at target and core inflation 
continues to fall towards the target mid-point. 
The economic outlook remains consistent with 
inflation remaining in the band over the medium 
term, giving the Committee confidence to 
continue lowering the OCR.
Economic activity in New Zealand remains 
subdued. With spare productive capacity, 
domestic inflation pressures continue to ease. 
Price and wage setting behaviours are adapting 
to a low-inflation environment. The price of 
imports has fallen, also contributing to lower 
headline inflation.
Economic growth is expected to recover during 
2025. Lower interest rates will encourage 
spending, although elevated global economic 
uncertainty is expected to weigh on business 
investment decisions. Higher prices for some 
of our key commodities and a lower exchange 
rate will increase export revenues. Employment 
growth is expected to pick up in the second half 
of the year as the domestic economy recovers. 
Global economic growth is expected to remain 
subdued in the near term. Geopolitics, including 
uncertainty about trade barriers, is likely to 
weaken global growth. Global economic 
activity is also likely to remain fragile over the 
medium term given increasing geoeconomic 
fragmentation. 
Consumer price inflation in New Zealand is 
expected to be volatile in the near term, due to 
a lower exchange rate and higher petrol prices. 
The net effect of future changes in trade policy 
on inflation in New Zealand is currently unclear. 
Nevertheless, the Committee is well placed to 
maintain price stability over the medium term. 
Having consumer price inflation close to the 
middle of its target band puts the Committee  
in the best position to respond to future 
inflationary shocks. 
The Monetary Policy Committee today agreed to 
lower the Official Cash Rate by 50 basis points to 
3.75 percent. If economic conditions continue to 
evolve as projected, the Committee has scope to 
lower the OCR further through 2025.
Meitaki, thanks.
Adrian Orr 
Governor 
Figure i.1
Official Cash Rate (OCR)
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


iii
Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Report and supporting notes published at:
www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/monetary-policy-statement
Subscribe online: www.rbnz.govt.nz/email-updates
Copyright © 2025 Reserve Bank of New Zealand
This report is published pursuant to section 129
of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 2021. 
ISSN 1770-4829
Thank you to RBNZ staff for photography in this report. 
Cover: Buried Village of Te Wairoa. Photo: Allison Heydon
Monetary Policy Framework
The Monetary Policy Committee operates and makes 
decisions under the Monetary Policy Framework that 
comprises the following key components:
•	 the Remit;
•	 the Charter;
•	 the Code of Conduct; and
•	 the monetary policy strategy.
The corresponding documents to these components 
and additional information can be accessed on our 
website under the Monetary Policy Framework.


1
Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
The projections were finalised on 13 February 2025. The Official Cash Rate (OCR) 
projection incorporates an outlook for monetary policy that is consistent with the MPC’s 
monetary policy assessment, which was finalised on 19 February 2025. 
Contents
Policy assessment	
ii
1.	
Summary record of meeting	
2
2.	 Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook	
6
	
Box A:   Revisions to GDP data	
10
	
Box B:   Trends in non-tradables inflation components	
18
3.	 Global economy and financial markets	
21
4.	 Special topics	
29
	
4.1	 	The implications of global tariffs for the New Zealand economy	
31
	
4.2		Outlook for some of New Zealand’s key commodity exports 	
37
5.	 Economic projections	
40
6.	 Appendices	
46
	
Appendix 1: Statistical tables 	
47
	
Appendix 2: Chart pack 	
52
Monetary Policy Statement.
February 2025


Te Pukatea Bay. Photo: Hamish Fitchett
Summary 
record of 
meeting
Chapter 
01


3
Chapter 1. Summary record of meeting. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Chapter 1. 
Summary record of meeting
Annual consumer price index (CPI) inflation is sustainably within the 
Monetary Policy Committee’s 1 to 3 percent target range, and measures 
of core inflation are continuing to converge to the mid-point. Measures of 
firms’ inflation expectations sit close to the target mid-point.
A period of restrictive interest rates has reduced 
demand in the New Zealand economy and 
contributed to lower inflation. Subdued global 
economic activity, falling net immigration, and lower 
government consumption have slowed domestic 
demand. Increased policy uncertainty associated 
with global trade developments is also expected to 
decrease business investment. Headline inflation is 
expected to increase in coming quarters but remain 
within the target band. This increase reflects a lower 
New Zealand dollar exchange rate and higher oil 
prices. The Committee expects these relative price 
shifts will not affect inflation over the medium term. 
Expectations of future inflation, the pricing intentions 
of firms, and the degree of spare productive capacity 
are consistent with the CPI inflation target being 
sustainably achieved. This provides the context 
and the confidence for the Committee to continue 
lowering the OCR, and at a faster pace than 
projected in November. 
Global economic activity is expected to 
remain subdued
The Committee noted that GDP growth for many of 
our main trading partners remains below potential. In 
contrast, economic growth in the US has remained 
strong. Trading partner GDP growth is assumed 
to decline slightly over 2025. Global economic 
uncertainty has risen significantly since November, 
following recent trade policy announcements by 
the United States. In the near term, we expect that 
heightened economic uncertainty will constrain 
business investment amongst our trading partners 
and in New Zealand. 
Global headline inflation has increased 
modestly, reflecting higher energy prices
The Committee discussed inflation amongst 
New Zealand’s trading partners. Headline inflation 
has declined over the past year but has increased 
slightly in recent months. The recent increase in 
headline inflation in many of our trading partners 
is largely accounted for by higher fuel and energy 
prices. Market participants expect most central banks 
in advanced economies to continue reducing policy 
interest rates over the coming year. Market pricing 
implies that US policy rates are projected to fall by 
less than assumed at the time of the November 
Statement. 
GDP growth in New Zealand is expected 
to rise, reducing spare capacity in the 
economy
The Committee discussed recent domestic 
economic developments. Domestic economic activity 
remains below trend. This reflects falling activity in 
interest rate sensitive sectors such as construction, 
manufacturing, retail trade, and business investment. 
In contrast, activity in the primary sector has 
increased. New Zealand’s export prices have 
held up, despite subdued global growth. Global 
supply conditions in beef and dairy markets have 
supported export prices. This, coupled with a lower 
New Zealand dollar exchange rate, will increase 
export sector incomes in New Zealand.
Timely indicators of economic activity, including a 
range of business surveys, have improved in recent 
months. Lower interest rates and higher export 
earnings are expected to support economic growth. 
The pace is expected to be modest, as potential 
GDP growth is constrained by ongoing weakness 
in productivity growth and lower net immigration. 


4
Chapter 1. Summary record of meeting. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Government spending is expected to decline as a 
share of the economy over the medium term, in line 
with the Half-Year Economic and Fiscal Update 2024. 
GDP revisions better explain the 
evolution of core inflation over the 
past two years
GDP data was revised significantly since the 
November Statement. These revisions show that the 
level of New Zealand’s economic activity in 2024 
was higher than assumed in November. However, 
the revisions show the New Zealand economy 
experienced a larger contraction during the middle 
of 2024. Overall, there is significant spare capacity 
in the economy, and slightly more than we had 
assumed in November. 
The new profile for GDP helps explain the evolution 
of core inflation and broader measures of capacity 
pressure over the past two years. The higher level 
of GDP over the start of 2024 aligns with the signal 
taken from high frequency data at the time. The 
subsequent decline in GDP over the middle of 2024 
also aligns more closely with high frequency data, 
which was one of the factors that contributed to a 
downwards revision to the OCR outlook in August. 
Employment remains subdued, but is 
expected to improve later this year
The Committee discussed conditions in the New 
Zealand labour market. Wage growth is slowing, 
consistent with lower demand for workers and lower 
CPI inflation. Employment levels and job vacancies 
have declined, reflecting subdued economic activity. 
As employment growth typically lags economic 
growth, it is expected to pick up in the second 
half of the year. Net immigration to New Zealand 
has reduced significantly from high rates over 
recent history. The number of migrant arrivals has 
slowed over the past year, and departures of New 
Zealanders have increased, partly in response 
to subdued labour market conditions relative to 
Australia. 
Lower OCR continues to pass through 
to mortgage and term deposit rates
The Committee noted that wholesale interest rates 
in New Zealand have generally declined since 
the November Statement, in response to a lower 
OCR and weaker-than-expected economic activity. 
This decline in wholesale interest rates has been 
reflected in lower mortgage and term deposit rates. 
The average interest rate on outstanding mortgages 
has now peaked and is expected to decline over the 
next 12 months as borrowers refix their mortgage 
interest rates at lower levels. 
The financial system remains stable
The Committee agreed that there is currently 
no material trade-off between meeting inflation 
objectives and maintaining financial system stability. 
Some households and businesses are continuing to 
experience financial stress. While non-performing 
loans remain low compared to past recessions, some 
financial stress will persist in the near term, even as 
the economy recovers. The banking system remains 
well capitalised and in a strong financial position to 
support customers. 
Inflation is expected to remain within the 
target band 
The Committee discussed domestic inflationary 
pressure. Headline CPI inflation and firms’ inflation 
expectations at all horizons are close to the target 
mid-point. Measures of core inflation continue 
to converge on the target mid-point. Surveyed 
household inflation expectations remain more 
elevated and volatile.
Non-tradables inflation has fallen but remains high. 
With spare productive capacity remaining in the 
economy over the next 12 months, the Committee 
is confident that domestic inflationary pressures will 
continue to abate.
Headline inflation is expected to increase in coming 
quarters, reflecting a lower New Zealand dollar 
exchange rate and higher oil prices, but remain within 
the target band. However, underlying inflationary 
pressures are expected to continue to ease, and 
annual headline CPI inflation is forecast to remain 
near the 2 percent mid-point once the effect of 
recent increases in petrol prices on inflation wanes. 
The near-term increase in headline inflation is 
unlikely to significantly affect wage- and price-setting 
behaviour given excess capacity in the economy. 
The Committee noted that the monetary policy remit 
directs it to discount disturbances in inflation that are 
expected to be temporary, in a manner consistent 
with meeting the medium-term inflation target. 


5
Chapter 1. Summary record of meeting. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
There are near-term risks to the 
economic outlook 
The Committee discussed near-term risks to the 
outlook. The Committee noted that while lower 
interest rates are expected to underpin a recovery 
in the domestic economy, the speed and timing 
of the recovery is uncertain. In particular, recent 
revisions to June and September 2024 quarter 
GDP growth suggest momentum in the economy 
was considerably weaker than previously measured. 
The Committee noted that tighter international 
financial conditions presented downside risks to 
global growth, particularly for those countries with 
high debt levels or fixed exchange rate regimes. 
The Committee discussed global asset markets and 
the risk of a fall in equity prices if elevated earning 
projections are not realised, or if market participants 
reassess their appetite for risk.
There is a risk of increased trade 
barriers and broader geoeconomic 
fragmentation
The Committee discussed the risks posed by 
increased trade barriers. Over the medium term, 
these trade barriers could be increased much further. 
This is not currently incorporated into our central 
projection given uncertainty about the timing and 
magnitude of any potential changes. This uncertainty 
is heightened given trade protection is being used to 
pursue both economic and geopolitical goals. 
Increased trade barriers will reduce global 
productive capacity. As a small open economy, 
New Zealand cannot avoid being affected by these 
international developments. Monetary policy cannot 
offset the long-term negative supply-side effects of 
higher barriers to international trade. More generally, 
global economic activity is likely to be more exposed 
to economic shocks given increasing geoeconomic 
fragmentation.
An increase in trade restrictions is likely to reduce 
economic activity in New Zealand. But the effects on 
inflation are uncertain, as these depend on how trade 
disruptions transmit through the global economy. 
Such shocks are likely to take time to materialise, 
giving the Committee flexibility to react as necessary. 
Any monetary response will depend on the impact 
of trade restrictions on medium-term inflationary 
pressures.
The global economy faces a range 
of structural challenges
The Committee discussed the long-term structural 
challenges faced by the economy in China and 
the broader region. In addition, the Committee 
noted that geopolitical and climate-related risks 
pose uncertainty over the medium term. There 
may be higher relative price volatility and more 
unpredictability in headline inflation. The Committee 
agreed that having consumer price inflation close 
to the middle of its target band puts it in the best 
position to respond to any shocks to inflation.
The Committee agreed to lower 
the OCR 
With headline CPI inflation close to the mid-point, 
measures of core inflation converging on the 
mid‑point, stable business inflation expectations, 
and significant spare capacity in the economy, the 
Committee agreed that a further reduction in the 
OCR was appropriate. The Committee agreed that 
a 50 basis point reduction would be consistent with 
their mandate of maintaining low and stable inflation, 
while seeking to avoid unnecessary instability in 
output, employment, interest rates and the exchange 
rate. If economic conditions continue to evolve 
as projected, the Committee has scope to lower 
the OCR further through 2025. On Wednesday 19 
February the Committee reached a consensus to 
lower the Official Cash Rate by 50 basis points to 
3.75 percent.
Attendees:
Reserve Bank members of MPC: 
Adrian Orr (Chair), Christian Hawkesby, 
Karen Silk, Paul Conway 
External MPC members:
Bob Buckle, Carl Hansen, Prasanna Gai
Treasury Observer: 
James Beard
MPC Secretary: 
Adam Richardson


Chapter 
02
Economic 
assessment 
and monetary 
policy outlook
Mount Maunganui. Photo: Kate Allen


7
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Chapter 2.
Economic assessment and 
monetary policy outlook
Key points
An extended period of restrictive interest 
rates has reduced demand in the 
New Zealand economy and contributed 
to lower inflation. Subdued global growth, 
lower net immigration, and lower government 
consumption have also reduced demand. 
Combined with subdued prices for imports, 
easing domestic inflation has resulted in 
annual Consumers Price Index (CPI) inflation 
of 2.2 percent in the year to the December 
2024 quarter, within the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent 
target range. Businesses’ expectations for 
headline inflation at all horizons remain near 
the 2 percent target mid-point.   
Revisions to Gross Domestic Product 
(GDP) data suggest that economic activity 
in New Zealand has been higher, despite 
a larger contraction during the middle of 
2024. Overall, these revisions suggest that 
capacity pressures were higher over 2023 
and early 2024 than we had assumed. The 
revised data better explain the evolution of 
domestic inflation during this time. The larger 
decline in GDP in mid-2024 also better aligns 
with a range of timely indicators that fell over 
this period. These timely indicators now 
point to some recovery in growth in the final 
quarter of 2024 and into 2025. 
Recent developments in international trade 
policy have markedly increased uncertainty 
about the global economic outlook. 
Economic activity in our main trading partners 
is expected to remain below potential, and 
place downward pressure on global inflation. 
Services inflation is easing gradually, while 
goods inflation has declined rapidly over the 
past year. Advanced economy central banks 
have eased monetary policy and most official 
interest rates are expected to be reduced 
further. Despite subdued global economic 
activity, supply and demand factors for some 
New Zealand commodity exports, notably 
dairy and beef, have led to higher export 
prices in recent months.
Higher global tariffs will affect the 
New Zealand economy, with indirect 
effects likely to be most important. Tariffs 
would likely lower growth in our main trading 
partner economies. This would reduce 
demand for our exports, and therefore 
economic growth in New Zealand over 
the medium term. However, the effect on 
inflation is ambiguous over the medium term. 
It depends on factors such as the degree of 
trade diversion, supply-chain adjustment, and 
financial market responses.
There is significant spare capacity in 
the New Zealand economy. The output 
gap — the difference between GDP and 
the economy’s potential output — is 
estimated to have been about -1.7 percent 
of potential at the end of last year, reflecting 
the large decline in economic activity. The 
subsequent reduction in firms’ demand for 
labour contributed to the increase in the 
unemployment rate to 5.1 percent in the 
December 2024 quarter. Other measures 
of spare capacity in the labour market also 
increased. 


8
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Annual non-tradables inflation continued 
to decline to 4.5 percent in the year to the 
December 2024 quarter. Annual tradables 
inflation remained negative in the year to the 
December 2024 quarter, largely accounted 
for by declines in fuel prices during 2024. All 
annual core inflation measures continued to 
decline in the December 2024 quarter, and 
are within or very near the target band for 
headline CPI inflation. 
Conditional on our economic outlook, 
we project that the OCR will continue to 
decline. The MPC has been reducing the 
OCR since August 2024 as inflationary 
pressures have eased. The degree of spare 
capacity in the economy and adaptation 
of wage- and price-setting behaviour to a 
low-inflation environment are consistent 
with inflation returning sustainably to the 
2 percent target mid-point. Lower interest 
rates are assumed to increase demand and 
output in the economy.


9
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Economic assessment
1	
See box A in the August 2024 Statement.
Revisions to GDP data suggest 
that economic activity in New 
Zealand has been higher, despite 
a larger contraction during the 
middle of 2024.
Revisions suggest that the level of 
production GDP was 2.3 percent higher in 
the March 2024 quarter than previously 
measured (figure 2.1). These revisions imply 
that the economy grew relatively steadily 
between 2022 and early 2024, rather 
than being broadly flat. The profile of the 
revisions suggests that the output gap was 
more positive during this time than had 
been assumed. This revised profile for the 
output gap better explains the high and 
broad‑based domestic inflation experienced 
during that period (see box A). 
The larger decline in economic activity 
during the middle of 2024 aligns more 
closely with the weakness observed in 
a range of other, more timely, activity 
indicators.1 However, the 1.0 percent 
contraction in GDP in the September 2024 
quarter was larger than assumed in the 
November Statement. Production in the 
manufacturing, construction, and retail trade 
sectors was particularly weak. These sectors 
tend to be more sensitive to monetary policy. 
However, some of the weakness was also 
due to disruptions in energy supply and 
extremely high electricity prices experienced 
during the September quarter. Activity in 
the primary sector increased by 1.0 percent, 
mainly accounted for by growth in the dairy 
and forestry sectors.
Figure 2.1
Production GDP
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Production GDP is a measure of the volume of production and is expressed in 
2009/2010 prices.


10
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Box A
Revisions to GDP data
2	
See Gross domestic product: September 2024 quarter | Stats NZ.
3	
In theory, production and expenditure GDP should be equal.
Since the November Statement, GDP has 
been revised to a higher level.2 These 
revisions reflect the use of more accurate 
economic data that become available later 
(a process known as ‘annual benchmarking’) 
and methodological changes. The new data 
imply that GDP growth was stronger than 
previously measured by Stats NZ from 2022 
until the March 2024 quarter. As a result, 
the revised level of production GDP was 
2.3 percent higher in the March 2024 quarter 
than previously measured. This is large 
compared to previous revisions. 
The revisions to GDP do not have a material 
effect on our estimate of the output gap in 
the most recent quarter, because we rely 
on a broad suite of indicators to estimate 
capacity pressure in the economy. Using 
a suite of indicators is more robust to 
uncertainty about the current level of GDP. 
However, the revised profile of GDP (and 
larger contraction in GDP in the September 
2024 quarter than assumed in the November 
Statement) means that our profile for the 
output gap has changed over recent years. 
The output gap is now estimated to have 
been significantly more positive over 2023 
and early 2024, but to have declined more 
sharply over the middle of 2024 (figure 2.4). 
We estimate that the output gap declined 
from 1.3 percent of potential at the end of 
2023 to -1.7 percent at the end of 2024. Our 
estimate of the current output gap is close to 
the average of our suite of indicators. 
The revised profile of GDP and the output 
gap over 2023 and early 2024 better 
explain high domestic inflation during 
that time. At the time of the May 2024 
Statement, annual non-tradables inflation 
was still elevated at 5.8 percent in the year 
to the March 2024 quarter. This had been 
much higher and more broad-based across 
components than we expected. At the time, 
we attributed some of this to potential GDP 
having been lower, and the output gap 
having been higher as a result (see box A 
of the May 2024 Statement). However, this 
still did not fully explain high non-tradables 
inflation at the time. The revised output gap 
profile better explains inflation dynamics over 
the past few years. 
The revisions also alter our broader 
understanding of the economy. For 
example, they suggest that labour 
productivity — while still weak — did not 
decline by as much as previously estimated. 
Consistent with this, potential GDP growth 
is assumed to remain low, but slightly higher 
than assumed in the November Statement. 
The revisions have also significantly changed 
the composition of GDP in New Zealand 
since 2022. This can be seen clearly in the 
revisions to expenditure GDP. Expenditure 
GDP was also revised higher, but to a 
lesser extent than production GDP.3 Across 
the expenditure components, household 
consumption, government consumption, and 
government investment were revised higher, 
while business and residential investment 
were revised lower (figure A.1). 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure A.1
Contributions to revisions in expenditure GDP
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)


11
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
We expect economic growth to 
recover during 2025
Timely indicators of economic activity 
have improved slightly in recent months, 
although most remain subdued. Reported 
activity in the ANZ Business Outlook, the 
Performance of Services Index, electronic 
card transactions, and the ANZ Truckometer 
all suggest that economic activity recovered 
somewhat in the December 2024 quarter. 
However, the Performance of Manufacturing 
Index and reported activity in the Quarterly 
Survey of Business Opinion (QSBO) indicate 
further weakness in the quarter. Within the 
QSBO, businesses continue to say that 
orders are the factor most limiting production, 
consistent with subdued demand.
Economic growth is expected to increase 
during 2025, as lower interest rates and 
stronger earnings for some exporting 
industries support demand. Actual and 
expected declines in the OCR have led to 
lower mortgage and deposit interest rates 
at shorter terms in recent months (see 
chapter 3). Lower interest rates will take time 
to fully transmit to economic activity. Activity 
in some sectors will be more sensitive to 
lower interest rates than others. The lower 
New Zealand dollar exchange rate and 
improved global prices for some of our key 
export commodities will also support export 
sector earnings (see chapter 4.2). Higher 
earnings are likely to support an increase in 
investment and overall domestic spending. 
Household spending has been 
weak
Household consumption was revised up 
in recent years but has declined in recent 
quarters. Household consumption declined 
0.3 percent in the September 2024 quarter, 
and has been easing on a per capita basis 
since 2023. Weak household spending 
reflects restrictive interest rates, a weak 
labour market, subdued growth in asset 
prices, and below-average population 
growth. Household consumption is assumed 
to increase over the projection, supported by 
lower interest rates (figure 2.2).
Government consumption has 
declined, but from a higher level
Government consumption declined by 
1.9 percent in the September 2024 quarter. 
However, higher government expenditure 
(consumption and investment) was the 
largest contributor to the upwards revision 
in expenditure GDP since 2022 (figure A.1). 
According to the Half Year Economic 
and Fiscal Update (HYEFU) 2024, real 
government consumption is also expected to 
remain higher than assumed in Budget 2024. 
Overall, government expenditure is assumed 
to continue to decline slowly as a share of 
potential GDP but remain at a higher level 
than in the November Statement (figure 2.3).
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.2
Private consumption
(seasonally adjusted)
Figure 2.3
Government consumption and investment
(share of potential, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


12
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Private investment has fallen
Business and residential investment 
declined by 4.9 and 2.0 percent, 
respectively, in the September 2024 
quarter. Both were also revised down since 
2022, with the latest data pointing to greater 
weakness than previously measured. The 
recent decline in business investment 
reflects weak demand due to restrictive 
interest rates and the related easing in 
capacity pressures. Weak residential 
investment also reflects restrictive interest 
rates, declining real house prices, and 
slower population growth. 
Business and residential investment are 
assumed to recover over the medium 
term. Business investment is assumed to 
increase as lower interest rates and higher 
export earnings support demand, and 
reduce excess capacity. However, elevated 
uncertainty related to global trade policies 
is assumed to lead to businesses delaying, 
altering, or cancelling some investment 
plans (see chapters 4.1 and 5). Residential 
investment is assumed to recover as lower 
interest rates and increasing house prices 
support demand for new building. 
There is significant spare capacity 
in the New Zealand economy
Capacity pressures have declined 
significantly since the start of 2024. 
We estimate that the output gap is currently 
about -1.7 percent of potential GDP. Our suite 
of capacity pressure indicators and the large 
decline in GDP during the middle of 2024 
are consistent with a slightly more negative 
output gap in the most recent quarter than 
assumed in the November Statement 
(figure 2.4). 
The output gap is assumed to start closing 
in 2025, as demand recovers and potential 
GDP growth remains low. GDP growth is 
assumed to exceed potential GDP growth 
from the start of 2025, as lower interest 
rates and stronger export earnings support 
demand. Potential growth is assumed to 
remain lower than it has been over history, 
due to subdued productivity growth and 
lower growth in labour supply due to low 
net immigration.
Labour market conditions have 
weakened
Business demand for labour has declined 
as economic conditions have weakened. 
Employment fell 1.1 percent in the year to 
the December 2024 quarter. Declining 
employment is most evident for younger 
cohorts, particularly those aged 15 to 19 
years. Job vacancies have continued to 
decrease in recent months and remain well 
below pre-COVID-19 levels. Participation 
in the labour market has also fallen slightly, 
consistent with some people leaving the 
labour market due to weaker job prospects.
Source: Stats NZ, NZIER, MBIE, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area shows the range of indicators in the suite. The vertical line shows 
the final quarter of published GDP data.
Figure 2.4
Output gap and indicator suite
(share of potential, seasonally adjusted)


13
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
A wide range of measures suggest that 
labour market capacity pressures eased 
substantially during 2024 (figure 2.6). Most 
measures of the labour market are weaker 
than their median levels since 2000. The 
unemployment rate increased to 5.1 percent 
in the December 2024 quarter (figure 2.5). 
Businesses continue to report that it is easy 
to find workers, and movement between 
jobs has slowed. The weakness in economic 
activity during the middle of 2024 is assumed 
to continue to flow through to weaker labour 
market conditions. The unemployment rate is 
assumed to peak at 5.2 percent in the June 
2025 quarter before declining in line with a 
recovery in economic growth.
Figure 2.5
Unemployment rate
(unemployed people as a share of the labour force, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Source: Stats NZ, NZIER, MBIE, RBNZ estimates.
Note: See Ball (2024), ‘Assessing and communicating labour market indicators of inflationary pressure’, Analytical Note, Reserve Bank of 
New Zealand.
Figure 2.6
Labour market indicators 


14
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Low demand for labour and low inflation 
are contributing to slower nominal wage 
growth. Annual same-job wage growth, as 
measured by the Labour Cost Index (LCI, 
ordinary and overtime, private sector) was 
3.0 percent in the December 2024 quarter, 
relative to a peak of 4.5 percent in early 
2023. Growth in broader wage measures 
has also declined. Wage growth is assumed 
to decline further, reflecting the usual lags 
between labour market pressure and wage 
adjustments.  
Net immigration continues to slow
Following a surge in 2022 and 2023, net 
immigration has declined rapidly (figure 2.7). 
The decline in net immigration reflects 
both a decline in arrivals and an increase 
in departures. This likely reflects weakness 
in New Zealand’s labour market compared 
to other countries, most notably Australia. 
Trans-Tasman divergences in labour market 
conditions have historically had a strong 
influence on migration of New Zealand 
citizens. 
Declining net immigration is assumed 
to have broadly offsetting effects on 
inflationary pressure. Slower population 
growth is reducing consumption growth and 
demand for housing. However, slowing net 
immigration is also resulting in slower labour 
supply growth and therefore, lower growth 
in potential output. Net immigration is 
assumed to increase gradually in the latter 
half of the projection as the New Zealand 
labour market recovers. 
Global growth remains 
below trend
Economic conditions vary across 
New Zealand’s trading partners, but overall 
growth in our main trading partners remains 
below potential (see chapter 3). Economic 
growth in the US has remained strong, with 
the unemployment rate remaining relatively 
low at 4.1 percent. GDP growth in China was 
slightly stronger than expected at the end 
of 2024. However, recent data suggest that 
domestic demand remains weak, reflecting 
subdued consumer spending and ongoing 
stress in the property market. Economic 
conditions in the euro area remain weak. 
Economic growth in Australia has also been 
subdued, with growth largely accounted for 
by increased government spending. 
We assume that trading-partner GDP 
growth declines slightly over 2025, 
although there is downside risk to this 
assumption. Notwithstanding considerable 
uncertainty around global trade policy and 
its economic implications (see chapters 
3 and 4.1), the global growth outlook is 
broadly similar to that at the time of the 
November Statement. Market participants 
expect most central banks in advanced 
economies to continue to reduce policy 
interest rates towards more neutral levels 
over the coming year, although the outlook 
for US policy rates is higher than it was at the 
time of the November Statement. 
Headline inflation in New Zealand’s 
trading partners has declined over the past 
year, but has increased slightly in recent 
months. The recent increase in headline 
inflation in many of our trading partners is 
largely accounted for by higher fuel and 
energy inflation. Services price inflation has 
remained above pre-COVID-19 levels, but 
continues to decline gradually in many of our 
trading-partner economies.
Figure 2.7
Net immigration 
(annual, share of working-age population)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


15
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Global conditions have 
contributed to lower inflation 
in New Zealand, but this 
disinflationary impulse is waning 
Declining inflation in our key trading 
partners and lower global oil prices over 
2024 have contributed to lower tradables 
inflation. We assume that world prices for 
our imports will continue to decline over the 
coming year as global inflationary pressures 
ease. Although there is always considerable 
uncertainty about the outlook for our import 
prices, this uncertainty is heightened due to 
recent developments in global trade policy 
(see chapter 4.1).
While global growth has remained subdued, 
world prices for some of New Zealand’s 
key export commodities have increased. 
Resilient demand and constrained global 
supply for dairy and beef have led to higher 
prices for these commodities over 2024 
(see chapter 4.2). Ongoing supply constraints 
are assumed to support prices for dairy and 
beef throughout 2025, although outlooks 
for commodity prices are always highly 
uncertain. Higher global prices and a lower 
exchange rate are assumed to support 
income to these exporters, which is expected 
to increase investment and consumption 
over the medium term. 
The New Zealand dollar exchange rate 
has depreciated about 3 percent on a 
trade-weighted basis since the November 
Statement. Market expectations for lower 
domestic interest rates relative to our trading 
partners have put downward pressure on the 
New Zealand dollar exchange rate, despite 
the recent increases in prices for our export 
commodities. Increased global trade policy 
uncertainty is another factor likely reducing 
the value of the New Zealand dollar. All 
else equal, the lower New Zealand dollar 
exchange rate is expected to result in slightly 
higher tradables inflation in New Zealand 
relative to what was assumed at the time of 
the November Statement.
Inflation is expected to increase 
in the near term due to temporary 
factors, but remain in the MPC’s 1 
to 3 percent target range 
Annual headline CPI inflation remained at 
2.2 percent in the December 2024 quarter. 
Headline inflation was slightly higher than 
the 2.1 percent assumed in the November 
Statement. Annual tradables inflation was 
less negative than expected, while annual 
non-tradables inflation decreased by slightly 
more than expected. 


16
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Measures of annual core inflation declined 
further in the December 2024 quarter. 
Core inflation measures have declined 
steadily since 2023, consistent with slower 
inflation across a broad range of items. 
Despite these declines, the average of 
annual core inflation measures remains 
above headline inflation (figure 2.8). This 
indicates that headline inflation is being 
lowered in part by components that tend to 
experience more volatile price movements. 
Nonetheless, declines in core inflation 
measures imply that the underlying trend in 
inflation is converging towards the 2 percent 
target mid-point for CPI inflation. This trend 
is particularly evident in available quarterly 
measures of core inflation.
Survey measures indicate that firms expect 
inflation to remain near the 2 percent 
target mid-point. Businesses' inflation 
expectations have remained near 2 percent 
at all time horizons (figure 2.9). Households’ 
expectations, which tend to be higher 
than those of firms, have also declined in 
recent years to be more consistent with 
a low‑inflation environment, although 
increased slightly in the latest quarter.
Annual tradables inflation remained 
negative in the December 2024 quarter, 
albeit to a lesser extent than in the previous 
quarter. Annual tradables inflation was 
-1.1 percent in the December 2024 quarter, 
which is well below its 2002–2019 average 
of 0.5 percent. The decline in tradables 
prices over the past year reflected declines 
in petrol prices, but there has also been a 
broad-based easing in inflation for our other 
imported goods and services. 
Figure 2.8
Headline and core inflation measures 
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ.
Note: The dashed lines represent the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for inflation over 
the medium term. The shaded area shows the range of core inflation measures. The core 
inflation measures include the sectoral factor model, factor model, trimmed mean (30%), 
weighted median, and CPI excluding food and energy.
Figure 2.9
Business inflation expectations 
(annual, years ahead)
Source:  RBNZ’s Survey of Expectations (Business).
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for inflation over the 
medium term. 


17
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Tradables inflation was higher than 
the -1.5 percent assumed in the November 
Statement. Annual tradables inflation is 
expected to increase in the near term, 
consistent with the increases in petrol prices 
over recent months, before returning to 
around pre-COVID-19 levels (figure 2.10).
Annual non-tradables inflation continued 
to decline, to 4.5 percent in the December 
2024 quarter (figure 2.11). This was slightly 
lower than 4.7 percent expected at the time 
of the November Statement. While 
non-tradables inflation remains elevated, it 
has become less broad-based over time as 
capacity pressures have declined and 
price-setting behaviour has adapted to a 
low-inflation environment. Box B discusses 
recent trends in different components of 
non-tradables inflation.
Annual non-tradables inflation is assumed 
to continue to decline over the next year. 
Current spare capacity in the economy 
is expected to flow through to lower cost 
pressures and non-tradables inflation over 
time. Non-tradables inflation is expected 
to decline slightly more quickly than at the 
time of the November Statement, mainly 
due to slightly weaker capacity pressures. 
Administered and policy-affected price 
changes are expected to continue to 
add volatility to some components of 
non‑tradables inflation over the coming year.
Figure 2.11
Non-tradables inflation 
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.10
Tradables inflation 
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


18
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Figure B.1
Non-tradables inflation by 
monetary policy sensitivity 
(quarterly, 4-quarter moving average)
Box B
Trends in non-tradables inflation 
components
Recent trends in the non-tradables 
components of inflation are consistent 
with easing inflationary pressure, although 
headline inflation will continue to be 
affected by relative price shifts. Inflation 
rates have eased across a wide range 
of non-tradables components. However, 
inflation rates for some components have 
declined more quickly than others. 
Inflation rates for non-tradables 
components that tend to be more sensitive 
to monetary policy have declined quickly 
since early 2023, and are now at levels 
similar to 2019 (figure B.1). Easing inflation 
for these components is consistent with 
the decline in the output gap seen from the 
middle of 2022. Inflation rates for some items 
in this category, such as dwelling construction 
costs and domestic accommodation, are now 
below their long‑run average levels.
As expected, inflation in non-tradables 
categories that are less and moderately 
sensitive to monetary policy are declining 
with more of a lag. For example, we estimate 
rental inflation in the CPI as being moderately 
sensitive to monetary policy. While rental 
inflation in the CPI has eased, it remains at 
an elevated level. However, rental inflation 
for new tenancies has fallen sharply since 
early 2024, consistent with weak economic 
activity and falling net immigration. This 
indicates that CPI rental inflation – which 
relies on rents for all properties, not just new 
tenancies – will continue to ease. Inflation in 
some other moderately sensitive items, such 
as restaurant meals and takeaway foods, has 
eased substantially. Inflation in some other 
moderately sensitive items – particularly local 
authority rate inflation – remains elevated.
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Non-tradable sub-groups are ordered by most negative to most positive estimated 
response to an unanticipated OCR increase. ‘More sensitive’ groups represent the top third 
of these groups by sensitivity. ‘Moderately sensitive’ groups represent the middle third by 
sensitivity, and ‘Less sensitive’ groups represent the lowest third by sensitivity. Based on 
Åstebøl and Patel (forthcoming), ‘Local Projections Estimates of Monetary Policy Pass-Through 
to GDP and Non-Tradables Inflation’, Analytical Note, Reserve Bank of New Zealand.
Inflation rates for insurance, energy, and 
administered goods and services have 
eased slightly, but remain high. Inflation 
rates for these items tend to have a slow 
responsiveness to monetary policy. Even 
though inflation in these groups is less 
sensitive, we expect their inflation rates to 
ease over the medium term. This reflects 
that some sector-specific drivers of higher 
inflation are assumed to wane, and that lower 
overall inflation and cost growth will feed into 
lower average inflation rates over time.


19
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Annual headline inflation is forecast to 
remain in the 1 to 3 percent target range, 
and remain near the target mid-point from 
2026 (figure 2.12). Recent increases in 
petrol prices are assumed to lead to higher 
near-term headline inflation than expected 
in the November Statement. Annual CPI 
inflation is assumed to increase to a peak 
of 2.7 percent in the year to the September 
2025 quarter. However, underlying 
inflationary pressures are assumed to 
continue to ease, and headline inflation 
is forecast to remain near the 2 percent 
mid‑point once the effect of recent increases 
in petrol prices on inflation wanes. 
Figure 2.12
CPI inflation 
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for inflation over 
the medium term.


20
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Figure 2.13
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Monetary policy outlook
Conditional on the central economic 
outlook, we assume that the OCR can 
continue to be lowered towards its neutral 
level over time (figure 2.13). Inflationary 
pressures are assumed to ease further over 
the medium term, as a result of spare capacity 
in the economy and wage- and price-setters 
adapting to a low-inflation environment. 
We assume that the near-term increase in 
headline inflation does not significantly affect 
wage- and price-setting behaviour.


Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Chapter 
03
Global 
economy 
and financial 
markets
Lake Wānaka. Photo: Paul Conway


22
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Chapter 3.
Global economy and financial markets
Key points
Global growth remains below trend and 
uncertainty regarding the outlook has 
increased. Consensus forecasts from 
Bloomberg for growth in New Zealand’s 
major trading partners are largely unchanged 
since the November Statement, with global 
growth expected to decline slightly in 2025. 
These forecasts were made prior to the 
trade policy developments in recent weeks.  
Despite subdued global growth, prices for 
some of New Zealand’s key commodity 
exports have increased, reflecting reduced 
global supply (see chapter 4.2). Uncertainty 
regarding the global economic outlook has 
increased recently as a consequence of 
escalating trade tensions (see chapter 4.1).
Disinflation among New Zealand’s key 
trading partners has slowed. Inflation in 
advanced economies has increased slightly, 
mainly because of higher fuel and energy 
prices. However, headline inflation rates 
remain close to target levels and services 
inflation in advanced economies continues 
to gradually decline. Global labour market 
conditions have been relatively steady in 
recent months. 
Market participants’ expectations for 
policy rates have begun to diverge across 
advanced economies, while long-term 
government bond yields have increased. 
Differences in the expected pace of 
monetary policy easing across economies, 
implied by financial market pricing, reflect 
both differences in macroeconomic 
developments and likely exposure to 
increasing global trade tensions. In the US, 
increased uncertainty and expectations 
of larger fiscal deficits have increased 
longer‑term government bond yields 
through an increase in the term premium. 
This has placed upward pressure on 
long‑term sovereign yields across advanced 
economies. Increased global uncertainty 
and higher interest rates in the US compared 
to other economies have resulted in an 
appreciation of the US dollar exchange rate.
In New Zealand, financial conditions have 
become less restrictive since the November 
Statement. Wholesale interest rates, such 
as interest rate swaps, have decreased 
across most tenors, with shorter-term rates 
falling by more than longer-term rates. The 
New Zealand dollar has depreciated on 
a trade-weighted basis, partly because 
of US factors. Shorter-term mortgage and 
term deposit rates have decreased, while 
longer‑term rates in New Zealand have 
moved slightly higher. This broadly reflects 
changes in the shape of the New Zealand 
swap curve. 


23
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Figure 3.1
GDP growth compared to 2024 OECD 
potential growth estimates 
(annual)
Source: Haver Analytics, OECD.
Note: GDP growth data are for the September 2024 quarter unless otherwise specified.
Global economic conditions
Global growth remains 
below trend
Restrictive monetary policy settings in most 
of our key trading partners continue to 
reduce economic growth and inflationary 
pressure. GDP growth in many of these 
economies is close to, or below, potential 
growth (figure 3.1). However, economic 
growth was relatively strong in the US and 
China in the December 2024 quarter. In the 
US, growth was driven by stronger household 
consumption and employment growth, while 
in China it was supported by recent policy 
stimulus and robust export growth.
Consensus forecasts for trading-partner 
growth are for a marginal decline over 
2025. Trade-weighted annual GDP growth 
in New Zealand’s key trading partners is 
expected to decline from 2.8 percent in 
2024 to 2.7 percent in both 2025 and 2026. 
Growth is expected to slow in China, the US, 
and high-income Asian economies. Partially 
offsetting some of this weakness is stronger 
growth in advanced economies excluding 
the US, and in emerging Asian economies. 
Overall, growth expectations are broadly 
unchanged from the time of the November 
Statement, despite heightened uncertainty 
regarding global trade. These Consensus 
forecasts for global growth only incorporate 
developments as of 31 January and, 
therefore, do not capture recent global trade 
developments. 
Economic growth in the US is expected to 
slow this year, but by less than at the time 
of the November Statement. Restrictive 
monetary policy and slower labour force 
growth are expected to reduce momentum in 
the US economy. GDP is forecast to grow by 
2.2 percent in 2025, down from 2.8 percent 
in 2024, but higher than the 2.1 percent 
growth expected at the time of the November 
Statement. 
The US economic outlook is significantly 
more uncertain than usual. Higher tariffs 
on US imports are expected to weaken 
economic activity, particularly if other 
countries retaliate or if the tariffs lead to 
increased uncertainty and lower confidence 
among US businesses and households.  
Average GDP growth in China is expected 
to slow from 5 percent in 2024 to 4.5 
percent in 2025. Policy stimulus and strong 
export demand contributed to an increase in 
GDP growth in the December 2024 quarter. 
However, recent data on retail sales and 
business activity suggest that this rate of 
growth is unlikely to continue into 2025. 
Economic activity continues to be negatively 
affected by a weak property market and 
declining home prices, which are keeping 
confidence and consumer spending growth 
low. While fiscal and monetary policy settings 
are expected to loosen further in coming 
quarters, recent tariff increases on China by 
the US are likely to weaken export growth 
from strong levels in 2024.


24
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Figure  3.2
Advanced economy aggregate CPI inflation
(annual)
Source: Haver Analytics, OECD, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Aggregate uses OECD goods and services categorisations, including the US, UK, 
Australia, euro area, Japan, and Canada and is weighted by share of nominal GDP in US 
dollars.
Disinflation in advanced 
economies has slowed
Headline inflation in advanced economies 
has increased slightly since the November 
Statement, but remains close to central 
bank targets. Advanced economy annual 
inflation increased to 2.8 percent in 
December 2024 (figure 3.2). Higher goods 
inflation accounted for the increase, which 
has largely been due to higher fuel and 
energy prices. Annual services inflation has 
continued to decline slowly but remains 
elevated at around 4 percent in aggregate 
across advanced economies. Core inflation 
measures have remained broadly stable 
since the November Statement. 
US inflation is expected to remain above 
target this year. Core Personal Consumption 
Expenditure (PCE) prices, which exclude 
food and energy, are expected to increase 
by 2.5 percent in 2025. This is below the 
inflation rate of 2.8 percent in 2024, but 0.2 
percentage points higher than expected 
at the time of the November Statement. 
This reflects the expected impact of more 
stimulatory fiscal policy, which will boost 
demand in the economy, and higher tariffs on 
US imports, which will increase import prices. 
Outside of the US, forecasts for inflation 
in New Zealand’s major trading partners 
in 2025 are broadly unchanged since the 
November Statement.
Labour market conditions have 
remained robust
Unemployment rates are relatively low in 
most advanced economies, and broadly 
unchanged from the November Statement 
(figure 3.3). Meanwhile, job vacancies have 
remained largely stable at similar levels 
as before the COVID-19 pandemic. Global 
labour markets have generally eased since 
the very tight levels in 2022, in response 
to previous monetary tightening. In 2025, 
labour markets are expected to remain 
broadly stable as monetary policy easing 
supports demand for workers across 
economies. 
Recent data suggest the US labour market 
is strengthening. Since around the middle 
of last year, employment growth has been 
increasing at a faster pace, and on a 3-month 
average basis is now at its highest growth 
rate since March 2023. The unemployment 
rate has fallen slightly over recent months, 
job vacancies have started to increase, 
and wage growth appears to be picking up 
following a steady decline from elevated 
levels in 2022.
Figure 3.3
Advanced economy unemployment rates 
Source: Haver Analytics, Bloomberg, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Dotted lines show RBNZ forecasts for New Zealand and consensus forecasts from 
Bloomberg for other countries.


25
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Global financial conditions
Market expectations for central 
bank policy rates have diverged
The pace of policy easing in advanced 
economies continues to diverge in line with 
differences in domestic macroeconomic 
conditions. Monetary policy settings in 
Canada, the euro area, and Australia are 
likely to return to broadly neutral over 2025, 
in line with reduced inflationary pressures 
in these economies. In contrast, the Bank 
of England and the Federal Reserve are 
expected to maintain their restrictive policy 
stances this year, as inflation is expected 
to remain above their respective targets 
throughout this year. Short-term bond yields 
have largely followed changes in near-term 
policy rate expectations in each economy.
Long-term government bond yields have 
increased, causing yield curves to steepen 
across advanced economies (figure 3.4). 
Increased economic uncertainty (figure 4.3), 
alongside expectations of a larger fiscal 
deficit in the US, have led investors to 
demand a higher return on longer-term US 
government bonds relative 
to short-term bonds (the term premium). 
For example, the difference between 
the US 10-year and 2-year Treasury yield 
has increased by around 20 basis points 
since the November Statement. Advanced 
economy term premia are highly correlated 
with those in the US. As such, most of these 
economies have experienced a similar 
steepening, including New Zealand. 
The US dollar has continued to 
strengthen
The US dollar has appreciated significantly 
in recent months in response to proposed 
tariffs and diverging monetary policy 
expectations. Financial market participants’ 
expectations for US interest rates have 
increased relative to most other advanced 
economies, supporting the US dollar. 
The US dollar has risen 1.1 percent on a 
trade-weighted basis since the November 
Statement, and around 5.5 percent since 
September 2024 (figure 3.5). The US 
dollar has moved with changes in market 
participants’ perceptions of the likely size 
of US tariffs. Higher tariffs tend to lead to an 
appreciation in the currency of the imposing 
economy, as their importers’ demand for 
foreign currency falls.
Figure 3.4
10-year government bond yields minus 2-year yields
Source: Bloomberg.
Figure 3.5
US dollar trade-weighted index (DXY)
Source: Bloomberg.


26
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
US equity prices have increased slightly 
despite periods of policy uncertainty. 
Higher yields on US Treasury bonds, 
which are considered by financial market 
participants to be credit-risk-free assets, have 
put downwards pressure on US equity prices. 
However, equity prices have been supported 
by increasing financial market participants’ 
expectations of future company earnings and 
greater risk appetite among investors. The 
additional return investors receive for holding 
US equities over risk-free assets (the equity 
risk premium) has now fallen to its lowest level 
since before the stock market crash in 
2000 to 2002. The S&P 500 index is 1.7 
percent higher and global equity prices are 
1.6 percent higher than at the time of the 
November Statement (figure 3.6). European 
equities have been particularly strong while 
Chinese equities have remained weak.
Domestic financial 
conditions
Domestic financial conditions have become 
less restrictive since the November 
Statement, influenced by both domestic 
and global factors. Consistent with global 
trends, shorter-term wholesale interest rates 
in New Zealand have fallen by more than 
longer-term rates. This has been reflected 
in changes in domestic mortgage and term 
deposit rates. The NZ dollar has depreciated 
on a trade-weighted basis in recent months. 
This follows a widening in the difference 
between interest rates in New Zealand 
and some of its major trading partners, and 
increased uncertainty about global trade. 
New Zealand is regarded by financial market 
participants as being subject to higher risk in 
an uncertain global environment compared 
to our major trading partners, which is why 
global uncertainty is causing our currency 
to depreciate.  
4	
Market participants’ expectations for the OCR can be inferred from prices for overnight indexed swap (OIS) contracts.
Near-term expectations for the 
OCR have decreased
Market participants expect further cuts 
to the OCR over the next year, and 
slightly larger cuts than at the time of 
the November Statement (figure 3.7).4 
Following the November Statement, market 
participants priced in a high chance of a 50 
basis point OCR reduction in February 2025. 
This expectation was reinforced by data 
releases showing weak economic activity in 
New Zealand. 
Figure 3.6
Global equity prices
(index=100 on 1 March 2020)
Source: Bloomberg.
Figure 3.7
Financial market participants’  
expectations for the OCR
Source: Bloomberg.
Note: The blue line shows market expectations for the OCR immediately before the 
November Statement. Each data point represents market expectations of the level of the 
OCR at a given point in the future, as measured by overnight indexed swap pricing.


27
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
The reduction in market participants’ 
expectations for the OCR has pushed 
shorter-term interest rate swaps lower 
since the November Statement (figure 3.8).5  
In contrast, longer-term swap rates, which 
are influenced by global factors such as 
economic conditions in the US, as well as 
domestic factors, are broadly unchanged 
since the November Statement. This means 
the New Zealand interest rate swap curve 
has steepened — similar to steepening in the 
yield curves in the US and other advanced 
economies.
The New Zealand dollar has 
depreciated
The New Zealand dollar exchange rate 
has depreciated by around 3 percent on a 
trade-weighted basis since the November 
Statement (figure 3.9). As outlined above, 
the potential economic impacts of policies 
proposed by the US administration have 
contributed to the US dollar appreciation 
against a basket of global currencies. 
Several of New Zealand’s other key trading 
partners, such as China, closely tie the value 
of their currencies to the US dollar. As such, 
a stronger US dollar has contributed to a 
weaker trade-weighted New Zealand dollar. 
Furthermore, interest rates in New Zealand 
have fallen by more than those of some 
of our key trading partners, making the 
New Zealand dollar relatively less attractive 
for investors.
5	
Interest rate swap rates are wholesale interest rates often used as a benchmark by financial institutions in setting other interest rates in 
the economy. They can provide a guide to market participants’ expectations for the policy rate over specific horizons. They involve the 
exchange of fixed and floating interest rate payments between two parties over a specified period. The level of interest rate swaps will be 
approximately equal to market expectations for average short-term market interest rates over the swap tenor.
Figure 3.8
New Zealand interest rate swaps
(terms in years)
Source: LSEG.
Figure 3.9
New Zealand dollar trade-weighted index
(nominal)
Source: RBNZ.


28
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Short-term mortgages 
remain popular
The trend towards short-term mortgage 
fixing, that began at the start of 2024, has 
intensified. In recent months, around 90 
percent of new mortgage flows have been 
directed towards terms of one year and less, 
with the 6-month term the most popular 
(figure 3.10). This trend has increased the 
frequency at which mortgage rate repricing 
takes place, and hence the speed at which 
changes in mortgage rates influence 
household cashflows.
Shorter-term mortgage and term deposit 
rates have fallen and longer-term rates 
have increased slightly since the November 
Statement (figure 3.11). This broadly reflects 
the change in the New Zealand swap rate 
curve. Shorter-term mortgage and term 
deposit rates remain slightly higher than 
longer-term rates. Since the November 
Statement, the popular 6-month mortgage 
and term deposit rates have fallen by 
around 35 basis points and 40 basis points, 
respectively.
The average yield on the stock of 
mortgages has recently started to decline 
and is expected to fall further over the 
next year. Most mortgage holders who have 
recently rolled off fixed-rate mortgages, or 
who have switched from floating to fixed, 
have done so at lower rates than they had 
previously been paying. A lower average 
yield on the stock of mortgages reduces 
the average monthly mortgage repayment 
paid by households, increasing disposable 
income and supporting household 
consumption.
Falling interest rates since mid-2024 have 
been accompanied by increasing bank 
funding spreads. In particular, the relative 
cost of deposit funding has increased 
materially as wholesale rates have fallen 
faster than deposit rates. Despite this, 
mortgage rates have declined broadly in line 
with swap rates, putting downward pressure 
on bank margins.
Figure 3.11
New Zealand mortgage rates 
(terms in years)
Source: interest.co.nz.
Note: The 6-month to 3-year mortgage rates shown are the average of the latest advertised 
fixed-term rates on offer from ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac for mortgages with a loan-to-
value ratio of less than 80 percent. The 4- and 5-year mortgage rates are the average of the 
latest advertised fixed-term rates on offer from ASB, BNZ, and Westpac.
Figure 3.10
Proportion of new mortgage lending volume by tenor
Source: RBNZ.


Chapter 
04
Special topics
Abel Tasman National Park. Photo: Magnus Åstebøl


30
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Chapter 4. 
Special topics 
Before the publication of each Statement, RBNZ staff provide 
analyses of some topical issues to the Monetary Policy Committee. 
Topics for the February Statement included:
1.	 The implications of global tariffs for the New Zealand economy
2.	 Outlook for some of New Zealand’s key commodity exports
Special topics in the past 12 months
Topic
Date/publication
Trends in production sectors of the New Zealand economy
November 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)
Summary of recent business visits
November 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)
Real interest rates and their effect on the economy
November 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)
Price-setting behaviour in a low-inflation environment
August 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)
Comparing macroeconomic conditions in economies
at different stages of monetary policy easing
August 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)
Non-tradables inflation in New Zealand
May 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)
Recent trends in New Zealand’s exporting sector
May 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)
The effect of higher shipping costs on inflation and
the OCR
February 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)
The effect of the Government’s proposed policies 
on monetary policy
February 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)


31
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
The implications of global tariffs for the New Zealand 
economy
Summary
6	
See Rice, et al. (2018), ‘Measuring uncertainty and its impact on the New Zealand economy’, Analytical Note, Reserve Bank of 
New Zealand.
•	 The US has announced and, in some 
cases, implemented a range of new 
tariffs. Higher tariffs have come into 
effect on US imports from China. Higher 
tariffs on imports from Canada and 
Mexico are currently on hold, subject to 
ongoing negotiations. Targeted countries 
have threatened to impose retaliatory 
tariffs against the US, and China has 
implemented higher tariffs on some US 
products. It is currently uncertain whether 
these and other tariffs will be implemented 
and how long they would remain in place. 
However, uncertainty about future trade 
policies is already impacting the global 
economy and there is a risk that these 
policies initiate a broader increase in the 
level of global tariffs. 
•	 Tariffs are a tax imposed by a particular 
country on their imports of products 
from a ‘tariff-targeted’ country. Tariffs 
increase the prices paid by consumers 
and businesses in the tariff-imposing 
country, and have the potential to lower 
export prices for the tariff-targeted 
country. The tariff is paid by the importer 
who has the option of passing it on to 
domestic consumers. This means that who 
ultimately bears the burden of the tariff 
depends on the relative price changes 
for importing and exporting companies 
and on the extent to which importing or 
exporting companies absorb the change 
in price in their margins.
•	 There will be a larger negative impact on 
economic growth and more inflationary 
pressure in the country imposing tariffs 
when it is harder for consumers and 
businesses to switch to non-tariffed 
substitutes. Similarly, there will be a larger 
negative impact on economic growth in 
the tariff-targeted country if it is harder to 
divert its products to non-tariff-imposing 
countries.
•	 Higher global tariffs may result in:
	– lower global economic growth; 
	– increased inflationary pressure in 
tariff-imposing countries;
	– a decrease in export prices in 
tariff-targeted countries; and
	– trade diversion towards 
non-tariffed countries.
•	 New Zealand would be directly affected 
if higher tariffs are imposed on our 
exports and indirectly affected via the 
effects of tariffs on our trading partners. 
The indirect effects for New Zealand are 
likely to be larger than the direct effects. 
For example, tariffs between the US and 
China may reduce GDP growth in these 
economies, contributing to lower demand 
for New Zealand’s exports, even if tariffs 
are not directly imposed on our products.
•	 Global trade policies can also affect 
the New Zealand economy via financial 
market and uncertainty channels. 
Domestic and global uncertainty can 
negatively affect economic activity in 
New Zealand, primarily by weakening 
business investment.6 Heightened 
global uncertainty also tends to lead to 
the New Zealand dollar exchange rate 
depreciating, which increases the cost 
of our imports, and increases export 
revenues. 
•	 Tariffs are a combination of supply and 
demand side disruptions for global 
economies, with complex effects. 
Increased uncertainty and any future trade 
policy shocks are likely to reduce growth 
in New Zealand, but the effect on inflation 
in New Zealand is currently uncertain.


32
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
US trade policies are changing
The US has announced and, in some 
cases, implemented a range of new tariffs 
on imports. Tariffs on US imports from 
China increased by 10 percentage points 
on 4 February 2025. Tariffs of 25 percent 
on most imports from Canada and Mexico 
were due to come into effect on the same 
day but were delayed by 30 days subject 
to ongoing negotiations. Remarks made 
by the US administration also indicate that 
higher tariff rates on other trading partners, 
such as the European Union (EU), are under 
consideration. It is uncertain whether these 
and other tariffs will be implemented, and 
for what period. There is a risk that these 
changes may initiate a broader and sustained 
increase in the level of global tariffs.
Countries targeted by the US 
administration’s announcements have 
indicated that they would impose retaliatory 
trade policies. Both China and the EU 
retaliated against tariff increases during 
President Trump’s first term. In December 
2024, China banned exports of critical 
minerals with military applications to the US. 
On 10 February 2025, China implemented a 
limited retaliation to the increased US tariffs, 
focusing largely on energy products and 
machinery. Government officials from Mexico 
and Canada have also voiced the possibility 
of retaliation.
Economic effects of tariffs
Tariffs are a tax imposed by a particular 
country on their imports of products from a 
‘tariff-targeted’ country. Tariffs increase the 
prices paid by consumers and businesses 
in the tariff-imposing country, and have 
the potential to lower export prices for the 
tariff‑targeted country.  Although the importer 
pays the tariff, who ultimately bears the cost 
of the tariff depends on the extent to which 
importing and exporting companies absorb 
the cost through lower profit margins. This 
will depend on the price sensitivities of 
the countries trading the tariffed product. If 
price sensitivity varies significantly across 
countries trading the tariffed product, the less 
price‑sensitive country will typically bear the 
brunt of initial price changes.
Trade volumes will be less sensitive to price 
changes if the product:
•	 is an essential input for the importing 
country; 
•	 is significantly different to other products; 
•	 uses specialised infrastructure or 
expertise; 
•	 is subject to long-term contracts; or 
•	 is not produced or demanded elsewhere. 
The effects of tariffs on economic growth 
and inflation depend on the relative size 
of affected trade flows and how economic 
activity and trade patterns adapt. In general, 
there will be a larger negative effect on 
economic growth and greater inflationary 
pressure when it is harder for consumers and 
businesses in the tariff-imposing country to 
switch to non-tariffed substitutes. Similarly, 
the negative effect on economic growth in 
the targeted country will be larger when it 
is harder for exporters in the tariff-targeted 
country to divert their exports to alternative 
destinations. 
External research suggests that a scenario 
of escalating global tariffs could remove 
up to 1 percentage point off our measure 
of trading-partner GDP growth. Table 4.1 
summarises the likely economic impacts 
of tariffs on countries that impose and are 
targeted by tariffs. 


33
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Table 4.1
Possible effect of tariffs on the tariff-imposing country and the tariff-targeted 
country
Impact on
Tariff-imposing country
Tariff-targeted country
Prices
Increase in import prices paid. This 
increase in import prices is likely to 
be higher if demand for imports is not 
very price-sensitive. These higher 
prices may be passed on to domestic 
consumers, or absorbed by importers' 
profit margins.
Decrease in export prices received. 
This decrease in export prices is likely 
to be larger if export supply is not very 
price-sensitive. These lower prices may 
be passed on to domestic consumers, 
or other export destinations.
Trade volume and 
composition 
Decrease in import volumes from the 
targeted country due to higher relative 
prices being paid. 
Imports may shift to non-tariffed 
products or countries, or to domestic 
production.
Decrease in export volumes to the 
tariff‑imposing country due to lower 
relative prices being received.
Exports may be redirected to 
non‑tariffed products or countries, or to 
domestic consumption.
Exchange rate
Appreciates due to a decreased 
supply of currency as import volumes 
decline. This decreases the relative 
price of imports, offsetting some impact 
from the tariffs.
Depreciates relative to the 
tariff‑imposing country due to a 
decreased demand for currency from 
the tariff‑imposing country.
Economic activity 
Decrease in economic activity and 
productivity as any gains to protected 
industries (which now face less global 
competition) are offset by higher 
prices for tariffed inputs for domestic 
production.
Decrease in economic activity and 
productivity if exporters are unable to 
find alternative markets.
Labour markets 
Decrease in employment as any gains 
to protected industries are offset by 
declines in other parts of the economy. 
Real wages may also decrease.
Decrease in employment in exporting 
and related sectors. Real wages may 
also decrease.
Countries that are not directly targeted by 
tariffs may benefit from trade diversion. 
Exports from these non-tariffed countries 
may increase to the tariff-imposing country 
as their non-tariffed exports are now more 
competitive. Imports from the tariff-targeted 
country may become cheaper as these 
countries find alternative markets. These 
flows may be accompanied by increased 
investment and productive capacity in 
non‑tariffed countries, as well as potentially 
increasing involvement in global supply 
chains. 
Indirect effects from lower global growth 
may negatively affect non-tariffed countries. 
Tariffs are likely to reduce growth in both 
imposing and targeted economies. Lower 
global growth may offset any benefits to 
non‑tariffed countries from trade diversion. 
The net impact on non-tariffed countries’ 
inflation is uncertain. Cheaper imports 
from the tariff‑targeted country could be 
offset by more expensive imports from the 
tariff‑imposing country, which now face 
higher production costs domestically. Weaker 
global economic growth could also reduce 
the cost of imports. These impacts are more 
ambiguous when the targeted country 
retaliates and faces their own potential 
inflationary pressures. Disruptions to global 
supply chains may also reduce global 
productivity, increasing the price of imports.


34
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Transmission to New Zealand
Global economic developments affect 
New Zealand through trade, financial 
market, and uncertainty channels. Higher 
global tariffs could lead to lower global 
output, and higher inflation for countries 
introducing tariffs. The potential impact 
on export demand and import prices for 
non-tariffed countries is more ambiguous. 
Tariffs can also have a significant effect on 
7	
There may be second or third round effects if the import and export composition of our key trading partners are significantly impacted by 
trade policies — although the balance and scale of these effects is highly uncertain.
exchange rates, interest rates, asset prices, 
and supply chains. 
Increased uncertainty about global trade 
policies can also influence spending 
decisions by firms and households, who 
may choose to defer spending plans until 
uncertainty reduces. Table 4.2 provides an 
overview of the likely directional effects that 
higher levels of global tariffs may have on the 
New Zealand economy. 
Table 4.2
Possible effect of tariffs on the New Zealand economy
Channels
Effect on the New Zealand (NZ) economy
Effect 
on NZ 
growth
Effect 
on NZ 
inflation
Trade7
Trade diversion that 
increases imports 
into NZ.
NZ may receive cheaper imports as tariff targeted 
exports are redirected towards NZ. This could 
increase domestic production (e.g. cheaper inputs 
and capital goods) or reduce domestic production 
(e.g. crowding out local businesses).
←→
↓
Trade diversion that 
increases demand for NZ 
exports. 
NZ could experience an increase in exports to 
tariff‑imposing countries if we are not subject to 
tariffs directly, as we would be a relatively cheaper 
trading partner compared to tariff-targeted 
countries.
↑
↑
Indirect effects via growth 
in our trading partners.
Demand for NZ exports may decline if growth slows 
in our trading partners. 
↓
↓
Supply chain disruptions 
and efficiency.
Supply chain fragmentation could reduce global 
resilience to shocks and increase import costs as 
countries adapt to tariffs. These disrupted supply 
chains may lower global productivity growth and 
lead to higher import costs in the medium term.
↓
↑
Financial
Exchange rate.
Higher global uncertainty tends to cause a 
depreciation in the New Zealand dollar. 
↑
↑
Interest rates.
In the shorter term, there may be upward pressure 
on interest rates in countries imposing tariffs. Over 
the longer term, there is likely to be downward 
pressure on global real interest rates due to 
declining productivity.
←→←→
Asset prices.
Slower global growth and higher uncertainty will 
weigh on asset prices.
↓
↓
Uncertainty
Trade policy uncertainty 
that reduces business 
and consumer 
confidence.
Higher uncertainty may result in New Zealand 
businesses and households delaying or reducing 
investment and consumer spending. 
↓
↓


35
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
New Zealand’s international trade is 
exposed to global tariffs both directly and 
indirectly through our trading partners. 
New Zealand would be affected directly 
by tariffs if another country imposed tariffs 
on us, or a universal tariff on all countries. 
However, New Zealand could be indirectly 
exposed to tariffs placed on, or by, our 
key trading partners. A large share of 
New Zealand’s goods exports goes to the 
US and China, between which trade tensions 
have risen (figure 4.1). The overall impact on 
New Zealand’s export sector will depend on 
how higher tariffs affect GDP growth in China 
and the US, and if demand for New Zealand 
exports increases due to substitution away 
from other countries’ products.
Reduced US–China trade could result in 
China exporting goods to New Zealand at a 
lower cost. On the other hand, tariffs are also 
likely to be inflationary for the US and any 
retaliating countries, with a potential pass-
through to higher global prices for products 
that New Zealand imports. There will be 
a complex interplay of trade redirection 
between tariff-imposing, tariff-targeted, and 
non-tariffed countries, with uncertain relative 
price effects.
Developments in trade policy affect 
New Zealand through financial market 
channels. Exchange rates can be directly 
affected by actual or expected tariffs. In 
addition, the New Zealand dollar exchange 
rate tends to depreciate when global 
uncertainty increases, and global investor 
risk appetite worsens. Recent global trade 
policy developments have contributed to a 
depreciation in the New Zealand dollar on a 
trade-weighted basis. All else equal, this will 
result in higher import costs (see chapter 5). 
Figure 4.1
New Zealand goods exports 
and imports by location
(share of 2024 export value)
Source: Haver Analytics.


36
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Trade policies affect the New Zealand 
economy via the uncertainty channel. 
Some measures of domestic and US trade 
and economic policy uncertainty have 
increased since the 2024 US election 
(figures 4.2 and 4.3). Higher domestic and US 
uncertainty can reduce economic activity in 
New Zealand, primarily through weakening 
business investment. The uncertainty 
channel transmits relatively quickly, and 
heightened uncertainty is likely to reduce 
domestic demand in New Zealand even if 
global tariff increases end up being relatively 
small or temporary.
Overall, these trade policy shocks are 
likely to reduce growth in the New Zealand 
economy, but the effect on inflation in 
New Zealand is highly uncertain. Tariffs 
are a combination of supply and demand 
side disruptions for global economies, 
with complex effects. The ultimate effects 
will depend on the nature of potential 
and applied tariffs, how other countries 
respond, and how tariffs transmit through 
various channels to the New Zealand 
economy. We will monitor key data releases, 
such as overseas merchandise trade and 
international prices, for emerging evidence 
of trade diversion, and both domestic and 
international uncertainty indices.
Figure 4.3
United States uncertainty measures
Source: Haver Analytics.
Figure 4.2
New Zealand uncertainty measures
Source: Sense Partners.
Note: Sense Partners tracks trade policy uncertainty and economic uncertainty using the 
share of New Zealand media articles that discuss trade and the economy.


37
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Figure 4.4
Top five New Zealand export destinations 
(year to the September 2024 quarter)
Source: Stats NZ.
Outlook for some of New Zealand’s key commodity 
exports 
New Zealand’s export sector is an 
important part of our economy, making 
up about 25 percent of GDP. Our top 
export destinations for goods and services 
in the year ended September 2024 were 
China, the US, Australia, Japan, and the UK 
(figure 4.4). Our top goods and services 
exports were dairy, travel, meat products, 
wood, and fruits and nuts (figure 4.5). 
New Zealand’s exports grew at a moderate 
pace, consistent with below trend global 
growth over 2024. Export volumes grew 
2.5 percent in the year to the September 
2024 quarter, while export prices were 
relatively unchanged. There are downside 
risks for New Zealand export volumes given 
the weaker global macroeconomic outlook 
(see chapter 3) and heightened trade 
tensions (see chapter 4.1).
We expect the value of New Zealand’s 
exports to increase in early 2025. 
Commodity prices increased over 2024, 
as shown by the ANZ World Commodity 
Price Index (figure 4.6). We expect 
commodity prices to remain at elevated 
levels over 2025, contributing to higher 
export values.  
Figure 4.6
ANZ World Commodity Price Index
(index = 100 in January 2015)
Source: ANZ. 
Figure 4.5
Top five New Zealand exports by product 
(year to the September 2024 quarter)
Source: Stats NZ.


38
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Supply and demand factors have 
contributed to higher commodity 
prices since the start of 2024
Global prices for beef and dairy products 
— New Zealand’s two largest export 
commodities — increased over 2024. 
Higher global commodity prices for beef and 
dairy were due to both resilient demand and 
constrained global supply. 
Livestock disease in the US and Europe 
reduced the supply of beef and dairy over 
2024. In the US, livestock were affected 
by avian flu, while in Europe livestock were 
affected by bluetongue disease. These 
diseases contributed to a reduction in milk 
supply and beef production. This reduction 
in supply resulted in the US and Europe 
needing to import more dairy and beef 
products to meet resilient domestic demand, 
contributing to upward pressure on prices. 
Additionally, foot and mouth disease was 
confirmed in German livestock in January 
2025. This may impact supply over the 
near term, as some countries have imposed 
export restrictions on Germany’s dairy and 
meat products. 
Livestock numbers declined over 2024 
in the US, China, and Europe, further 
contributing to reduced beef and dairy 
supply. An oversupply of raw milk in the 
domestic Chinese market and weak Chinese 
demand have contributed to suppressed 
domestic prices over the past couple of 
years and a subsequent reduction in Chinese 
dairy herds. Structural changes such as 
environmental regulation and an ageing 
farmer population in Europe have contributed 
to declining livestock numbers affecting 
both European beef and dairy supply. US 
livestock numbers have been declining 
since 2019, reflecting the cattle cycle — a 
recurring pattern where herd sizes expand 
when prices are high and shrink when costs 
increase or profits fall. US livestock numbers 
were expected to begin increasing in 2024. 
However, adverse weather conditions have 
delayed this. 
Demand for beef and dairy products was 
relatively resilient over 2024 despite 
subdued global GDP growth, supporting 
prices. In the last quarter of 2024, China’s 
restocking of milk powder inventories 
supported their demand for dairy products. 
This contributed to upward pressure on 
global dairy prices and an increase in 
demand for New Zealand dairy exports. 
In comparison, forestry exports have 
experienced weak prices over this same 
period due to weak demand from China’s 
construction industry. 
Supply factors will continue to 
influence global commodity prices 
in 2025
Global beef supply is likely to decline in 
2025 for the first time since 2020. This is 
due to declining livestock numbers in four of 
the world’s largest beef producers: the US, 
China, Europe, and Brazil. New Zealand cattle 
numbers are also projected to decline over 
2025. Global demand for beef is expected to 
remain robust over 2025, further supporting 
prices. Falling supply and robust demand 
mean that global beef prices may increase 
further over 2025. 
Global dairy product supply may also be 
partially constrained in 2025. Disease 
outbreaks in the US and Europe may 
contribute to a decrease in milk yields over 
the near term. China’s Ministry of Agriculture 
and Rural Affairs forecasts Chinese milk 
production to continue to decline in the first 
half of 2025. However, supply constraints 
will be balanced against expected dairy 
production growth in other countries, such as 
New Zealand and Australia. 
Financial market participants expect 
global dairy prices to remain resilient in 
2025. However, there is downside risk to 
demand once China finishes restocking their 
inventories, which could result in downward 
pressure on dairy prices. Overall, resilient 
demand and near-term supply constraints 
suggest that global dairy prices are likely 
to remain elevated over the near term. 
The outlook for the medium term is more 
uncertain.


39
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Our forecasts assume an 
elevated global commodity price 
outlook for 2025
Our forecasts assume that global prices 
for New Zealand’s goods exports increase 
over 2025, supported by higher beef and 
dairy prices. Higher global prices will support 
incomes for dairy and beef exporters, and 
this is further supported by the recent 
depreciation in the New Zealand dollar 
exchange rate. The lower exchange rate 
means that exporters receive higher prices in 
New Zealand dollar terms for a given level of 
global prices. 
Beef and dairy prices will be affected by 
weather conditions, geopolitical tensions, 
further disease outbreaks, and trade 
restrictions. For example, China is currently 
investigating beef imports, including from 
New Zealand. The Dairy Companies 
Association of New Zealand has also joined 
Australia and the US dairy industry to address 
concerns over Canada’s subsidised dairy 
exports. The US approach to international 
trade is also uncertain. 


Chapter 
05
Economic 
projections
Hump Ridge Track. Photo: Luisa Gaspar


41
Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Chapter 5.
Economic projections
This chapter summarises the economic projections that MPC 
members considered when making their policy assessment. 
The projections were finalised on 13 February 2025.
Economic activity and the labour market 
have been weak, and we estimate that the 
output gap is significantly negative. 
Annual headline inflation is now close 
to 2 percent. Non-tradables inflation has 
continued to decrease, and will soon 
return to a level consistent with sustainably 
achieving the mid-point of the MPC’s 1 to 
3 percent target band.
We assume that the negative output 
gap puts further downward pressure 
on non‑tradables inflation over the next 
year. Lower interest rates are expected 
to contribute to a recovery in aggregate 
demand, reducing the negative output gap 
across the projection. This implies a period 
of economic growth above the potential 
growth rate. We assume that price-setting 
behaviour continues to adapt to a 
low-inflation environment over the medium 
term, easing persistent domestic inflationary 
pressure. As price-setting behaviour 
adapts, the OCR declines to around the 
middle of our estimated band of long-term 
neutral rates.
Headline inflation is projected to increase 
within the target band in 2025, before 
returning near the target mid-point in 2026. 
The increase in headline inflation is due to 
price increases in tradables components, 
such as petrol, which do not typically result 
in persistent inflationary pressure. Since 
monetary policy operates with a lag, we 
generally ‘look through’ temporary shocks 
to inflation, to achieve low and stable 
inflation in the medium term (consistent with 
the MPC’s Remit). 
We assume that offshore trade 
policy announcements will affect the 
New Zealand economy via the uncertainty 
and financial markets channels. Elevated 
uncertainty related to global trade policies 
is assumed to lead to businesses delaying, 
altering, or cancelling some investment plans. 
These projections do not assume specific 
effects of trade policies on New Zealand’s 
exports or imports. The projections do include 
the market response so far as captured in 
global interest rates and the value of the 
New Zealand dollar exchange rate. The effect 
of trade policies on New Zealand exports and 
imports will depend on a range of factors, 
including their design, size, breadth, duration, 
and the extent of retaliation and trade 
diversion (see chapter 4.1).
The New Zealand labour market has 
continued to weaken. The unemployment 
rate increased to 5.1 percent in the 
December 2024 quarter, and employment 
has declined. Due to usual lags between 
activity and the labour market, the 
unemployment rate is expected to continue 
to increase to a peak of 5.2 percent in early 
2025 before gradually decreasing.
These projections rely on a set of key 
assumptions about the global and 
domestic factors influencing the economy. 
There is significant uncertainty about these 
assumptions.


42
Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Table 5.1 
Key projection assumptions
Key factors
Global factors
•	 Global growth remains below potential and there is increased uncertainty around 
the growth outlook. As a result, the global economy is likely to continue constraining 
New Zealand’s economic activity over the coming year.
•	 The New Zealand dollar trade-weighted index (TWI) has depreciated about 
3 percent since the November Statement, primarily due to increased global 
uncertainty. The weaker New Zealand dollar exchange rate puts upward pressure 
on tradables inflation in New Zealand. The New Zealand dollar TWI is assumed to 
remain at 67.5 over the projection.
Domestic 
capacity 
pressures
•	 The output gap is assumed to have a lower starting point (-1.7 percent of potential 
GDP in the December 2024 quarter) than in the November projection. We estimate 
the starting point of the output gap using the output gap indicator suite (figure 6.2). 
•	 We assume the output gap begins to recover in 2025 in response to lower interest 
rates.
•	 The decline in the output gap since mid-2022 has been mainly in response to tighter 
monetary policy, slower growth in government spending, and headwinds from 
slowing growth in our trading partners. Likewise, less restrictive monetary policy is 
expected to result in a recovery in the output gap. Sectors of the economy that are 
typically more sensitive to monetary policy have tended to be weaker over the past 
two years, and are expected to lead the recovery in economic growth 
(see chapter 4.1 of the November Statement).
Economic growth
Potential 
output
•	 We use the output gap indicator suite, which is largely independent of recent GDP 
data, to estimate the starting point output gap. The output gap is the difference 
between published GDP data and estimated potential GDP. Therefore, GDP revisions 
require us to adjust our estimate of recent potential GDP growth to match our 
independent output gap estimate.
•	 GDP growth in the two years to early 2024 was revised significantly higher in the 
most recent GDP data release (see box A in chapter 2). Therefore, we have revised 
our estimate of potential growth higher over this period. The higher growth rate of 
potential GDP implies labour productivity did not decline by as much over the past 
few years as previously measured. However, labour productivity growth has still been 
weak and is assumed to remain so over the projection.
•	 The rapid decline in GDP during 2024 means that our estimate of the output gap 
decreases from above +1 percent of potential GDP at the beginning of 2024 to 
-1.7 percent by the end of 2024 (figure 6.5).
Production
•	 Available data suggest modest GDP growth resumed in the December 2024 quarter. 
We assume a period of above-potential growth will begin in 2025, as the output gap 
begins to close in response to lower interest rates and higher international prices for 
dairy and meat products increase export earnings.
Consumption
•	 Consumption declined in the September 2024 quarter. We assume a moderate 
growth rate for consumption across the forecast, as interest rates decrease and house 
prices gradually increase.


43
Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Economic growth (continued)
Residential 
investment
•	 Residential investment has been falling for two years, as restrictive interest rates have 
reduced housing demand and made development projects less viable.
•	 Residential investment was revised down by Stats NZ over the past two years, and fell 
significantly in the most recent quarter. Real residential investment is now about 
10 percent below its pre-COVID-19 level, which is similar to the decrease in residential 
building consents over this period.
•	 Surveys of construction sector confidence have improved significantly in recent 
months, and we expect construction activity to increase across the forecast period in 
response to lower interest rates and increasing house prices.
Business 
investment
•	 Business investment was also revised down over the past two years, and fell 
significantly in the September 2024 quarter. We assume business investment will 
fall further in the near term in response to the negative output gap and significant 
economic and trade policy uncertainty (see chapter 4.1). In the medium term, we 
expect business investment to grow as the output gap closes.
Government
•	 Government consumption and investment were revised significantly higher over the 
past two years in the recent GDP release. Government spending was the largest 
contributor to the upward revision to expenditure GDP, but was partially offset by 
downward revisions to residential investment and business investment.
•	 Our forecast for government spending is based on the Half Year Economic and Fiscal 
Update (HYEFU) 2024, published in December. HYEFU 2024 showed a relatively 
flat forecast for real government consumption, whereas Budget 2024 had forecast 
declines. The higher revised starting point and updated government consumption 
forecast imply higher total government spending in the medium term than assumed in 
the November Statement.
•	 Government expenditure is still assumed to decline as a share of the economy over 
the medium term, reducing inflationary pressure, but to a lesser extent then previously. 
Exports and 
imports
•	 Over the medium term, goods export volumes are assumed to grow at a similar 
pace to the rest of the economy. Prices for dairy and meat have been supported by 
weak global supply and resilient demand (see chapter 4.2). Given the weaker New 
Zealand dollar exchange rate, goods export revenues are assumed to be higher 
than in the November Statement.
•	 Services exports are assumed to continue to recover toward pre-COVID-19 levels, 
causing total export growth to be slightly faster than overall economic growth. It is 
assumed that the weaker New Zealand dollar exchange rate leads to slightly higher 
volumes of services exports, all else equal.
•	 Import volumes are assumed to evolve in line with their historical relationships with 
other components of GDP. Nominal import prices are assumed to remain around 
current levels in foreign currency terms. 
Inventories
•	 Since early 2023, there has been a significant decrease in inventories, which had 
built up during the COVID-19 period. The drawdown in inventories has meant less 
production has taken place, given the level of demand. As the economy begins to 
recover, we expect inventories growth to return to more normal levels.


44
Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Labour market
Employment 
and wages 
•	 The New Zealand labour market has continued to weaken. The unemployment rate 
increased to 5.1 percent in the December 2024 quarter. Employment has decreased.
•	 As the labour market tends to lag developments in the broader economy, 
employment growth is expected to remain subdued over the next year.
•	 Same-job wage growth has declined. With weak labour market conditions, and 
headline inflation remaining within the target band, we expect wage growth to 
decline to around its pre-COVID-19 average of about 2 percent per year over the 
medium term.
•	 The unemployment rate is expected to continue to increase slightly to a peak of 
5.2 percent in early 2025, before declining. The slightly higher unemployment rate 
projection relative to the November Statement is consistent with a more negative 
output gap projection.
Migration
•	 Net immigration has continued to decline — although remains positive — with higher 
departures and lower arrival numbers. We expect working-age net immigration 
to remain low over the next year, before increasing gradually to around 6,500 
per quarter by the end of the projection. The tight Australian labour market is 
encouraging New Zealand workers to leave for more attractive job opportunities in 
Australia. However, as labour market conditions in New Zealand improve from the 
second half of 2025, we expect net immigration to gradually increase.
•	 Migration is assumed to have a minimal effect on inflationary pressure in our 
forecast, as we assume the additional supply of workers and increased demand for 
goods and services have broadly offsetting effects on inflation.
Inflation
Headline
•	 Annual headline CPI inflation remained at 2.2 percent in the December 2024 quarter, 
near the target mid-point.
•	 In 2024, negative tradables inflation contributed significantly to lower headline 
inflation. Recently, tradables prices have begun to increase, which is expected 
to contribute to headline inflation increasing within the target band during 2025. 
However, significant spare capacity in the economy is expected to continue to put 
downward pressure on non-tradables inflation, and headline inflation is expected to 
return near the target mid-point in early 2026.
Non-tradables
•	 Non-tradables inflation is projected to continue to decline due to the negative output 
gap and price-setting behaviour adapting to a low-inflation environment. We project 
annual non-tradables inflation will reach a level consistent with the mid-point of the 
MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target band by the end of 2025.
•	 Administered and policy-affected price changes are having a significant influence on 
non-tradables inflation at present, and this is likely to continue in 2025. On net, these 
changes are making a large positive contribution to annual non-tradables inflation.
Tradables
•	 Annual tradables inflation decreased rapidly in 2024, but has begun to increase 
recently. Fuel prices have increased since the November Statement, and a weaker 
New Zealand dollar exchange rate is expected to put upward pressure on tradables 
inflation over the next year.
•	 After higher import costs have passed through, annual tradables inflation is assumed 
to decrease to around pre-COVID-19 average levels.


45
Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Figure 5.3
Unemployment rate
(unemployed people as a share of the labour force,
seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Charts
Figure 5.1
Inflation components
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Dotted lines show the projections from the November Statement. The 
shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI 
inflation over the medium term.
Figure 5.2
Private sector LCI wage inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 5.4
House price growth
(annual)
Source: CoreLogic, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 5.5
Production GDP
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 5.6
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
 Chapter 
06
Appendices
Huka Falls. Photo: Michelle Laux


47
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Chapter 6.
Appendices
Appendix 1: Statistical tables
Table 6.1
Key forecast variables
GDP growth 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Annual
Unemployment 
rate
TWI
OCR
2023
Mar
-0.1
1.2
6.7
3.4
71.3
4.5
Jun
0.7
1.1
6.0
3.6
71.0
5.3
Sep
0.0
1.8
5.6
3.9
70.6
5.5
Dec
0.3
0.5
4.7
4.0
70.8
5.5
2024
Mar
0.3
0.6
4.0
4.4
71.6
5.5
Jun
-1.1
0.4
3.3
4.6
71.4
5.5
Sep
-1.0
0.6
2.2
4.8
70.9
5.4
Dec
0.3
0.5
2.2
5.1
69.5
4.6
2025
Mar
0.6
0.8
2.4
5.2
67.7
4.0
Jun
0.6
0.4
2.4
5.2
67.5
3.4
Sep
0.5
0.9
2.7
5.1
67.5
3.2
Dec
0.6
0.4
2.5
4.9
67.5
3.1
2026
Mar
0.6
0.5
2.2
4.8
67.5
3.1
Jun
0.6
0.5
2.2
4.7
67.5
3.1
Sep
0.6
0.9
2.2
4.6
67.5
3.1
Dec
0.6
0.4
2.2
4.5
67.5
3.1
2027
Mar
0.6
0.4
2.2
4.5
67.5
3.1
Jun
0.6
0.4
2.1
4.4
67.5
3.1
Sep
0.7
0.8
2.0
4.4
67.5
3.1
Dec
0.6
0.4
2.0
4.3
67.5
3.1
2028
Mar
0.6
0.4
2.0
4.3
67.5
3.1


48
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Table 6.2
Measures of inflation and inflation expectations
2023
2024
2025
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Inflation (annual rates)
CPI
6.0
5.6
4.7
4.0
3.3
2.2
2.2
CPI non-tradables
6.6
6.3
5.9
5.8
5.4
4.9
4.5
CPI tradables
5.2
4.7
3.0
1.6
0.3
-1.6
-1.1
Sectoral factor model
estimate of core inflation
5.8
5.3
4.6
4.2
3.5
3.3
3.1
CPI trimmed mean (30% measure)
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
3.8
2.7
2.5
CPI weighted median
6.6
5.0
4.4
4.4
3.5
2.8
2.6
GDP deflator (expenditure)
5.3
6.5
3.5
3.8
2.9
2.7
Inflation expectations
RBNZ Survey of Expectations
— inflation 1 year ahead
4.3
4.2
3.6
3.2
2.7
2.4
2.0
2.1
RBNZ Survey of Expectations 
— inflation 2 years ahead
2.8
2.8
2.8
2.5
2.3
2.0
2.1
2.1
RBNZ Survey of Expectations 
— inflation 5 years ahead
2.4
2.3
2.4
2.3
2.3
2.1
2.2
2.1
RBNZ Survey of Expectations 
— inflation 10 years ahead
2.3
2.2
2.3
2.2
2.2
2.0
2.2
2.1


49
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Table 6.3
Measures of labour market conditions	
(seasonally adjusted, changes expressed in annual percent terms, unless specified otherwise)	
2023
2024
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Household Labour Force Survey
Unemployment rate
3.6
3.9
4.0
4.4
4.6
4.8
5.1
Underutilisation rate
9.9
10.4
10.7
11.2
11.8
11.6
12.1
Labour force participation rate
72.4
72.0
71.9
71.5
71.6
71.1
71.0
Employment rate 
(% of working-age population)
69.8
69.2
69.0
68.4
68.3
67.7
67.4
Employment growth
4.4
3.0
2.8
1.0
0.1
-0.6
-1.1
Average weekly hours worked
33.5
33.6
33.7
33.8
33.2
33.3
33.2
Number unemployed
(thousand people)
110
119
123
134
143
148
156
Number employed 
(million people)
2.93
2.94
2.95
2.93
2.94
2.92
2.92
Labour force (million people)
3.04
3.06
3.07
3.07
3.08
3.07
3.07
Extended labour force
(million people)
3.14
3.15
3.16
3.17
3.18
3.17
3.17
Working-age population
(million people, age 15+ years)
4.21
4.24
4.27
4.29
4.30
4.31
4.33
Quarterly Employment Survey — QES
Filled jobs growth
6.5
6.1
4.3
3.5
-0.2
-1.3
-0.9
Average hourly earnings growth 
(private sector, ordinary time)
7.7
7.1
6.6
4.8
4.0
3.2
4.0
Other data sources
Labour Cost Index growth, adjusted 
(private sector, ordinary and overtime)
4.3
4.1
3.9
3.8
3.6
3.3
3.0
Labour Cost Index growth, unadjusted
(private sector, ordinary time)
6.1
5.7
5.7
5.2
4.8
4.5
3.9
Estimated net working-age 
immigration (thousands, quarterly)
33.4
23.7
12.8
7.0
4.9
1.4
1.0
Change in All Vacancies Index* 
-21.6
-27.9
-27.6
-27.3
-33.4
-31.4
-27.3
Note: The All Vacancies Index is produced by MBIE as part of the monthly Jobs Online report, which shows changes in job vacancies advertised by businesses on 
internet job boards. The unadjusted Labour Cost Index (LCI) is an analytical index that reflects quality change in addition to price change (whereas the official LCI 
measures price changes only). For definitions of underutilisation, the extended labour force, and related concepts, see Stats NZ (2016) 'Introducting underutilisation 
in the labour market'. 
* The All Vacancies Index is a non-seasonally adjusted series.


50
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Table 6.4
Composition of real GDP growth
(annual average percent change, seasonally adjusted, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
Final consumption expenditure
Private
4.8
4.5
2.4
0.2
6.4
3.3
1.0
0.2
1.9
2.1
2.4
Public authority
3.8
3.3
5.5
7.0
8.0
2.6
2.0
-1.4
0.0
0.0
0.0
Total
4.6
4.3
3.1
1.8
6.8
3.2
1.3
-0.2
1.4
1.6
1.9
Gross fixed capital formation
Residential
-1.8
-0.1
2.7
2.2
2.5
-2.0
-5.6
-9.3
2.9
10.4
9.9
Other
9.8
7.0
2.8
-2.3
11.3
5.0
-0.5
-4.6
-2.2
6.6
5.1
Total
6.6
5.2
2.8
-1.2
9.1
3.3
-1.6
-5.6
-1.1
7.4
6.2
Final domestic 
expenditure
5.0
4.5
3.0
1.1
7.3
3.2
0.6
-1.5
0.9
2.8
2.8
Changes in 
inventories*
0.2
-0.2
-0.2
-0.3
0.6
0.3
-1.6
0.3
0.7
0.1
0.0
Gross national 
expenditure
5.5
4.3
2.7
-0.1
8.5
3.8
-0.9
-1.1
1.5
3.0
2.8
Exports of goods 
and services
3.8
3.3
0.2
-17.9
2.5
5.6
8.3
2.1
2.9
2.7
2.6
Imports of goods 
and services
7.8
4.8
1.4
-15.7
17.1
4.5
-1.2
0.5
1.6
4.7
3.7
Expenditure on GDP
4.3
3.9
2.4
0.2
4.6
3.9
1.3
-0.7
1.8
2.3
2.5
GDP (production)
3.4
3.5
2.3
-0.3
4.6
3.5
1.4
-1.2
1.8
2.4
2.5
GDP (production, 
March qtr to March qtr)
3.5
3.5
0.7
4.7
0.5
3.0
1.3
-1.2
2.4
2.4
2.6
* Percentage point contribution to the growth rate of GDP.


51
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Table 6.5
Summary of economic projections
(annual percent change, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
Price measures
CPI 
1.1
2.0
2.4
1.6
3.1
4.5
3.8
2.8
2.2
2.1
2.1
Labour costs
1.9
2.0
2.4
1.6
3.1
4.5
3.8
2.8
2.2
2.1
2.1
Export prices
(in New Zealand dollars) 
3.4
1.3
7.0
-6.0
20.8
1.1
-2.1
7.4
3.0
1.8
1.9
Import prices
(in New Zealand dollars) 
1.6
4.1
2.5
-2.4
18.9
8.2
-3.7
3.6
-0.5
0.4
1.0
Monetary conditions
OCR (year average)
1.8
1.8
1.2
0.3
0.5
3.1
5.5
4.9
3.2
3.1
3.1
TWI (year average)
75.6
73.4
71.7
72.4
74.0
71.2
71.0
69.9
67.5
67.5
67.5
Output
GDP (production, annual 
average % change)
3.4
3.5
2.3
-0.3
4.6
3.5
1.4
-1.2
1.8
2.4
2.5
Potential output (annual 
average % change)
3.2
3.1
2.6
0.0
1.9
3.3
2.7
1.7
1.4
1.8
2.2
Output gap (% of potential 
GDP, year average)
0.4
0.8
0.5
0.1
2.8
2.9
1.6
-1.2
-0.8
-0.2
0.1
Labour market
Total employment (seasonally 
adjusted)
2.9
1.5
2.6
0.2
2.5
3.1
1.0
-0.6
1.5
2.0
1.8
Unemployment rate (March qtr, 
seasonally adjusted)
4.4
4.2
4.2
4.6
3.2
3.4
4.4
5.2
4.8
4.5
4.3
Trend labour productivity 
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.2
0.3
0.3
0.5
Key balances
Current account balance 
(% of GDP)
-3.1
-3.9
-1.7
-2.7
-6.8
-8.6
-6.6
-5.4
-3.3
-3.3
-3.4
Terms of trade
(SNA measure, annual 
average % change)
4.5
-2.1
2.0
-1.0
0.4
-5.1
-1.3
2.8
4.2
2.0
0.9
Household saving rate 
(% of disposable income)
-2.0
-1.3
1.4
7.6
2.4
-3.0
-1.8
-2.3
-1.2
-0.1
1.0
World economy
Trading-partner GDP 
(annual average % change)
4.0
3.5
1.7
-0.4
6.2
2.9
3.1
2.9
2.7
2.8
2.8
Trading-partner CPI 
(TWI-weighted)
1.8
1.4
2.4
0.8
4.1
4.8
2.2
1.9
2.1
2.1
2.2
 


52
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Appendix 2: Chart pack
Figure 6.1
Composition of CPI inflation
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 6.2
Output gap and output gap indicators
(share of potential)
Source: NZIER, MBIE, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The output gap indicators based on information from labour market surveys 
are shown separately from the other indicators. For each group of indicators, the 
shaded area shows the range of values and the line shows the mean value. The 
output gap estimate in the final quarter is based on our near-term GDP estimate.
Figure 6.3
Unemployment and underutilisation rates
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 6.4
OCR and nominal neutral OCR indicator suite
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area indicates the range between the maximum and minimum 
values from our suite of long-run nominal neutral OCR indicators. See Castaing et 
al. (2024), ‘Estimates of New Zealand’s nominal neutral interest rate’, Bulletin, 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand.
Figure 6.5
GDP and potential GDP
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.6
Measures of core inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Core inflation measures exclude the GST increase in 2010. The shaded 
area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI inflation 
over the medium term.


53
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2025
Figure 6.7
Inflation expectations
(annual, years ahead) 
Source: RBNZ Survey of Expectations (Business).
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for 
annual CPI inflation over the medium term.
Figure 6.9
House price inflation
(annual) 
Source: REINZ.
Source: Stats NZ, Global Dairy Trade, LSEG, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.12
Terms of trade, dairy, and oil price indices
(index = 100 in the September 2008 quarter, quarterly average)
Figure 6.10
Mortgage interest rates
Source: interest.co.nz, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The rates shown for the fixed terms are the average of the advertised 
rates from ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac, shown as weekly data. The floating 
rate represents the monthly yield on floating housing debt from the RBNZ 
Income Statement survey.
Figure 6.8
Private sector wage growth
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 6.11
New Zealand dollar exchange rates
(monthly average) 
Source: NZFMA, RBNZ.
