BANK: RBNZ
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: Monetary Policy Statement May 2026
DATE: 26/05/2026
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/monetary-policy-statements/2026/may-272605/monetary-policy-statement-may-2026.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Monetary Policy
Statement. 
May 2026
B.33


ii
Policy assessment. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026                 
Policy assessment.
The Monetary Policy Committee voted 
to hold the OCR at 2.25 percent. 
Annual consumers price inflation was 3.1 percent 
in the March quarter. The Middle East conflict is 
increasing near-term inflation and weakening 
economic activity. Inflation is expected to peak 
at 4.3 percent in the September quarter and to 
return to the 2 percent target mid-point in mid-
2027. Currently, core inflation, wage growth, 
and medium- to long-term inflation expectations 
remain consistent with inflation returning to the 
2-percent target mid-point over the medium term. 
The global economic backdrop remains uncertain. 
Supply chain disruptions, higher prices for 
petrochemicals, and a more fragmented global 
trading environment are impacting the outlook. 
Growth will vary across countries, reflecting 
differences in energy intensity, fiscal support,  
and exposure to AI investment. On balance,  
New Zealand’s trading partners are expected to 
see weaker growth and higher inflation. 
Domestically, business contacts and surveys 
indicate weaker confidence and spending. For 
some firms, rising costs are squeezing profit 
margins and curbing investment and hiring 
intentions. Consumer confidence has fallen 
sharply, and the housing market remains weak. 
Economic conditions continue to differ across 
regions and sectors, with high commodity prices 
supporting incomes in regional New Zealand. 
The outlook for medium-term inflation pressures 
is also uncertain. These could remain elevated if 
households and businesses expect higher costs 
in future and build those expectations into price- 
and wage-setting decisions today. However, weak 
demand and elevated unemployment will dampen 
medium-term inflation pressures.
The Committee remains focused on ensuring 
that increased costs do not lead to elevated 
inflation over the medium term, while avoiding 
unnecessary economic volatility. On balance, the 
OCR will most likely need to increase sooner and 
by more than envisaged in the February Monetary 
Policy Statement. The pace of OCR increases will 
depend on the relative influence of persistent 
wage- and price-setting behaviour versus weaker 
economic activity on medium-term inflation 
pressures. 
Anna Breman 
Governor 
Figure i.1
Official Cash Rate (OCR)
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


iii
Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Report and supporting notes published at:
www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary‑policy/monetary‑policy‑statement
Subscribe online: www.rbnz.govt.nz/email‑updates
Copyright © 2026 Reserve Bank of New Zealand
This report is published pursuant to section 129
of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 2021. 
ISSN 1770‑4829
Thank you to RBNZ staff for photography in this report. 
Cover: Aoraki Mount Cook National Park. Photo: Fay Simpkiss
Monetary Policy Framework
The Monetary Policy Committee operates and makes 
decisions under the Monetary Policy Framework that 
comprises the following key components:
•	 the Remit;
•	 the Charter;
•	 the Code of Conduct; and
•	 the monetary policy strategy.
The corresponding documents to these components and 
additional information can be accessed on our website under 
the Monetary Policy Framework.


1
Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
The projections were finalised on 21 May 2026. The Official Cash Rate (OCR) projection 
incorporates an outlook for monetary policy that is consistent with the MPC’s monetary 
policy assessment, which was finalised on 27 May 2026. 
Contents
Policy assessment	
ii
1.	
Summary record of meeting	
2
2.	 Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook	
7
	
Box A: Scenarios for the effect of the Middle East conflict on New Zealand	 13
	
Box B: Summary of recent business visits	
20
3.	 Global economy and financial markets	
25
4.	 Special topics	
35
	
4.1	 How will the Middle East conflict affect the New Zealand economy?	
37
	
4.2	How much spare capacity is there in the New Zealand economy? 	
43
5.	 Economic projections	
49
6.	 Appendices	
57
	
Appendix 1: Statistical tables 	
58
	
Appendix 2: Chart pack 	
63
Monetary Policy Statement.
May 2026


Ōmarama Clay Cliffs. Photo: Denham Watson
Summary 
record of 
meeting
Chapter 
01


3
Chapter 1. Summary record of meeting. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Chapter 1. 
Summary record of meeting
The ongoing conflict in the Middle East is weakening economic activity and 
increasing near-term inflation. The Committee remains focused on ensuring 
that higher costs do not lead to elevated inflation over the medium term, 
while avoiding unnecessary economic volatility. A prolonged period of weak 
economic growth and elevated unemployment is expected to dampen 
medium-term inflationary effects. The Committee judges that the balance of 
risks is to the upside for inflation and to the downside for growth. 
Conflict in the Middle East is disrupting 
global supply chains
The Middle East conflict has severely disrupted the 
supply of oil, gas and other petroleum products 
transiting through the Strait of Hormuz. The decline 
in oil supply has so far been mitigated through 
inventory drawdowns, rerouting, increased 
production elsewhere, and demand adjustment 
in some countries. This helped contain oil price 
increases over April and May, despite no resolution 
to the conflict. Nevertheless, prices for petroleum 
products have increased substantially since the 
conflict began, increasing prices for fuel and other 
petrochemical-intensive inputs such as plastics and 
fertilisers. 
The Committee noted that the outlook for energy 
prices depends on how the conflict evolves, the 
extent of damage to energy infrastructure in the 
Middle East, and the speed with which global supply 
chains adjust. Members noted that these events will 
encourage firms to permanently reconfigure their 
supply chains to reduce exposure to the region. 
Along with stronger global demand for renewable 
energy, this may place further upward pressure on 
global energy prices in the near term. 
Pricing in oil futures markets is consistent with a 
resolution to the conflict over coming months and 
shipping resuming through the Strait of Hormuz. 
However, given damage to energy infrastructure 
and the need to rebuild inventories, oil prices are 
expected to remain elevated over the medium term. 
Trading partner inflation is increasing 
The Committee noted that higher energy prices 
have increased headline inflation in many of 
New Zealand’s trading partners in recent months. 
Trading partner inflation is expected to increase 
further as the direct and indirect effects of higher 
costs emerge. Members noted that the pass-through 
of higher costs to near-term inflation will vary across 
economies, depending on factors such as energy 
intensity, price controls, subsidies, or tax changes. 
Differences in current economic conditions, including 
the degree of capacity pressure, will influence the 
extent of medium-term inflation pressures across 
trading partners. 
The Middle East conflict poses downside risks to 
global economic activity. High-frequency indicators 
suggest that higher petrochemical prices are 
weighing on sentiment and real incomes in many 
economies. The impact is expected to be largest for 
economies with greater reliance on imported energy 
and energy-intensive manufacturing, including many 
of New Zealand’s Asian trading partners. In some 
cases, these headwinds may be partly offset by 
continued strong demand for artificial intelligence 
exports and fiscal support.


4
Chapter 1. Summary record of meeting. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
The New Zealand economy was 
recovering prior to the conflict
The Committee noted New Zealand was in the early 
stages of an economic recovery. GDP growth of 0.2 
percent in the December 2025 quarter was lower 
than expected, but timely indicators suggest the 
economy continued to expand in the March 2026 
quarter. For example, strength in retail spending 
broadened across industries and businesses 
reported increasing capacity constraints, consistent 
with the economic recovery gaining momentum. 
There has been significant spare capacity in the 
New Zealand economy for some time. This is 
reflected in a range of indicators, with the output gap 
estimated to be -1.3 percent of potential output in the 
March 2026 quarter, broadly in line with the estimate 
in February.
The labour market was stabilising, with employment 
growing modestly and annual wage inflation 
remaining at 2 percent in the March 2026 quarter. 
Net migration has increased materially since late 
2025. Unemployment remains elevated, indicative of 
spare capacity in the labour market.
Annual headline inflation remained at 3.1 percent 
in the March 2026 quarter, which was higher than 
expected in the February Statement largely due to 
fuel price increases over March. Underlying inflation 
has continued to gradually ease, with measures of 
core inflation declining on average to 2.3 percent. 
Near-term inflation is expected to 
increase, and economic growth to 
weaken 
First-round direct and indirect effects from higher 
petrochemical prices will increase inflation this 
year. Direct effects, through higher fuel prices 
for businesses, are expected to occur slightly 
faster than the indirect effects of higher prices of 
petrochemical-intensive inputs. Intelligence from 
business engagements indicates that some firms 
have implemented temporary fuel surcharges, 
although the extent of this varies across sectors. 
Some businesses are absorbing cost increases 
into margins given weak demand, while others are 
embedding higher costs into price changes. 
The Committee noted elevated uncertainty around 
its near-term inflation forecast. The forecast 
incorporates current oil futures pricing, which 
assumes Dubai oil prices fall to US$96 per barrel 
by the end of the year. Annual headline inflation is 
expected to increase to a peak of 4.3 percent by the 
September 2026 quarter and to return to the target 
mid-point in mid-2027. While shorter-term inflation 
expectations have increased, medium- to longer-term 
expectations remain close to 2 percent.
Near-term economic activity is likely to be weaker 
than assumed in the February Statement because 
of the Middle East conflict. Higher fuel prices 
are increasing costs, lowering profit margins for 
many businesses, and reducing real incomes and 
household purchasing power. High frequency data, 
including electronic card transactions and measures 
of business and consumer confidence, are pointing 
to weak demand in the near term. With weaker 
consumption and investment, annual GDP growth in 
2026 is now expected to be 0.9 percentage points 
lower than assumed in the February Statement. 
These forecasts indicate a slower economic recovery 
in the near term, with the pace of economic growth 
increasing by the end of the year.
Financial conditions have tightened
Market expectations for central bank policy rates 
have increased, both domestically and abroad. The 
Committee discussed how differences in economic 
starting points, fiscal and structural policy responses 
to higher fuel prices, and reliance on imported energy 
will influence the monetary policy response required 
to contain medium-term inflation across countries. 
The Committee noted that financial conditions 
in New Zealand have tightened through higher 
wholesale interest rates passing through to higher 
fixed-term mortgage rates and, to a lesser extent, 
term deposit rates. The average interest rate on 
outstanding mortgages declined to 4.9 percent in 
March but is expected to increase to 5.3 percent over 
the next 12 months. 
Global financial market volatility increased materially 
in March because of the Middle East conflict but 
declined following the ceasefire in early April. Global 
risk appetite has subsequently improved, in part due 
to strong upward revisions to earnings growth among 
US technology firms pushing up global equity prices. 
There has been some volatility in the trade-weighted 
New Zealand dollar exchange rate, but it is currently 
little changed since the start of the year.


5
Chapter 1. Summary record of meeting. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
The Committee was also briefed on financial system 
stability and agreed this poses no material trade-off 
to meeting its inflation objective.
The Committee discussed risks to the 
inflation outlook
Members noted uncertainty around the scale and 
duration of the global economic consequences 
of the Middle East conflict and how the shock will 
propagate through the New Zealand economy and 
influence medium-term inflation pressures. 
The Committee discussed the risk of higher near-
term inflation feeding through to medium-term 
inflation. Members noted that firms’ price-setting 
behaviour could be more persistent because of 
generally elevated inflation since the pandemic 
and the cost-push nature of the current shock. This 
would lead to stronger second-round inflation effects 
than currently assumed. This risk is accentuated 
by low profit margins for some businesses given 
weak activity and higher costs, limiting the degree to 
which they can absorb further cost increases. Wage 
pressures could also arise from labour shortages in 
some sectors and regions. However, if the recent 
increase in net migration continues, this would help 
to offset this risk. 
Members noted that spare capacity in the domestic 
economy and weaker global demand could constrain 
firms’ ability to pass on higher costs by more than 
assumed in the central projection. Lower spending by 
households in response to lower real income growth, 
persistently elevated unemployment, a weak housing 
market, and reduced resilience due to repeated 
shocks collectively pose downside risks to domestic 
economic activity. However, economic activity could 
recover faster than assumed if a resolution to the 
Middle East conflict leads to lower domestic fuel 
prices. 
The Committee discussed risks to the global growth 
outlook. To the downside, members noted that 
high and increasing global government debt ratios, 
alongside greater geopolitical fragmentation, could 
push up long-term bond yields, tightening financial 
conditions and weighing on global growth. The 
Committee also noted that earnings expectations 
and valuations in US equity markets remain elevated 
and that if revenues from AI products fail to meet 
expectations, this could lead to a shock that would 
pose downside risks to global growth.
To the upside, members agreed that demand for 
New Zealand’s exports could remain stronger than 
expected if our Asian trading partners continue 
to benefit from strong manufacturing investment. 
Greater investment from large technology firms, 
alongside stronger investment in economic and 
military security, may also continue to provide a 
tailwind to the global economy through stronger 
economic activity in Asia, Europe and the US. 
The Committee noted the three alternative scenarios 
in the May Statement. These informed the trade‑offs 
influencing the Committee’s discussions and 
decisions. The scenarios represent just three of 
many plausible paths for the domestic economy 
and inflation. In practice, monetary policy decisions 
depend on a broad range of factors, including 
prevailing economic conditions, the outlook for 
medium-term inflation pressure, and the Committee’s 
secondary objectives of avoiding unnecessary 
instability in the economy while having regard to 
financial system stability.
The Committee voted to leave the OCR 
unchanged at 2.25 percent
The Committee emphasised that it remains 
focused on ensuring core inflation, wage growth 
and medium- and long-term inflation expectations 
remain consistent with inflation at 2 percent over the 
medium term. It discussed the monetary conditions 
required to achieve the medium-term inflation 
mandate. Members noted that financial conditions 
have tightened materially this year, helping to guard 
against the risk of second-round price effects. 
All Committee members agreed that the central 
projection for the OCR was appropriate and a good 
reflection of the trade-offs currently faced. However, 
members differed in their preferred timing for the 
initial increase in the OCR. 


6
Chapter 1. Summary record of meeting. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Three members (Anna Breman, Karen Silk, Paul 
Conway) judged that holding the OCR at 2.25 
percent was appropriate at this meeting. These 
members emphasised that core inflation and wage 
growth remain contained and medium- and long-
term inflation expectations remain around 2 percent. 
Indicators of economic activity have deteriorated, in 
some cases more quickly than anticipated. Tighter 
financial conditions and economic uncertainty 
are already weighing on household and business 
sentiment, which is reducing consumption and 
investment. Spare capacity in the economy is likely to 
dampen second-round inflationary pressure. 
With inflation pressures increasing in coming months, 
these members agreed that OCR increases would 
be required to ensure inflation returns to target 
over the medium term. These members noted the 
wide range of estimates for the neutral interest 
rate, making it difficult to assess the extent to which 
current monetary conditions are accommodative. 
They emphasised that the timing of OCR increases 
should depend on the evolving data, the outlook, and 
the balance of risks. Close attention needs to be paid 
to global developments, supply chain normalisation, 
core inflation, wage dynamics, and inflation 
expectations. These data, as well high-frequency 
indicators, will clarify whether stronger second-round 
inflation effects are emerging. 
Three members (Carl Hansen, Hayley Gourley, 
Prasanna Gai) preferred to increase the OCR by 25 
basis points, to 2.5 percent, at this meeting. These 
members emphasised that, given the breadth of 
critical inputs that have been impacted by the conflict, 
first-round indirect price increases could become 
more broad-based, feeding through to a greater risk 
of second-round price increases. These members 
noted that 2-year inflation expectations have risen 
across a range of surveys. Firms may reset prices 
based on a shared belief about the persistence of 
the shock and prices would remain elevated even if 
the shock were to fade. In addition, should domestic 
fuel prices decline faster than expected, it may 
lead to stronger demand as confidence responds 
more quickly. These members noted that monetary 
conditions remained accommodative. Further, 
inflation in New Zealand’s trading partners could 
increase faster than expected due to both the Middle 
East conflict constraining supply, and AI-related 
spending boosting demand. 
These members judged that removing stimulus now, 
while observing domestic economic developments, 
would help reduce medium-term inflation risks. Moving 
earlier was viewed as preferable, given upward 
pressure on neutral rates, and that it may also limit the 
overall magnitude of the increase in the OCR and the 
negative impact on output. One member (Carl Hansen) 
emphasised that raising the OCR at this meeting would 
also create optionality for further monetary policy 
tightening in July.
All Committee members agreed that increasing 
the OCR at upcoming meetings would likely be 
necessary to ensure higher near-term inflation does 
not feed through to higher medium-term inflation. 
The Committee judges that this is a proportionate 
response to bring inflation to target in a reasonable 
timeframe without creating unnecessary volatility in 
output. The pace of OCR increases will depend on 
the relative influence of persistent wage- and price-
setting behaviour versus weaker economic activity on 
medium-term inflation pressures. 
On Wednesday 27 May, three Committee members 
(Anna Breman, Karen Silk, Paul Conway) voted to leave 
the OCR on hold and three members (Carl Hansen, 
Hayley Gourley, Prasanna Gai) voted for a 25-basis 
point increase. In this instance, the chairperson has 
a casting vote, meaning the OCR remains on hold at 
2.25 percent. The Committee remains focussed on 
bringing medium-term inflation back to target and 
expects that OCR increases will be required this year. 
Attendees:
MPC members:
Anna Breman (Chairperson), Carl Hansen, Hayley 
Gourley, Karen Silk, Paul Conway, Prasanna Gai
Treasury Observer: 
James Beard
MPC Secretary: 
Elliot Jones


7
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Chapter 
02
Economic 
assessment 
and monetary 
policy outlook
Lake Hāwea. Photo: Zhongchen Song


8
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Chapter 2.
Economic assessment and 
monetary policy outlook
Key points
The Middle East conflict has materially 
altered the outlook and the balance of risk 
for inflation and economic growth, globally 
and in New Zealand. Higher global oil prices 
have increased domestic inflation directly, 
through higher prices for petrol, diesel, 
and other petroleum‑based products, and 
indirectly, through higher input costs faced 
by businesses. At the same time, higher fuel 
costs have reduced household disposable 
incomes. Lower real incomes, elevated 
uncertainty, and weak confidence are 
reducing domestic spending and growth.
Inflation was slightly above the Monetary 
Policy Comittee’s 1 to 3 percent range 
before the conflict, and is expected to 
increase in the near term. Annual consumers 
price index (CPI) inflation remained at 
3.1 percent in the year to the March 2026 
quarter, in part reflecting higher fuel prices 
in the month of March. Based on the 
current outlook for oil prices, CPI inflation is 
projected to be 4.2 percent in the June 2026 
quarter, unchanged from the April monetary 
policy review, and to peak at 4.3 percent in 
the September 2026 quarter. This reflects 
both the direct and indirect first-round effects 
of the Middle East conflict on New Zealand 
prices.
Inflation is projected to return to within the 
target band in the first half of 2027, when 
the initial increase in fuel prices drops 
out of the annual calculation. Significant 
spare capacity in the domestic economy is 
continuing to dampen underlying inflationary 
pressure and is expected to limit firms’ 
ability to pass on higher costs. Measures 
of core inflation are on average close to 
2 percent, and wage growth is at levels 
consistent with medium‑term price stability. 
While shorter‑term inflation expectations 
have increased, inflation expectations at 
the five‑ and ten‑year horizons remain close 
to the 2 percent target mid‑point in our 
survey of business leaders and professional 
forecasters.
Nevertheless, New Zealand is likely to 
face additional inflationary pressure as a 
consequence of recent events in the Middle 
East. Pricing in futures markets implies that 
global oil prices are expected to decline over 
2026, but to remain around 20 to 30 percent 
higher than pre‑conflict levels in the medium 
term. Higher inflation in New Zealand’s 
trading partners and a lower exchange 
rate are expected to contribute to higher 
non‑oil import prices. Higher near‑term 
inflation is expected to influence price‑ and 
wage‑setting behaviour in the medium term, 
despite domestic spare capacity. Monetary 
policy will respond as needed to ensure that 
near-term inflation does not feed through to 
higher medium-term inflation. 
The Monetary Policy Committee is focused 
on ensuring inflation returns to the 
2 percent target mid‑point over the medium 
term. Conditional on the central economic 
outlook, we project that the OCR will need 
to increase this year. The scale and timing of 
OCR increases remain uncertain. 


9
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Figure 2.1
Production GDP
(real, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Production GDP is expressed in 2009/2010 prices.
Figure 2.2 
Output gap and indicator suite
(share of potential GDP)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Economic assessment
1	
This is a model‑based forecast. Unlike our central projection, the seasonal adjustment in this model does not account for residual 
seasonality in recent official GDP data. 
At the start of the year, the 
New Zealand economy was in the 
early stages of recovery 
Real production GDP increased by 
0.2 percent in the December 2025 
quarter, following 0.9 percent growth in 
the September 2025 quarter (figure 2.1). 
December quarter growth was weaker 
than the 0.5 percent growth expected at 
the time of the February Statement. Growth 
was supported by continued expansion 
in services and primary industries, while 
construction contracted and manufacturing 
output was broadly unchanged in the quarter. 
Timely indicators of activity suggest 
that the economy continued to grow in 
the March 2026 quarter, reducing spare 
capacity (figure 2.2). In the Quarterly 
Survey of Business Opinion (QSBO), 
businesses reported an improvement in 
trading activity and increasing capacity 
constraints, consistent with the economy 
gaining momentum and spare capacity being 
absorbed over the first two months of the 
year. The Performance of Manufacturing 
Index (PMI) also improved in the March 
2026 quarter, although the Performance of 
Services Index (PSI) weakened slightly. The 
Reserve Bank’s GDP nowcasting model, 
Kiwi‑GDP, which incorporates information 
from these data and a broad range of other 
indicators, suggests the economy grew 
0.5 percent in the March 2026 quarter.1 
The Middle East conflict has 
materially altered the economic 
outlook 
The outbreak of the conflict in the Middle 
East in late February and the subsequent 
closure of the Strait of Hormuz have 
disrupted commercial shipping and led 
to a sharp increase in global prices for oil 
(figure 2.3). Other petrochemical products, 
such as plastics and fertilisers, are also 
directly affected. While oil prices have 
declined from their peaks in early April, they 
remain much higher than expected at the 
time of the February Statement. 
Oil futures pricing indicates that financial 
markets expect the conflict to resolve over 
the coming months and shipping via the 
Strait of Hormuz to resume. However, the 
conflict has caused lasting disruption to oil 
supply, with damage to production facilities 
and decreased global inventories. Global 
strategic oil reserves have been drawn 
down, and the need to rebuild reserves 
may support prices for some time after the 
conflict has resolved. Futures market pricing 
suggests that oil prices are expected to 
remain elevated over the projection, around 
20 to 30 percent above pre‑conflict levels. 


10
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
The outlook for the Middle East conflict 
and future oil supply is highly uncertain. 
Futures markets provide some indication 
of the expected path of oil prices, but 
outcomes could diverge materially as the 
conflict evolves. Measures of economic 
uncertainty are elevated in New Zealand and 
internationally, reflecting this risk (figure 2.4). 
Changes to the outlook for the conflict or 
differences in how global shocks transmit to 
the New Zealand economy relative to our 
assumptions could have material implications 
for monetary policy (see box A).
Global growth is expected to 
slow, and global inflation is 
expected to increase
In response to the conflict in the Middle 
East, New Zealand’s trading‑partner growth 
outlook has deteriorated since the February 
Statement (figure 2.5). Growth forecasts 
for many of New Zealand’s Asian trading 
partners were revised higher at the start of 
the year. These upward revisions reflected 
strong demand for AI‑related technology 
exports as well as less‑severe impacts from 
US tariff policies than initially expected. 
Since the onset of the Middle East conflict, 
Consensus forecasts for trading‑partner GDP 
growth have been revised lower for 2026 
and 2027. 
Trading‑partner inflation is forecast to be 
materially higher than expected at the time 
of the February Statement. Consensus 
forecasts for annual trading‑partner inflation 
have been revised from 2 percent in 2026 
and 2027 at the time of the February 
Statement to 2.6 percent and 2.1 percent 
respectively (figure 2.6). These upward 
revisions to CPI inflation have been broad-
based, although developed markets outside 
of Asia, such as Australia, the UK, euro area, 
and the US, have seen the largest increases 
in their inflation outlook (see chapter 3). 
Figure 2.4
Economic policy uncertainty  
(standardised)
Source: Sense Partners, Policyuncertainty.com, RBNZ estimates.
Note: All measures are standardised in their base frequencies from 1997 to their latest data point.
Figure 2.5
Consensus forecasts for global GDP growth 
(annual, weighted by New Zealand trade)
Source: Stats NZ, Haver Analytics, Consensus Economics, Bloomberg, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Global GDP growth is based on 16 of New Zealand’s largest trading partners.
Figure 2.3
Dubai oil prices
(daily)
Source: Bloomberg, LSEG.


11
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
There are downside risks to global growth 
and upside risks to global inflation. 
Consensus forecast revisions have been 
relatively small to date and should be 
interpreted with caution. Forecasters have 
made only small adjustments to their central 
outlook in response to the conflict, while 
acknowledging the risk of more severe 
outcomes. Our central projection for GDP 
growth in New Zealand’s trading partners is 
lower than Consensus expectations, and our 
central projection for trading‑partner inflation 
is higher (see chapter 5).
Financial conditions have 
tightened
Interest rates have increased in advanced 
economies. Market expectations for policy 
rates have shifted materially higher in the US, 
Australia, and other advanced economies. 
Central banks have communicated a 
willingness to look through the direct 
inflationary effects of the Middle East 
conflict, but remain alert to more persistent 
or generalised inflationary pressure. 
Higher policy rate expectations have led 
to increases in government bond yields, 
particularly at shorter maturities. 
Wholesale interest rates in New Zealand 
have also increased, reflecting higher 
expected policy rates in the near term 
and the rise in global bond yields at 
longer horizons. Some of the increase in 
market‑implied OCR expectations may reflect 
illiquidity in wholesale interest rate markets 
since the onset of the Middle East conflict. 
Market pricing for the OCR has shifted about 
75 basis points higher, to around 3.5 percent 
by the end of 2026. Retail lending and 
deposit rates have also increased, albeit to a 
lesser extent (see chapter 3).
Figure 2.6
Consensus forecasts for global CPI inflation
(annual, weighted by New Zealand trade)
Source: Stats NZ, Haver Analytics, Consensus Economics, Bloomberg, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Global CPI inflation is based on 17 of New Zealand’s largest trading partners.


12
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
New Zealand is facing less 
favourable terms of trade
Higher fuel and non‑fuel import prices 
are weighing on New Zealand’s terms of 
trade (figure 2.7). In addition to higher fuel 
costs, New Zealand businesses are facing 
higher prices for fertiliser, petrochemicals, 
and petrochemical‑derived products such 
as plastics. More generally, higher inflation in 
New Zealand’s trading partners is expected 
to contribute to higher prices for a wide 
range of imported goods and services. The 
New Zealand dollar has depreciated on a 
trade‑weighted basis since the February 
Statement, reflecting weaker risk sentiment 
in response to the Middle East conflict. If 
sustained, this will also contribute to higher 
import prices in New Zealand dollar terms. 
Prices for some of New Zealand’s 
commodity exports have been elevated, 
but are expected to fall as global demand 
slows. High global commodity prices for 
meat, dairy, and aluminium have supported 
New Zealand exporter incomes. Over the 
coming seasons, high fertiliser prices may 
provide further support to dairy and meat 
prices, while a weaker New Zealand dollar 
helps sustain New Zealand dollar incomes. 
However, weaker global demand is expected 
to outweigh these factors and weigh on 
export prices over the medium term.
Figure 2.7
New Zealand terms of trade
(quarterly average)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


13
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Box A
Scenarios for the effect of the Middle East conflict 
on New Zealand
The outlook for economic activity and inflationary 
pressure in New Zealand is conditional on many 
factors, including the evolution of the Middle 
East conflict and its impacts on the global and 
domestic economies. The evolution of the conflict, 
its implications for global economic conditions, and 
outcomes for New Zealand are highly uncertain. 
Scenario analysis helps us test the sensitivity of 
our economic outlook to the assumptions we have 
made regarding:
•	 the extent and duration of the conflict’s effects 
on global fuel prices and broader global supply 
chains; 
•	 the effect on demand in New Zealand and our 
major trading partners; and 
•	 the extent to which higher costs feed into 
domestic price‑ and wage‑setting behaviour.
We consider three scenarios that illustrate how 
the economy could evolve very differently than 
assumed in the central projection (table A.1). 
•	 Scenario 1 assumes that the conflict escalates, 
leading to a more sustained disruption to global 
oil supply. Oil prices increase and remain higher 
for longer, increasing inflation in the near term. 
Firms’ price‑setting behaviour becomes more 
sensitive to higher inflation, resulting in stronger 
second‑round price effects. 
•	 Scenario 2 assumes the same conflict conditions 
and oil prices as in scenario 1. However, in 
this scenario, firms reduce the extent of price 
increases, absorbing more of the higher costs 
into their margins. Higher inflation does not 
become embedded in price- and wage‑setting 
behaviour over the medium term. This 
moderates inflationary pressure, resulting in a 
lower OCR and stronger growth outcomes in 
New Zealand, relative to scenario 1.
•	 Scenario 3 assumes global oil prices decline in 
line with the central projection, but the conflict 
has a larger negative impact on global and 
domestic demand. This prevents firms from 
passing on higher costs.
This box presents just three of many plausible 
paths for the domestic economy in the context 
of the ongoing conflict. The scenarios have been 
chosen to illustrate key uncertainties around the 
projection. The outlook for the Middle East conflict 
and associated global conditions is one source 
of uncertainty. How the global shock influences 
price-setting behaviour and demand in the domestic 
economy is another. 
Any combination of new shocks or altered 
transmission paths could result in a different 
outlook for inflationary pressure and monetary 
policy in New Zealand. The scenarios presented in 
this box consider ways in which economic outcomes 
could deteriorate, but it’s also possible that 
economic conditions could improve. For example, if 
the conflict resolves quickly and oil supply resumes 
more rapidly than assumed, inflationary pressures 
could ease and the growth outlook strengthen. 
Scenario 1: Higher global oil prices and 
persistent pricing behaviour 
In this scenario, the conflict lasts longer than 
assumed in the central projection and results 
in a more persistent disruption to global oil 
supply. The price of Dubai oil rises to US$120 per 
barrel in mid‑2026 and remains elevated for an 
extended period (figure A.1). Firms are assumed to 
respond to higher inflation by pre‑emptively and 
opportunistically raising their prices in a coordinated 
manner, increasing the near‑term indirect effects 
of the shock and making price pressures more 
persistent through stronger second-round price 
effects. CPI inflation rises to 5.8 percent (figure A.2). 
The OCR needs to increase quickly to offset 
persistent additional inflationary pressure, peaking 
at 4.3 percent (figure A.3). Higher prices and 
restrictive monetary policy result in a much weaker 
growth and employment outlook (figure A.4). 


14
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Scenario 2: Higher global oil prices 
and restrained pricing behaviour 
In this scenario, conflict and oil supply conditions 
are the same as in scenario 1, but price-setters are 
more restrained. Businesses pass on higher costs 
to their customers, but more gradually and to a 
lesser extent. Inflation still rises rapidly, reflecting 
the direct and indirect effects of higher fuel prices 
in the near term. However, an adverse cycle of 
higher prices is avoided, and near-term inflationary 
pressures do not become as persistent. The OCR 
needs to increase by less than in the scenario with 
persistent pricing behaviour, peaking at 3.6 percent. 
Lower inflation and a lower OCR result in a more 
rapid improvement in growth and employment 
outcomes for New Zealand compared to scenario 1.
Scenario 3: Weaker global
and domestic demand  
In this scenario, global fuel prices decline in line 
with the central projection, but the conflict has a 
larger negative impact on global and domestic 
demand. Weaker global demand leads to lower 
New Zealand export volumes. Precautionary 
behaviour and uncertainty about the outlook for 
employment and real incomes causes households 
to save. Weaker demand prevents firms from 
passing on higher costs, and compressed profit 
margins prevent firms from offering higher wages. 
Spare capacity and unemployment increase 
(figure A.4). In this scenario, CPI inflation falls quickly 
back within the target band as oil prices decline. 
Monetary policy remains accommodative to prevent 
further deterioration in demand conditions, and 
to ensure inflation settles sustainably near the 2 
percent inflation target mid-point.
Figure A.1
Dubai oil price
Source: LSEG, RBNZ estimates.
Figure A.3
Official cash rate
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Figure A.2
CPI inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure A.4
Unemployment rate
(unemployed people as a share of the labour force,  
seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


15
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Table A.1 
Key scenario assumptions 
Scenario 1 and 2: Higher global 
oil prices
Scenario 3: Weaker global and 
domestic demand
Conflict and oil prices
•	 Conflict lasts through 2026.
•	 Dubai crude oil prices rise to US$120 
per barrel for the remainder of 2026 
and remain persistently higher.
•	 Same as central projection. Conflict 
resolves over 2026, and oil prices decline 
in line with risk‑adjusted futures pricing.
World economy
•	 Global growth slows by more than 
in the central projection in response 
to higher fuel prices and heightened 
uncertainty.
•	 Export prices and volumes are 
materially weaker than in the central 
projection.
•	 Non‑oil import prices are higher.
•	 Global growth slows by more than 
in the central projection, reflecting a 
proportionally larger negative demand 
response to a given oil price shock.
•	 Export prices and volumes are slightly 
weaker than in the central projection.
•	 Non‑oil import prices are lower.
Domestic economy
Scenario 1
•	 Indirect effects on inflation are 
proportionally larger than in the central 
projection.
•	 Higher inflation becomes partially 
embedded in price‑ and wage‑setting 
behaviour.
•	 Higher prices cause real incomes to fall, 
and demand to weaken.
Scenario 2
•	 Indirect effects on inflation are 
proportionally smaller than in the 
central projection. However, aggregate 
inflation is still higher, reflecting the 
larger overall size of the shock.
•	 Inflation expectations remain anchored, 
and wage growth remains modest.
•	 Higher inflation does not become 
persistently embedded in price‑ and 
wage‑setting behaviour.
•	 Precautionary households significantly 
reduce their real consumption. Firms 
reduce their labour force in the face 
of weak demand and low profitability, 
resulting in persistently higher 
unemployment. 
•	 Substantial spare capacity dampens wage 
growth and limits firms’ ability to pass on 
higher costs to prices. Second‑round 
price effects are weaker than in the 
central projection.
Monetary policy
Scenario 1
•	 Monetary policy reacts to offset higher 
inflationary pressure.
•	 The OCR rises to around 4.3 percent in 
the medium term.
Scenario 2
•	 Monetary policy response is moderated 
relative to scenario 1.
•	 The OCR rises to around 3.6 percent in 
the medium term.
•	 Monetary policy remains accommodative 
in response to weaker inflationary 
pressure.
•	 The OCR remains on hold at 2.25 percent 
in the near term. 


16
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
The conflict will have 
wide‑ranging impacts on inflation 
and growth in New Zealand
The Middle East conflict will affect 
inflationary pressure in New Zealand 
through a range of trade, financial market, 
and uncertainty channels. To better explain 
our assumptions about the implications of 
the conflict for inflation in New Zealand, we 
classify the effects into four broad categories:
•	 First‑round direct effects describe the 
immediate impact of changes in global 
oil prices on petrol and diesel prices in 
the CPI. 
•	 First‑round indirect effects describe 
changes in the prices of other goods 
and services in the CPI that use directly 
affected goods as inputs. 
•	 Second‑round demand effects describe 
how reduced household and business 
spending increases spare capacity, 
dampening inflationary pressure.
•	 Second‑round price effects describe the 
way in which higher prices in the near 
term propagate through the economy 
over the medium term via price‑ and 
wage‑setting behaviour. Second‑round 
price effects also include the medium-
term impact of generalised global 
inflationary pressure and a weaker 
New Zealand dollar on import costs and 
domestic prices. 
The effect of the Middle East conflict 
on medium‑term inflationary pressure 
will depend on the balance between 
inflationary second‑round price effects and 
disinflationary second‑round demand effects.
2	
The January 2025 vehicle licensing fee increase was erroneously omitted from the March 2025 quarter CPI and instead included in the June 
2025 quarter release. This means annual CPI inflation in the March 2026 quarter was 0.1 percentage point higher than it would have been.
First-round direct and indirect 
effects will contribute to higher 
inflation in 2026
The Middle East conflict will result in 
materially higher near‑term CPI inflation 
in New Zealand. Higher global oil prices 
have increased inflation in New Zealand 
directly, through higher prices for petrol, 
diesel, and other petroleum‑based products, 
and indirectly, through higher input costs 
faced by businesses (figure 2.8). Annual 
headline inflation was 3.1 percent in the 
March quarter and is projected to increase to 
4.3 percent in the September 2026 quarter, 
based on current oil futures market pricing. 
Annual headline inflation would have been 
3.0 percent in the March 2026 quarter, if the 
January 2025 increase in vehicle licensing 
fees had been correctly captured in the 
March 2025 quarter CPI release.2 
Figure 2.8
CPI inflation contributions
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


17
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Tradables inflation is projected to increase 
in the near term. Annual tradables inflation 
decreased slightly to 2.5 percent in the 
March 2026 quarter, but was higher 
than forecast in the February Statement. 
Higher‑than‑expected tradables inflation 
in the March 2026 quarter can largely be 
attributed to the direct effect of higher petrol 
and diesel prices in the month of March. 
Annual tradables inflation is projected to 
increase to 5.6 percent in both the June and 
September 2026 quarters, reflecting higher 
quarterly average fuel prices and significant 
indirect effects on other prices, particularly 
food and international travel.
Non‑tradables inflation is also expected 
to be impacted by the Middle East 
conflict, though to a lesser extent. Annual 
non‑tradables inflation remained stable 
at 3.5 percent in the March 2026 quarter, 
slightly higher than the February Statement 
projection. Elevated non-tradables inflation 
prior to the conflict mostly reflects high 
administered price and energy inflation.3 
The Middle East conflict likely had negligible 
impact on non‑tradables inflation in the 
March 2026 quarter. Whereas fuel prices 
tend to adjust very rapidly in response to a 
change in oil prices, other prices generally 
respond with some delay. We expect indirect 
effects of the conflict to begin contributing to 
non‑tradables inflation from the June 2026 
quarter. Annual non‑tradables inflation is 
expected to remain around 3.5 percent over 
2026, as the indirect effect of higher fuel 
prices on items including domestic airfares, 
other transport, and construction are offset 
by declining inflation in other non‑tradable 
components.
3	
Administered prices are based on the ‘central and local government charges’ series produced by Stats NZ. It incorporates a wide range of 
prices set or heavily influenced by central or local government. Stats NZ updated the methodology for the ‘central and local government 
charges’ series in the March 2026 quarter to better reflect current government charges, most notably removing electricity prices. Stats NZ 
currently publishes both the old series and the updated series. 
Second‑round demand effects 
will dampen economic growth
Household consumption is expected to 
remain subdued in 2026, as higher fuel 
prices reduce real disposable incomes and 
weigh on household confidence. Some 
households may maintain spending on 
other goods and services despite higher 
fuel prices by drawing on savings. However, 
higher mortgage rates may limit households’ 
willingness to take on new lending, and 
uncertainty about the labour market may 
lead to more cautious behaviour. Many 
households will respond to higher living costs 
and uncertainty by reducing their spending 
on non‑essential goods and services. While 
evidence from the Retail Trade Survey 
suggests that consumption was recovering 
in the March 2026 quarter, both electronic 
card transaction data and recent business 
engagements indicate that demand for non-
essential goods is slowing (see box B).
Businesses are expected to delay 
investment, reflecting heightened 
uncertainty, weaker demand, and 
compressed margins. Many firms are 
reporting that they have been unable to pass 
on the full extent of input cost increases to 
selling prices, impacting profitability. Reduced 
margins, lower consumer demand, and 
heightened uncertainty about the economic 
outlook may lead firms to delay or scale back 
investment, despite recently strong export 
revenues. Over the medium term, investment 
is projected to recover as activity strengthens 
and uncertainty eases.
The expected recovery in residential 
investment may be delayed. The Middle 
East conflict has increased the cost of 
construction via higher prices for diesel and 
materials. High uncertainty and increasing 
mortgage rates are expected to dampen 
house price growth, reducing the incentive to 
build new houses. 


18
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
The near‑term growth outlook is weaker 
than previously assumed. Taken together, 
weaker consumption and investment mean 
that annual GDP growth is expected to be 
0.9 percentage points lower in the year to 
the December 2026 quarter relative to the 
February Statement.
Spare capacity will persist for 
longer
There is significant spare capacity in the 
domestic economy. Before the onset of the 
Middle East conflict, a range of indicators 
suggest that spare capacity was being 
gradually absorbed (see chapter 4.2). In the 
February Statement, we projected that a 
gradual recovery in demand, supported by 
low interest rates, would continue to reduce 
spare capacity. However, the Middle East 
conflict is expected to materially delay the 
economic recovery, and spare capacity 
is projected to persist. The output gap is 
estimated to be around ‑1.5 percent of 
potential output in the June 2026 quarter, 
and is expected to remain at or below that 
level for another year (figure 2.10). The output 
gap is projected to recover in the latter half 
of the projection as inflation falls, real income 
growth recovers, and uncertainty fades. 
New Zealand’s supply capacity is growing 
slowly. Low investment, slow population 
growth, and weak productivity growth 
have all contributed to low potential output 
growth in recent years. This constrains 
the rate at which the economy can grow 
without contributing to inflationary pressure. 
However, net immigration has increased 
materially since late 2025, which will 
increase the labour force and contribute to 
higher potential growth if sustained. 
Figure 2.9
Production GDP growth 
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.10
Output gap 
(share of potential, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


19
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Spare capacity in the labour market is 
projected to persist. Recently, labour 
market conditions have shown signs 
of stabilising. The unemployment rate 
decreased to 5.3 percent in the March 
2026 quarter (figure 2.11). Employment 
grew modestly, while labour force 
participation declined. Total hours worked 
grew strongly for the third consecutive 
quarter. Most measures of labour market 
tightness remain at levels consistent with 
substantial spare capacity (figure 2.12). 
Elevated unemployment is projected to 
persist for longer than assumed in the 
February Statement. Low profitability, 
spare capacity, and heightened uncertainty 
about the outlook will make businesses 
cautious about taking on new workers. 
Meanwhile, recovering migration flows are 
adding to population and the labour force.
Figure 2.11
Unemployment rate
(unemployed people as a share of the labour force, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.12
Labour market indicators
Source: Stats NZ, NZIER, MBIE, RBNZ estimates.
Note: See Ball (2024), Assessing and communicating labour market indicators of inflationary pressure.


20
Box B
Summary of recent business visits
We regularly meet with a range of businesses 
to improve our industry knowledge and 
understanding of economic conditions. In the 
last several months, Reserve Bank and Treasury 
staff have spoken with businesses and industry 
organisations across New Zealand. 
Overall, businesses reported that demand and 
activity have flattened and uncertainty is high. 
Primary exporters continue to benefit from elevated 
export prices, strong overseas demand, and a 
lower New Zealand dollar. We heard that elevated 
payouts and revenues are being used to reduce 
debt, dampening the spillover to demand in the 
economy more broadly. After early signs of recovery 
at the start of the year, retail, hospitality, tourism, and 
residential construction firms reported a weakening 
of demand and reduced discretionary spending 
following the onset of the Middle East conflict. Since 
fuel prices have risen, consumers are showing 
heightened price sensitivity, substituting towards 
cheaper products and away from discretionary 
purchases. 
At this stage, the businesses we spoke to report 
minimal global supply chain disruptions, and 
sufficient freight availability; however, this is 
dependent on the ongoing availability of fuel. 
Businesses did not report shortages of building 
materials, fertiliser, or other inputs to production. 
Construction, agriculture, and tourism firms noted 
that, because we are moving into their quieter 
season, demand for productive inputs is lower, 
limiting supply constraints in the near term. 
Businesses noted increasing cost pressures and 
squeezed margins. Fuel costs have increased 
significantly due to the Middle East conflict, and 
many businesses reported that they are either 
applying a temporary fuel surcharge to customers 
or paying one to suppliers. Most firms are absorbing 
at least part of the direct fuel cost increase, which is 
reducing profit margins. 
Conflict‑related cost increases are broad‑based, 
as the closure of the Strait of Hormuz is re‑routing 
some shipping lines and increasing freight costs. 
This means the cost of other imported goods is 
also rising. Businesses reported that other costs 
have also continued to rise, including electricity, 
insurance, and council rates. 
Weak demand is preventing some firms, 
particularly in retail and hospitality, from passing 
on costs to customers, resulting in further margin 
pressures. Some import and freight companies set 
prices on fixed contracts, so it has taken some time 
for conflict‑related increases to flow through. Other 
firms in retail have more flexibility in setting prices, 
although in some cases are facing weak demand so 
these firms are less willing to increase prices. 
Labour market conditions remain weak, while 
wage growth is mixed. Some businesses had 
reduced their headcount in the last year, while other 
businesses would consider reductions if the Middle 
East conflict was prolonged, expecting weaker 
demand and higher costs for an extended period. 
Wage pressures were mixed across businesses. 
On one hand, soft labour market conditions, higher 
non‑labour costs, and prioritisation of job security 
are dampening wage inflation pressures. On the 
other hand, cost-of-living adjustments and higher 
inflation expectations may mean that some workers 
bargain for higher wages.  
Investment intentions are subdued as uncertainty 
is weighing on firms’ confidence. Businesses 
reported that broader long‑term investment plans 
were going ahead. However, some businesses 
are looking for ways to cut costs due to the conflict 
and may scale back investment where possible. 
Businesses that reported intentions to invest 
tended to be those with larger balance sheets. 
These businesses are focusing on productivity 
enhancements and technology, with some interest 
in artificial intelligence. 
Overall, feedback from businesses is consistent 
with our assumptions about the impact of the 
Middle East conflict on the New Zealand economy 
in the near term, although the overall magnitude 
is uncertain. Our central projection assumes that 
some households reduce discretionary spending, 
and that business investment will decline in the 
June 2026 quarter. Indirect effects of higher fuel 
prices are expected to emerge across a range of 
goods and services with significant fuel exposure 
over coming months.
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026


21
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Spare capacity is assumed to 
moderate second‑round price 
effects
Spare capacity in the labour market is 
expected to limit wage growth. Nominal 
wage inflation has been declining as the 
labour market has weakened (figure 2.13). 
Annual private sector wage inflation was 
2.0 percent in the March 2026 quarter, 
consistent with medium‑term price stability. 
Annual public sector wage growth has been 
declining and was 1.7 percent in the March 
quarter. Over 2026, higher living costs 
mean that real wages are falling. In some 
circumstances, workers might respond 
to high inflation by bargaining for higher 
wages, which could result in inflationary 
pressure being more persistent. However, 
unemployment is projected to remain 
elevated, and fewer people than usual are 
changing jobs. These factors will limit the 
extent to which employees can successfully 
bargain for higher wages. 
All measures of core inflation that we 
regularly monitor are within the MPC’s 
target range for headline inflation. Of the 
five measures we monitor, four decreased in 
the March 2026 quarter, while one increased. 
On average, these measures indicate that 
annual core inflation was about 2.3 percent 
(figure 2.14).
There may be some spillover from 
temporarily higher headline inflation to 
core inflation. Oil‑derived products are an 
important input into the production of many 
goods and services, and cost pressures are 
emerging across a wide range of products. 
However, substantial spare capacity is 
expected to materially constrain the extent 
of any increase. Core inflation is expected to 
remain within the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target 
range for CPI inflation, with headline inflation 
converging towards core inflation in the 
latter half of the projection as the first‑round 
effects of the Middle East conflict on inflation 
dissipate.
Figure 2.13
Private sector LCI wage inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.14
Headline and core inflation measures
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The dashed lines represent the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for inflation over 
the medium term. The shaded area shows the range of core inflation measures. The core 
inflation measures include the sectoral factor model, factor model, trimmed mean (30%), 
weighted median, and CPI excluding food and energy.


22
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Expectations for inflation one year ahead 
have increased materially in the June 2026 
quarter across households, businesses, and 
professional forecasters (figures 2.15, 2.16, 
and 2.17). These increases are consistent 
with a large salient price shock and are 
of a magnitude that is consistent with our 
June 2026 quarter forecast for CPI inflation, 
assuming the typical relationship between 
actual and expected inflation (see chapter 
4.2 of the August 2025 Statement). 
Longer‑term inflation expectations of 
businesses and professional forecasters 
have been stable or declining, while 
household inflation expectations increased. 
Five‑year ahead inflation expectations 
of households increased in the latest 
quarter. Five‑ and ten‑year ahead inflation 
expectations of professional forecasters 
and business leaders in the Survey of 
Expectations (SOE) declined slightly in the 
June 2026 quarter, and are close to the 
2 percent target mid‑point for inflation. In 
2024, the Reserve Bank of New Zealand 
introduced the Tara‑ā‑Umanga – Business 
Expectations Survey, which covers a much 
larger and more representative sample of 
New Zealand businesses than the SOE. 
It suggests that longer‑horizon inflation 
expectations are declining. However, the 
relatively short history of these data limits 
interpretability. 
Figure 2.15
Inflation expectations of households
(annual, years ahead)
Source: RBNZ Tara‑ā‑Whare – Household Expectations Survey.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI 
inflation over the medium term.
Figure 2.16
Inflation expectations of professional 
forecasters and business leaders
(annual, years ahead)
Source: RBNZ Survey of Expectations.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI 
inflation over the medium term.
Figure 2.17
Inflation expectations of businesses
(annual, years ahead)
Source: RBNZ Tara‑ā‑Umanga – Business Expectations Survey.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI 
inflation over the medium term.


23
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Inflation is projected to return to 
near the target mid‑point in 2027
Annual CPI inflation will fall when the 
initial increase in fuel prices drops out of 
the annual calculation. Retail petrol and 
diesel prices are projected to continue to 
decline across the remainder of the year, in 
line with futures market pricing. If petrol and 
diesel prices decline as expected, annual 
tradables inflation will decline quickly. Even 
if fuel prices were to remain around current 
high levels, annual inflation will fall once the 
June 2026 quarter increase drops out of the 
calculation.   
Headline inflation is projected to return to 
the 2 percent target mid‑point next year. 
Significant spare capacity will continue 
to limit the extent to which costs can be 
passed on to prices and limit wage growth, 
supporting a gradual decline in non‑tradables 
inflation. Tradables inflation is assumed to 
return to around historical average rates 
once fuel price increases drop out of the 
annual calculation. Monetary policy will 
respond as required to offset any additional 
medium‑term inflationary pressures and 
ensure that inflation settles sustainably near 
the 2 percent target mid‑point in the medium 
term.
Figure 2.18
Headline, tradables, and non‑tradables inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI 
inflation over the medium term.


24
Monetary policy outlook
Conditional on the central economic 
outlook, we project that the OCR will 
increase this year to ensure that inflation 
settles sustainably near the 2 percent 
target mid-point in the medium term 
(figure 2.19). 
Compared to the February Statement, the 
OCR is projected to increase sooner and 
by more. This reflects higher medium‑term 
inflationary pressure arising from the Middle 
East conflict. The near‑term increase in 
inflation due to higher fuel prices is assumed 
to be temporary, and to partially reverse 
over the projection. However, we assume 
that there will be smaller but more persistent 
second‑round effects on medium‑term 
inflationary pressure. The pace of OCR 
increases will depend on the relative 
influence of persistent wage- and price‑setting 
behaviour versus weaker economic activity
on medium-term inflation pressures. 
 
Figure 2.19
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026


25
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026 
25
Pouakai Tarn. Photo: Ayesha Shafi
Chapter 
03
Global 
economy 
and financial 
markets


26
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Chapter 3.
Global economy and financial markets
Key points
Before the Middle East conflict, global 
growth had been stronger than previously 
assumed. New Zealand’s trading‑partner 
growth rose by more than expected at the 
February Statement, reaching 3.2 percent 
in the year to the March 2026 quarter, as 
growth in Asia was buoyed by AI‑related 
export demand. 
Inflation has continued to increase in 
trading‑partner economies. Annual 
trading‑partner CPI inflation rose to 
2.2 percent in the March 2026 quarter, 
continuing its upwards trend since the June 
2025 quarter. 
The Middle East conflict presents downside 
risks to global activity and upside risks 
to inflation. New Zealand’s Asian trading 
partners are particularly exposed to higher 
imported energy costs. This exposure 
is partly offset by fiscal support, large oil 
reserves, and regulated or subsidised retail 
energy prices. The region also continues 
to benefit from AI‑related export demand. 
Compared to the February Statement, 
our central projection assumes that 
trading‑partner growth is 0.2 percentage 
points lower on average over 2026, while 
trading‑partner inflation is 0.7 percentage 
points higher over the same period.
Higher expected inflation has led to 
expectations for tighter monetary policy in 
many advanced economies. Government 
bond yields have increased materially across 
all maturities, and most sharply at shorter 
maturities. 
Energy prices are elevated and are 
expected to remain higher than previously 
anticipated over the medium term. Crude 
oil prices are 45 to 60 percent higher than 
at the time of the February Statement, while 
refined fuels like diesel, petrol, and jet fuel 
have increased in price even more. Futures 
markets imply that crude oil prices are 
expected to decline over time, but remain 
20 to 30 percent higher over the medium 
term compared to before the outbreak of 
conflict in the Middle East. European and 
Asian natural gas prices have increased by 
60 to 90 percent.
Domestic financial conditions have 
tightened since the February Statement 
due to higher interest rates as a result of 
the Middle East conflict. The 2‑year swap 
rate has increased by around 50 basis points 
to 3.6 percent since the February Statement. 
Wholesale and retail rates have increased, 
with wholesale rates increasing by more 
than retail rates. The average yield on total 
mortgage lending is likely to increase this 
year, tightening financial conditions via the 
cashflow channel.


27
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026 
Global economic conditions
Before the Middle East conflict, 
global growth had been resilient 
and inflation was increasing
Growth among New Zealand’s trading 
partners was stronger than expected at 
the start of 2026. Global economic activity 
was resilient to headwinds from higher US 
tariff policies and elevated uncertainty over 
2025 and the March 2026 quarter. Annual 
trading‑partner growth is estimated to have 
been 3.2 percent in the year to the March 
2026 quarter (figure 3.1). Growth amongst 
our developed Asian trading partners was 
stronger than anticipated at the time of 
the February Statement, with the region 
benefiting from increased export demand for 
AI‑related technology products. Additionally, 
in Australia and the US, AI‑related investment, 
resilient household consumption, and 
accommodative fiscal policy have supported 
economic activity in the March 2026 quarter.
Trading‑partner inflation was already 
increasing before the Middle East conflict. 
Annual trading‑partner CPI inflation increased 
from 1.6 percent in the June 2025 quarter 
to 2.2 percent in the March 2026 quarter 
(figure 3.2). There has been a range of 
drivers for this increase in inflation in some 
of our major trading partners. In the US, 
the pass‑through of tariffs into consumer 
prices has put upwards pressure on inflation, 
though is estimated to have largely run its 
course. Australia is facing domestic capacity 
pressures, a relatively tight labour market, 
and robust GDP growth aided by strong 
business investment. In China, annual 
inflation averaged 0.8 percent over the 
March 2026 quarter, up from an average of 
0 percent in 2025. This was largely due to 
higher food prices and seasonality around 
the timing of the Lunar New Year.
Figure 3.1
Trading‑partner GDP growth
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, Haver Analytics, Bloomberg, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The trading‑partner aggregate is based on 16 of New Zealand’s largest trading 
partners.
Figure 3.2
Trading‑partner inflation 
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, Haver Analytics, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The trading‑partner aggregate is based on 17 of New Zealand’s largest trading 
partners.


28
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
The Middle East conflict presents 
downside risks to global activity 
and upside risks to inflation
High‑frequency indicators point to 
a deterioration in global growth and 
confidence since the start of the Middle 
East conflict. Global purchasing managers’ 
indices (PMIs) suggest firms are facing higher 
input prices and longer delivery times. 
Reported activity growth in the services 
sector has declined in many economies. 
Manufacturing activity has been less affected, 
reflecting continued demand for AI‑related 
goods. Consumer and business confidence 
has also weakened in recent months, 
with most measures below their historical 
averages.
The outlook for the global economy 
remains highly uncertain. New Zealand’s 
Asian trading partners are particularly 
exposed to higher imported energy costs. In 
many cases fiscal support, large oil reserves, 
and regulated or subsidised retail energy 
prices should help dampen the immediate 
impact on households and firms. The region 
also continues to benefit from AI‑related 
export demand, which does not appear 
to have been materially affected by the 
economic effects of the Middle East conflict. 
Among New Zealand’s other major trading 
partners, the US, Australia, and Canada are 
net energy exporters, reducing the downside 
activity effects of the shock relative to more 
energy‑import‑dependent economies. 
Our central projection assumes that 
trading‑partner growth is 0.3 percentage 
points lower on average over 2026 and 
2027, while trading‑partner inflation is 
0.7 percentage points higher over the 
same period. To inform our assumptions, 
we have assessed a range of estimates 
from Bloomberg consensus forecasts, the 
International Monetary Fund, and a variety of 
internal modelling approaches (see chapter 
5). Our central projection assumes that in 
2026, trading‑partner growth is 2.6 percent 
while inflation is 2.7 percent. Growth is 
assumed to improve slightly to 2.7 percent 
in 2027, while inflation remains elevated at 
2.7 percent. These projections are subject to 
considerable uncertainty, and there remains 
a wide range of possible outcomes for the 
conflict in the Middle East and associated 
macroeconomic impacts.
Energy prices are elevated, but 
futures pricing indicates that 
market participants expect prices 
to decline
Energy commodity prices have increased 
significantly since the February Statement. 
Crude oil prices are 50 to 60 percent higher 
across the major international benchmarks, 
while natural gas prices in Asia and Europe 
have increased by 60 to 90 percent. 
New Zealand does not import natural gas 
and is therefore not directly exposed to 
this price increase, but many of our trading 
partners in Europe and Asia will be affected. 
Dubai crude oil, the most relevant 
benchmark for New Zealand and many 
of its trading partners, initially rose more 
than other benchmarks due to concerns 
of acute supply disruptions in the Middle 
East. However, the price of Dubai crude 
has moved closer to other oil benchmarks 
as supply has been redirected from other 
regions and global inventories have been 
drawn down. Adjusted for inflation, Dubai 
crude oil prices remain below peaks reached 
during previous periods of elevated energy 
prices but are high relative to historical levels 
(figure 3.3).


29
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026 
Refined fuel prices have increased by more 
than crude oil prices. Prices for refined 
products, including diesel, petrol, and jet fuel, 
have increased more sharply than crude oil 
prices, due to reduced refinery capacity in 
the Middle East and lower refined fuel output 
globally. After rising about 120 percent early 
in the conflict, Singapore refined fuel prices 
are currently about 60 percent higher than 
before the conflict (figure 3.4). 
Futures prices imply material declines in 
energy prices over the coming months, 
though prices over the medium term are 
higher than at the time of the February 
Statement. Oil and gas futures imply a 20 to 
30 percent decline from current prices in the 
next twelve months, with the majority of this 
occurring within the next six to ten months. 
However, longer‑dated futures contracts 
imply that energy prices are expected to be 
around 20 to 40 percent higher on average 
over 2027 relative to the conflict. 
The Middle East conflict has 
increased prices of many 
non‑energy commodities
Around a quarter to a third of globally 
traded nitrogenous fertiliser is exported 
via the Strait of Hormuz. Disrupted supply 
has led to a large spike in fertiliser prices, 
with urea rising 80 percent and diammonium 
phosphate rising 16 percent from February to 
April. China and Russia have also restricted 
fertiliser exports, further tightening supply 
conditions. Food prices have increased 
slightly since the onset of the conflict, but 
broader increases may emerge if fertiliser 
supply remains compromised during periods 
of seasonally higher demand in Asia over the 
June to August period and later in the year.
The Middle East also supplies a large 
portion of global plastic feedstock, helium, 
and sulphur, which are crucial inputs into a 
range of industrial processes. Higher prices 
for these input goods could put upward 
pressure on goods prices and compress 
producer profit margins in New Zealand and 
trading‑partner economies. 
Figure 3.4
Oil and Singapore refined product prices 
(nominal, 1‑month futures)
Source: Bloomberg.
Figure 3.3
Dubai crude oil price
(real, December 2025 dollars)
Source: Haver Analytics, LSEG.


30
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Figure 3.6
Change in government bond 
yields since 28 February
Source: Bloomberg.
Global financial conditions
Interest rates have increased 
globally since the February 
Statement
Financial market participants expect that 
monetary policy over the next year will be 
tighter across most advanced economies 
than at the time of the February Statement. 
Market‑implied expectations for policy 
rates in developed markets at the end of 
2026 have increased by 40 to 120 basis 
points since the beginning of the Middle 
East conflict (figure 3.5). Central banks have 
generally communicated a willingness to look 
through the first‑round effects of the energy 
price shock but remain alert to second‑round 
effects, including the risk of higher inflation 
expectations and pass‑through into wage 
inflation. Most advanced economy central 
banks left policy settings unchanged at 
their most recent meetings. The Reserve 
Bank of Australia opted to tighten monetary 
policy further at its May meeting, having also 
increased its cash rate at the previous two 
meetings in response to emerging domestic 
capacity pressures. 
Government bond yields are higher. The 
largest increases have been at the 2‑year 
tenor, consistent with expectations for 
tighter monetary policy over the next year. 
Smaller increases in 5‑ and 10‑year yields 
largely reflect market expectations for higher 
inflation over the medium term and central 
banks maintaining tighter policy settings in 
response (figure 3.6).
Figure 3.5
Change in 1‑year‑ahead policy rate 
expectations since 28 February
Source: Bloomberg.


31
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026 
Global risk appetite has remained 
relatively strong despite the 
Middle East conflict
Exchange rate movements have mainly 
reflected differences in exposure to the 
energy shock and changes in expected 
monetary policy settings. Among 
New Zealand’s trading partners, currencies 
of net energy exporters and those expected 
to tighten monetary policy by relatively more 
have broadly appreciated. The currencies of 
countries more reliant on imported energy, 
and therefore more exposed to downside 
activity effects of this shock, have in general 
seen larger depreciations (figure 3.7). The 
US dollar had appreciated by as much as 
3 percent on a trade‑weighted basis since 
the February Statement, supported by 
demand for oil priced in US dollars, the US’ 
status as a net energy exporter, and safe 
haven flows. As risk sentiment has improved, 
the US dollar has weakened slightly, currently 
sitting around 2.1 percent higher than at the 
time of the February Statement.
Global equity markets have been supported 
by strong earnings growth. At the onset of 
the conflict, equity prices fell by around 10 to 
15 percent, troughing near the end of March. 
However, equity prices recovered over April 
and are now above their pre‑conflict levels in 
many economies (figure 3.8). This recovery 
has been underpinned by strong earnings 
growth, particularly in the technology sector, 
as demand for AI‑related tech products 
continues to grow. Energy firms have also 
benefited from higher commodity prices.
Figure 3.7
Change in nominal trade‑weighted 
exchange rate since 28 February
Source: Bloomberg.
Figure 3.8
Global equity indices
Source: Bloomberg.


32
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Domestic financial conditions
Wholesale interest rates have 
increased
Domestic financial conditions have 
tightened due to higher interest rates 
as a result of the Middle East conflict. 
New Zealand swap rates have increased 
by around 30 to 50 basis points since 
the February Statement, with the largest 
increases at shorter tenors (figure 3.9). This 
reflects market expectations for higher 
inflation over the near term and a faster 
and larger increase in the OCR in response 
(figure 3.10). Since the February Statement, 
market pricing for the level of the OCR by 
the end of 2026 has increased by around 60 
basis points to 3.5 percent.
Lending and deposit rates have 
increased
Since the February Statement, retail 
rates have increased, but less so than 
wholesale rates. Most term deposit rates 
have increased between 20 and 40 basis 
points (figure 3.11). The popular 6‑month 
term deposit rate has remained unchanged. 
Similarly, mortgage rates for terms of 6 
months to 5 years have increased between 5 
and 40 basis points (figure 3.12).
The spread between retail rates and 
wholesale rates has decreased to 
historically low levels outside of the 
COVID‑19 period. The spread between the 
6‑month term deposit rate and the 6‑month 
bank bill rate has decreased by around 45 
basis points since its recent peak in October 
2025, to 62 basis points. Since the February 
Statement, the spread between the 2‑year 
mortgage rate and the 2‑year swap rate has 
declined by around 20 basis points to 170 
basis points. 
Retail rates tend to lag wholesale interest 
rates, which are more volatile. Market 
contacts have noted that the uncertain 
outlook for monetary policy and volatile 
financial market conditions are likely 
contributing to additional caution from banks 
to fully pass recent increases in wholesale 
rates through to mortgage and deposit rates.
Figure 3.10
Financial market participants’ 
expectations for the OCR
Source: Bloomberg. 
Note: The blue line shows expectations for the OCR immediately before the February 
Statement. Each data point represents market expectations of the level of the OCR at a given 
point in the future, as measured by overnight indexed swap pricing.
Figure 3.9
New Zealand swap rates 
Source: Bloomberg.


33
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026 
Another factor contributing to lending rates 
increasing by less than wholesale rates is 
that the estimated relative cost of new bank 
funding has declined since the February 
Statement. This largely reflects deposit rates 
increasing by less than wholesale rates, and 
the relative cost of wholesale funding not 
increasing materially despite the conflict 
in the Middle East. All else equal, when 
the relative cost of bank funding is lower, 
it reduces the extent to which banks need 
to increase lending rates in response to 
higher wholesale rates to maintain their profit 
margins. 
The average mortgage yield is 
likely to increase this year
The average yield on the total stock of 
mortgage lending continued to decline 
to around 4.9 percent in March 2026. 
On average, mortgage holders have been 
refixing onto lower rates. In recent months, 
around 55 percent of new mortgages have 
been fixed for periods of longer than one 
year. If mortgage rates increase over time, 
consistent with current market pricing for 
wholesale rates, then mortgage holders 
will likely be refixing onto higher rates on 
average by March 2027. Under this scenario, 
we estimate the average yield to increase 
by around 45 basis points to 5.4 percent in 
March 2027.
Figure 3.11
New Zealand term deposit rates
(terms in years)
Source: interest.co.nz.
Figure 3.12
New Zealand mortgage rates
(terms in years)
Source: interest.co.nz. 
Note: The 6‑month to 3‑year mortgage rates shown are the average of the latest advertised 
fixed term rates on offer from ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac for mortgages with a loan‑to‑value 
ratio of less than 80 percent. The 4‑ and 5‑year mortgage rates are the average of the latest 
advertised fixed term rates on offer from ASB, BNZ, and Westpac.


34
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
The New Zealand dollar has 
depreciated
The New Zealand dollar trade‑weighted 
index (NZD TWI) has depreciated 
2.2 percent since the February Statement 
(figure 3.13). The exchange rate initially 
depreciated by as much as 4 percent in 
response to the Middle East conflict, as 
financial market participants sought safer 
currencies such as the US dollar. Some of this 
depreciation reversed after the US and Iran 
announced a ceasefire in early April, and the 
exchange rate has appreciated 1.9 percent 
since the April Monetary Policy Review.
The New Zealand dollar has continued to 
depreciate against the Australian dollar. 
The NZD/AUD exchange rate is around 
12 percent lower since its recent high in April 
2025. This has contributed to a lower NZD 
TWI. The strength of the Australian economy 
in recent quarters has led to the Australian 
dollar appreciating against several of its 
trading partners. 
Figure 3.13	
New Zealand dollar trade‑weighted index 
and the NZD/AUD exchange rate
(nominal)
Source: RBNZ.


35
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026 
Chapter 
04
Special topics
Wairarapa Glowworm Caves. Photo: Zoe Robinson


36
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Chapter 4. 
Special topics 
Before the publication of each Statement, Reserve Bank staff 
provide analyses of some topical issues to the Monetary Policy 
Committee. 
Topics for the May Statement included:
1.	 How will the Middle East conflict affect the New Zealand economy?
2.	 How much spare capacity is there in the New Zealand economy? 
Special topics in the past 12 months
Topic
Date/publication
Recent developments in inflation and the outlook
for key drivers
February 2026 Statement (Chapter 4)
How are high commodity prices affecting the 
New Zealand economy?
November 2025 Statement (Chapter 4)
A closer look at our measures of labour market 
spare capacity
November 2025 Statement (Chapter 4)
Household sector developments and outlook
August 2025 Statement (Chapter 4)
Assessing developments in inflation expectations
August 2025 Statement (Chapter 4)
How does uncertainty affect the New Zealand economy?
May 2025 Statement (Chapter 4)
The transmission of higher global tariffs to the 
New Zealand economy
May 2025 Statement (Chapter 4)


37
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
How will the Middle East conflict affect the 
New Zealand economy?
Summary
•	 The Middle East conflict has resulted in 
significant international price increases 
for crude oil, along with a range of other 
products including natural gas, fertiliser, 
plastics, and some metals. For a small 
open economy such as New Zealand, this 
represents a negative supply shock.
•	 Higher oil prices feed through to higher 
CPI inflation directly via higher fuel 
prices. Retail petrol and diesel prices 
increased quickly following the rise in 
global oil prices.  
•	 Higher costs pass through to higher 
prices for other goods and services 
over time. New Zealand’s high use of 
diesel and jet fuel could result in material 
indirect price effects on inflation, as higher 
fuel costs transmit into other goods and 
services. For example, higher aviation fuel 
costs can increase airfares, while higher 
fertiliser, transport, and packaging costs 
can increase food prices.
•	 The extent and persistence of the initial 
increases in prices are likely to depend on 
prevailing economic conditions. Inflation 
is slightly above the MPC’s target range, 
and the recent experience of high inflation 
may have a stronger influence on firms’ 
price‑setting behaviour than otherwise. 
On the other hand, weak demand and 
significant spare capacity in the economy 
may reduce firms’ ability to raise prices and 
workers’ ability to bargain for higher wages.
•	 The net effect of the conflict on 
medium‑term inflationary pressure in 
New Zealand is unclear. This reflects 
a balance between channels that may 
dampen inflation through weaker demand 
and those that may increase inflation if 
higher costs become broadly embedded 
in price‑ and wage‑setting behaviour.
•	 Our central projection assumes that the 
net effects of the conflict are inflationary, 
and therefore tighter monetary policy 
will be required. However, we will monitor 
economic developments closely for 
evidence that medium‑term inflationary 
pressure is building to a smaller or larger 
degree than anticipated.
The conflict in the Middle East has 
materially affected global trade by 
disrupting shipping activity through 
the Strait of Hormuz and damaging 
regional energy infrastructure
Sharply reduced transit activity and 
heightened geopolitical uncertainty have 
contributed to tighter global energy market 
conditions, putting significant pressure 
on international oil and natural gas prices. 
These developments have been quickly 
reflected in domestic fuel prices and the 
prices of other energy‑intensive inputs, such 
as fertilisers, plastics, and some metals. In 
real terms, retail fuel prices are close to 
or above their highest levels in the past 
50 years (figure 4.1). 
For a small open economy such as 
New Zealand, these developments 
represent an adverse supply shock. 
As a net importer of petroleum products, 
New Zealand is exposed to a deterioration in 
its terms of trade, as higher import prices and 
production and transport costs contribute to 
higher near‑term inflation, while weighing on 
economic activity.


38
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
The macroeconomic impacts of 
previous oil price shocks have 
varied
The current oil shock has some similarities 
to the 1973 oil shock in terms of its abrupt, 
geopolitically‑driven disruption to oil trade. 
In 1973, after the Yom Kippur War, members 
of the Organization of Arab Petroleum 
Exporting Countries reduced oil production 
and imposed an embargo on exports to 
certain nations. By early 1974, the real price 
of crude oil had approximately doubled in 
New Zealand dollar terms. Higher oil prices 
contributed to a sharp deterioration in 
New Zealand’s terms of trade and current 
account, weaker growth, and higher inflation. 
Inflation increased to around 12 percent, and 
remained in double digits for an extended 
period, becoming increasingly entrenched in 
price‑ and wage‑setting behaviour.  
However, these outcomes occurred in an 
economic environment very different from 
today. The 1973 oil supply shock occurred 
when New Zealand inflation was already 
relatively high. The domestic economy 
featured import protection, a highly unionised 
labour market, widespread wage and 
price indexation, and a monetary policy 
framework without today’s independent 
inflation-targeting mandate. In that context, 
international price shocks had a rapid and 
broad effect on price‑ and wage‑setting. 
The current oil shock differs from the 2022 
oil shock following Russia’s invasion of 
Ukraine. The current oil shock is occurring 
against a less inflationary backdrop than 
2022. At that time, strong global and 
domestic demand, competition for limited 
resources, and generally resilient household 
and business balance sheets reinforced 
persistent price pressures in New Zealand 
and abroad. Today, softer demand, greater 
spare capacity, and less resilient household 
and business balance sheets are likely to 
dampen the degree to which higher costs 
are passed through to prices.
The Middle East conflict will 
affect the New Zealand economy 
through trade, financial, and 
uncertainty channels 
We think about the transmission of global 
shocks through three broad channels: the 
trade channel, the financial channel, and 
the uncertainty channel. The key channels 
through which the Middle East conflict will 
affect growth and inflation in New Zealand 
are summarised in table 4.1.
Figure 4.1
Retail petrol and diesel prices
(real, December 2025 dollars)
Source: MBIE, RBNZ estimates.


39
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Table 4.1
How the Middle East conflict affects growth and inflation in New Zealand 
Channel
Effects on 
NZ inflation
Effects on 
NZ growth
Effect on NZ economy
Trade
NZ imports
↑
↓
Consumption imports: Higher energy prices 
and supply chain disruptions raise import 
prices for fuel and other petrochemical 
products. Higher retail fuel prices lower real 
disposable incomes for households and 
reduce overall consumption.
Production imports: Higher prices for 
imported inputs such as fuel, fertiliser, 
and plastics increase production costs 
for firms, reducing profitability for a given 
level of demand. Weak demand and 
higher production costs also reduce firms’ 
incentives to invest.
Inflation expectations:  Higher prices for 
imported goods may influence firms’ and 
households’ inflation expectations and price- 
and wage-setting behaviour.
NZ exports
↓↑
↓
Slower global growth reduces demand for 
New Zealand exports. Domestic producers 
face higher costs of production. Rising food 
prices, reflecting higher global fertiliser 
costs, may support primary sector incomes, 
providing some offset. 
Financial
Interest rates
↓
↓
Expectations of higher inflation are raising 
interest rates globally and in New Zealand. 
Higher interest rates weigh on growth and 
reduce inflation.
Exchange rate
↑
↑
Higher global uncertainty tends to cause 
a depreciation of the New Zealand dollar, 
adding to inflationary pressure.
Uncertainty
Asset prices
↓
↓
Higher global uncertainty and weaker global 
growth are likely to weigh on asset prices.  
Geopolitical 
and economic 
uncertainty 
↓
↓
Heightened uncertainty may cause 
New Zealand businesses to defer or cancel 
investment plans and lead households to 
spend less. 
Note: ↓↑ indicates that opposing forces create ambiguity about the direction of the net effect.


40
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Oil shocks have first‑round and 
second‑round effects on inflation
Monetary policy considers the net impact 
of higher oil prices on medium-term 
inflationary pressure. We decompose 
the impact into four different effects: 
first‑round direct effects, first‑round indirect 
effects, second‑round price effects, and 
second‑round activity effects. 
Higher oil prices have a first‑round direct 
effect on CPI inflation. Increases in global 
oil prices are typically passed through to 
domestic fuel prices within one to two weeks. 
Fuel (petrol and diesel) accounts for about 
4 percent of the CPI basket and has a direct 
impact on headline CPI inflation. These are 
referred to as first‑round direct effects.
Higher oil prices also affect inflation 
through first‑round indirect effects. The 
conflict has affected many commodity 
prices directly. Fuel and oil‑ and gas‑derived 
products including fertiliser and plastics are 
used in the production and distribution of 
many goods and services. When these input 
costs increase, businesses may pass some of 
the increase on to consumers, particularly in 
industries where they comprise a large share 
of production costs. For example, higher 
aviation fuel costs can increase airfares, while 
higher fertiliser, transport, and packaging 
costs can increase food prices. These effects 
are less immediate than the direct impact 
on fuel prices, but can often begin to be 
observed in the months following an oil price 
increase. We refer to these as first‑round 
indirect effects. 
4	
See Bayarmagnai (2023), Rational inattention to inflation among New Zealand households. 
5	
See Armstrong and Parker (2016), How wages are set: evidence from a large survey of firms. 
An initial increase in CPI inflation can lead 
to more persistent inflationary pressure 
via second‑round price effects. Firms and 
households may adjust their price‑ and 
wage‑setting behaviour, resulting in higher 
inflation now, particularly if their medium-
term inflation expectations increase. 
Over the medium term, higher costs due 
to a weaker exchange rate and higher 
non‑oil import prices can continue to flow 
through to consumer prices, adding to 
inflationary pressures. We refer to these as 
second‑round price effects.
Fuel has highly visible prices, is frequently 
purchased, and is widely covered by 
the media. Large fuel price increases 
can therefore influence how people think 
about future inflation. This can translate to 
higher inflation expectations, particularly 
over shorter‑term horizons. Reserve Bank 
research suggests that households also 
become more attentive when inflation is 
elevated, with expectations becoming more 
responsive during periods of high inflation.4  
Higher actual and expected inflation 
can influence wage‑setting if workers 
seek compensatory wage increases. In 
New Zealand, wage‑setting is generally 
infrequent, with most businesses reviewing 
and setting wages annually. Around half 
of all employees are in firms that consider 
inflation when setting wages.5 Any effect of 
higher inflation flowing through to wages 
is expected to be gradual, with spare 
capacity in the labour market likely to limit 
this transmission. When inflation is driven 
by higher import prices, as opposed to 
strong demand, it is less likely that firms 
will compensate workers for a higher cost 
of living, as their profit margins are may be 
reduced.


41
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Figure 4.3
New Zealand oil‑GDP intensity
(real, US dollar terms, 2015 prices)
Source: Energy Institute, Our World in Data, OECD national accounts, World Bank, RBNZ 
estimates.
If businesses expect higher inflation 
for longer, they may adjust prices more 
frequently. New Zealand research suggests 
businesses are more likely to implement 
price increases than decreases following 
changes in costs or demand, with this 
asymmetry becoming more pronounced in 
high-inflation periods.6 With inflation elevated 
and the recent experience of high inflation 
fresh in businesses’ minds, the current 
oil shock may have greater influence on 
price‑setting behaviour than otherwise.
Oil price increases also dampen real 
economic activity. Higher oil prices reduce 
households’ and firms’ real incomes, which 
dampens aggregate demand and economic 
growth. Elevated energy prices may also 
weigh on growth in New Zealand’s key 
trading partners, which can have further 
adverse effects on domestic activity. We refer 
to these as second‑round activity effects. 
The implications for inflationary pressure 
over the medium term depend on the 
relative magnitude and persistence of 
second‑round price and activity effects. 
The size and timing of these 
effects is uncertain and depends 
on several factors
Considerable uncertainty remains around 
the outlook for oil prices. Oil prices have 
eased from their peak early in the conflict the 
Middle East conflict as inventory drawdowns 
and flexible supply chains have supported 
global supply. However, prices could rise 
further if the conflict intensifies, and physical 
shortages of oil and refined fuels could 
present a more acute risk to economic 
activity in New Zealand and globally. Where 
prices will settle over the medium term also 
remains uncertain. Reduced supply due to 
damaged production and refinery facilities, 
in addition to stronger demand as countries 
replenish their inventories, will likely keep 
energy prices elevated above pre‑war levels 
over the medium term. 
6	
See Buckle, Ryan and Song (2026), Inflation and the changing nature of firm price adjustment: Six decades worth of evidence. 
Pass-through of higher costs to consumer 
prices may vary in speed, magnitude, and 
breadth. New Zealand is a relatively heavy 
user of transport fuel, compared with the 
size of its economy, and has a large share of 
diesel and jet fuel use. This may contribute 
to stronger indirect effects of oil price shocks 
relative to some OECD peers, through 
transport costs and their pass‑through 
to other goods and services (figure 4.2). 
However, declining oil intensity since the 
1990s suggests that these effects may be 
weaker than in earlier episodes (figure 4.3).
Figure 4.2
Oil‑GDP intensity in 2024
(real, US dollar terms, 2015 prices)
Source: Energy Institute, Our World in Data, OECD national accounts, World Bank, RBNZ 
estimates.


42
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
How cost pressures translate into consumer 
prices depends on firms’ margin positions, 
pricing power, and demand conditions. 
In the near term, firms may absorb cost 
increases in profit margins, particularly 
where demand is weak or competition or 
contractual arrangements limit repricing. 
Where margins are thin and pricing power 
is stronger, pass‑through to prices could 
occur more quickly. With spare capacity and 
subdued demand in the economy, some 
firms may instead respond by adjusting 
output, employment, or investment rather 
than raising prices. 
Reports from recent business visits suggest 
that margins have reduced and firms now 
have less scope to absorb further cost 
increases (see box B in chapter 2). However, 
with significant spare capacity still evident 
and demand subdued, pricing responses are 
likely to be uneven. Firms in more demand-
sensitive sectors, such as discretionary retail, 
hospitality, and construction, may adjust 
primarily through margins or activity rather 
than prices. In contrast, faster pass‑through 
is more likely in sectors with greater pricing 
power or more direct fuel and energy related 
input cost‑price linkages, such as transport, 
freight, agriculture, and manufacturing.
It is unclear to what degree higher 
near‑term inflation will influence wage‑ and 
price‑setting behaviour. This will depend 
on the extent to which spare capacity in the 
economy limits firms’ ability to pass on higher 
costs, reduces workers’ bargaining power 
to seek compensating wage increases, 
and helps keep medium‑term inflation 
expectations anchored. 
Another uncertainty is the size and 
persistence of the demand drag from 
higher fuel costs. Domestically, higher fuel 
prices reduce real household incomes and 
may weigh on consumption by reducing 
discretionary spending. In some sectors, 
higher fuel prices may directly result in lower 
production where fuel is a significant input, 
particularly if transport disruptions occur. 
Externally, the impact will depend on the 
extent to which trading-partner growth slows 
and global financial conditions tighten, and 
how strongly this transmits to New Zealand 
via export demand. 
The medium‑term inflation outlook will 
depend on the relative strength of channels 
that could either limit or reinforce the 
persistence of inflationary pressure. Weaker 
global and domestic growth may dampen 
demand and non‑fuel costs sufficiently to 
limit further increases in inflation beyond 
first‑round impacts. However, if higher 
inflation becomes embedded in the 
behaviour of firms more widely, higher 
inflation could broaden into goods and 
services with less fuel price exposure.


43
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
How much spare capacity is there in the
New Zealand economy? 
7	
For more information on the OGIS suite, refer to the following publications: Jacob and Robinson (2019), Suite as! Augmenting the Reserve 
Bank’s output gap indicator suite, Armstrong (2015), The Reserve Bank of New Zealand’s output gap indicator suite and its real‑time 
properties.
Summary
•	 A key assumption underlying our central 
economic projection is that significant 
spare capacity in the economy is 
constraining medium‑term inflationary 
pressure. However, estimates of the 
output gap are uncertain. 
•	 We use a wide range of indicators in 
our Output Gap Indicator Suite (OGIS) 
to assess the current degree of spare 
capacity in the economy. This suite 
also helps us understand the range of 
uncertainty around our starting point 
output gap assumption. 
•	 There is strong evidence that the 
economy is operating with significant 
spare capacity. At present, the OGIS 
mean provides a point estimate of around 
‑1.3 percent for the output gap in the 
March 2026 quarter.
•	 Movements in individual indicators are 
mixed, but are consistent with spare 
capacity having remained broadly stable 
over 2025, with signs of some reduction 
in spare capacity in the March 2026 
quarter.
The output gap refers to the 
difference between GDP and the 
economy’s potential output
A negative output gap reflects spare 
capacity in the economy, placing downward 
pressure on inflation. For example, when 
firms are operating below capacity and the 
labour market is loose. 
The output gap is not directly observable, 
so we use OGIS to estimate it in real time.7 
The suite uses a range of indicators and 
models that incorporate different information 
sets and rely on varying assumptions, 
providing a broad assessment of capacity 
pressure.
The mean of OGIS summarises information 
across a broad set of underlying indicators. 
Currently, OGIS consists of 12 output gap 
indicators, which can be grouped into 
indicators based on labour market data 
(labour market indicators), and those 
based on other data (non‑labour market 
indicators). Together, these estimates inform 
our assessment of economy‑wide capacity 
pressures.
Labour market indicators capture 
capacity pressure through developments 
in employment, unemployment, hours 
worked, job vacancies, and other related 
measures. These indicators are closely 
linked to domestic inflationary pressure 
and provide insight into the extent to which 
labour resources are being utilised. 


44
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Non‑labour market indicators draw on 
information such as the Quarterly Survey 
of Business Opinion (QSBO) and national 
accounts data, including GDP. These 
indicators provide complementary signals on 
demand and supply imbalances and broader 
economic conditions.
The output gap indicators from OGIS lie 
between ‑2.7 percent and ‑0.3 percent in 
the March 2026 quarter (figure 4.4). The 
current width of OGIS is consistent with the 
typical range of the pre‑COVID period. 
8	
Labour Utilisation Composite Index in levels is a principal component of a range of labour market variables from the Household Labour 
Force Survey, including unemployment rates, the employment rate, and labour market flows.
Most labour market indicators 
suggest high levels of spare 
capacity, although they have 
stabilised 
All labour market indicators in OGIS point 
to a significant increase in labour market 
spare capacity since 2023 (figure 4.5). 
Indicators based on hours worked and 
employment are currently close to their lows 
following the Global Financial Crisis (GFC). 
Other measures of labour market spare 
capacity are mixed. The underutilisation rate 
and the vacancy‑to‑unemployment ratio 
are less weak than most other indicators. In 
contrast, the Labour Utilisation Composite 
Index in levels is currently the weakest 
indicator in the suite, partly reflecting a very 
low transition rate of people not current 
employed into employment.8
More recently, there are signs that labour 
market spare capacity has stabilised. The 
average hours worked gap has shown a 
reduction in spare capacity over recent 
quarters. The underutilisation rate and the 
vacancy‑to‑unemployment ratio indicators 
have stabilised. Consistent with this, the 
labour market indicator mean has remained 
broadly unchanged since the middle of 
2025. 
Figure 4.4
Output gap and output gap indicators
(share of potential, seasonally adjusted)
Source: NZIER, MBIE, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: For each group of indicators, the shaded area shows the range of values and the 
line shows the mean value. The output gap estimate in the final quarter is based on our 
near‑term GDP estimates.


45
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Figure 4.5
Labour market‑based indicators
a: Average hours worked gap indicator
(share of potential, seasonally adjusted)
b: Household Labour Force Survey employment gap indicator
(share of potential, seasonally adjusted)
c: Monthly employment indicators gap
(share of potential, seasonally adjusted)
d: Underutilisation rate indicator
(share of potential, seasonally adjusted)
Source: MBIE, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: The shaded area represents the range of OGIS indicators.
e: Vacancy‑unemployment ratio indicator
(share of potential, seasonally adjusted)
f: Labour utilisation composite index in levels
(share of potential, seasonally adjusted)


46
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Non‑labour market indicators 
based on GDP data show varying 
degrees of spare capacity  
Non‑labour market OGIS indicators that are 
based on GDP data as inputs are currently 
showing a wide range of estimates of spare 
capacity. These indicators rely on national 
accounts data and are therefore updated 
with a lag relative to other indicators in the 
suite, with the latest observed data available 
for the December 2025 quarter. To improve 
comparability, the March 2026 quarter is 
estimated based on our forecasts for these 
variables in our central projection, so that all 
indicators are aligned to the same quarter. 
The core business investment indicator is 
among the weakest in the suite (figure 4.6). 
This is consistent with weak business and 
residential investment observed over the 
past three years. Hamilton filtered GDP has 
also been relatively weak, but our estimate 
for the March 2026 quarter shows an 
increase to sit near the mean of OGIS.9 
By contrast, the structural vector 
autoregression (SVAR) model points to 
a smaller degree of spare capacity than 
other indicators.10 This measure partly relies 
on using non‑tradables inflation to estimate 
capacity pressure. Non‑tradables inflation 
remains slightly elevated compared to 
history, which is contributing to the SVAR 
indicator showing less spare capacity 
compared to other indicators.
9	
The Hamilton filter produces an output gap estimate based on filtered GDP. GDP is detrended using the linear projection method proposed 
by Hamilton (2017), and the output gap is measured as the percentage deviation of actual GDP from this estimated trend.
10	
The SVAR‑based output gap is estimated from a structural vector autoregression of GDP and non‑tradables inflation, identified using 
long‑run restrictions.
Figure 4.6
GDP indicators
a: Core business investment indicator
(share of potential, seasonally adjusted)
b: Hamilton filtered GDP
(share of potential, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area represents the range of OGIS indicators. 
Dots show the expected value of each indicator based on the 
central projection. 
c: SVAR model
(share of potential, seasonally adjusted)


47
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Indicators based on QSBO data 
suggest that spare capacity has 
reduced over the past year
Non‑labour market indicators based on  
the QSBO suggest that spare capacity has 
reduced since early 2025 (figure 4.7). The 
QSBO composite indicator, which combines 
firms’ difficulty finding skilled and unskilled 
labour with their reported capacity utilisation, 
has rebounded from its post‑COVID lows. 
This indicator was the weakest in the suite 
for much of 2023 and 2024, but now sits 
slightly above the OGIS mean. The QSBO 
orders as a limiting factor and the QSBO 
principal component indicators have also 
increased since early 2025, and are above 
the OGIS mean.11
11	
The QSBO principal component indicator consists of 50 variables from the QSBO that are related to capacity pressure
(e.g. difficulty finding labour).	
Figure 4.7
QSBO indicators
a: QSBO composite indicator
(share of potential, seasonally adjusted)
b: QSBO orders as a limiting factor
(share of potential, seasonally adjusted)
Source: NZIER, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area represents the range of OGIS indicators.
c: QSBO principal component
(share of potential, seasonally adjusted)


48
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
OGIS points to substantial 
spare capacity remaining in the 
economy, but suggests that 
spare capacity had begun to be 
absorbed
The indicator suite continues to point to 
a material degree of spare capacity in the 
economy, though with some dispersion 
across measures. The mean of OGIS 
indicators as of the March 2026 quarter is 
‑1.3 percent, with eight of the twelve OGIS 
indicators falling between ‑0.8 percent and 
‑1.9 percent. 
Recent movements in leading indicators 
suggest that spare capacity had begun 
to be absorbed before the conflict in the 
Middle East. Non‑labour market indicators, 
particularly measures based on information 
from the QSBO, have pointed to reductions 
in spare capacity. These measures can tend 
to move more quickly than others in the suite. 
While they provide a strong signal that spare 
capacity had started to be absorbed, they 
may understate the remaining level of spare 
capacity. In contrast, labour market indicators, 
which typically lag others in the suite, have 
on average been broadly unchanged over 
recent quarters. Their typical lag could 
suggest that they overstate the current 
degree of spare capacity.  
We expect spare capacity in the economy 
to increase over the middle of 2026, as 
lower real incomes and higher uncertainty 
due to the Middle East conflict reduce real 
household and business spending (see 
chapter 5).


49
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Chapter 
05
Economic 
projections
Punakaiki. Photo: Rebecca Williams


Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
50
Chapter 5.
Economic projections
This chapter summarises the central economic projections that 
the MPC considered when making their policy assessment. 
The projections were finalised on 21 May 2026.
12	
The January 2025 vehicle licensing fee increase was erroneously omitted from the March 2025 quarter CPI and instead included in the June 
2025 quarter release. This means annual CPI inflation in the March 2026 quarter was 0.1 percentage point higher than it would have been.
Inflation was slightly above the target range 
in the March 2026 quarter, but the average 
of core inflation measures remained low and 
stable at 2.3 percent. Annual CPI inflation was 
3.1 percent, 0.3 percentage points higher than 
expected in the February Statement, largely 
due to higher‑than‑expected fuel prices. 
Annual headline inflation would have been 
3.0 percent in the March 2026 quarter if the 
January 2025 increase in vehicle licensing 
fees had been correctly captured in the March 
2025 quarter CPI release.12
Petrol and diesel prices will have a large 
direct effect on CPI inflation in the June 
2026 quarter. Fuel prices are expected to 
contribute 1.2 percentage points to annual 
CPI inflation in the June 2026 quarter. Fuel 
prices are assumed to decrease over the 
remainder of the projection, but remain 
higher than before the conflict. Declining 
petrol and diesel prices are projected to 
contribute about ‑0.5 percentage points to 
annual CPI inflation in the June 2027 quarter.
Indirect price effects are also expected 
to contribute to CPI inflation, as some 
businesses are passing on higher fuel costs. 
Significant price increases are expected in air 
and road transport, food, and construction. 
Indirect price effects are assumed to 
contribute 0.8 percentage points to annual 
CPI inflation in the September 2026 quarter.
Second‑round price effects can amplify 
the initial increase in CPI inflation. Higher 
import prices and a lower exchange rate feed 
directly into costs, and the initial increase in 
inflation may result in firms and households 
adjusting their price‑ and wage‑setting 
behaviour. These dynamics make inflation 
more persistent, adding to inflationary 
pressure over the medium term.
However, second‑round demand effects 
are also expected due to lower real income 
and wealth, and higher uncertainty. Lower 
demand reduces inflationary pressure in the 
medium term. We have estimated the effects 
of oil supply shocks on the New Zealand 
economy using a range of techniques. 
Second‑round demand effects are assumed 
to cause the output gap to be about 
0.8 percentage points lower than otherwise 
by the end of 2026.
Before the conflict, in the March 2026 
quarter, the economy was growing and 
the output gap was broadly in line with our 
February Statement assumption. Timely 
indicators suggest growth was above 
potential, and the output gap was closing.
The labour market was beginning to 
stabilise, but is now expected to remain 
weak for longer. The unemployment rate 
fell to 5.3 percent in the March 2026 quarter. 
Same‑job wage growth has decreased to a 
level consistent with headline inflation near 
the target mid‑point. Wage growth is expected 
to remain low as elevated unemployment, 
compressed business margins, and weak 
productivity growth limit workers’ bargaining 
power. We expect the unemployment rate to 
increase to about 5.4 percent over the next 
year, before gradually decreasing in line with 
the recovering output gap.
This projection assumes the OCR increases 
gradually over the medium term to about 
3.3 percent. These projections represent 
what we believe to be the most likely path 
for the economy, conditional on a range of 
assumptions. However, it is only one of many 
possible paths. Global developments and the 
evolution of the domestic economy are likely 
to be different to our assumptions. Box A 
considers alternative scenarios, and the 
implications for monetary policy settings.


51
Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Table 5.1 
Key projection assumptions
Economic growth and capacity pressure
Production
•	 GDP increased 0.2 percent in the December 2025 quarter. Timely indicators 
suggest growth increased in the March 2026 quarter, especially in manufacturing 
and construction. Higher activity is consistent with the decreases in interest rates 
since August 2024.
•	 We assume GDP growth was 1.0 percent in the March 2026 quarter and will be 
0.0 percent in the June 2026 quarter. Although GDP growth is seasonally adjusted, 
it currently has a remaining predictable seasonal pattern. Residual seasonality is 
estimated to add 0.4 percentage points to Stats NZ’s published GDP in the March 
2026 quarter, implying underlying growth of 0.6 percent. This residual seasonality 
is assumed to reduce published GDP growth by 0.2 percentage points in both the 
June and September 2026 quarters. We have not accounted for residual seasonality 
in quarters after September 2026.
•	 We assume the shock caused by the Middle East conflict reduces June 2026 
quarter GDP by 0.6 percentage points, reflecting higher fuel prices, lower real 
incomes, and greater uncertainty. In the September and December 2026 quarters, 
growth is assumed to be 0.1 percentage points lower than otherwise due to 
second‑round demand effects. This leaves annual growth 0.8 percentage points 
lower than otherwise by the December 2026 quarter.
•	 Our assumptions about the effects of the Middle East conflict were informed by 
internal modelling using a range of techniques to estimate the impacts of oil supply 
shocks on the New Zealand economy. These techniques include local projections, 
structural vector autoregression models, and G‑Cubed (a multi‑sector, multi‑country 
structural model of the global economy).
Domestic 
capacity 
pressures
•	 The output gap is projected to decrease to ‑1.8 percent by the September 2026 
quarter, about 0.8 percentage points lower than would have been the case in the 
absence of the Middle East conflict.
•	 The output gap is then assumed to narrow in response to the lagged effect of 
relatively low real interest rates, reduced uncertainty, and declining import prices. 
We project the output gap will increase to ‑0.7 percent at the end of 2027, and 
‑0.1 percent at the end of 2028.
Consumption
•	 Consumption is projected to grow slowly, reflecting decreasing house prices and 
low real income growth. We project consumption growth to increase from early 2027 
as the labour market begins to recover and import prices decrease.
•	 The IRD’s in‑work tax credit (IWTC), a payment received by families with dependent 
children, at least one parent in paid employment, and qualifying income, is being 
temporarily increased in response to the oil shock. We expect this payment will have 
minimal macroeconomic effects. 
•	 The sale of Fonterra’s consumer brands business, and the associated shareholder 
payout in April 2026, is expected to be largely directed toward debt repayment and 
saving and is not expected to have a material effect on consumption.
•	 House prices are projected to decrease slightly in 2026. Net immigration has 
increased, providing some support for housing demand. However, a large stock 
of housing available for sale, higher borrowing costs, and lower real disposable 
incomes limit households’ ability and willingness to bid up prices. From 2027, house 
prices are projected to increase only gradually as income growth improves.


Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
52
Business 
investment
•	 Business investment has decreased significantly over the past three years, as 
spare capacity has reduced the incentive to invest in new capital. In the near term, 
increased spare capacity and uncertainty from the oil shock are assumed to delay 
the recovery of business investment.
•	 Business investment is projected to increase later in the projection, responding to a 
narrowing negative output gap.
•	 The sale of Fonterra’s consumer brands business, and the associated shareholder 
payout in April 2026, could support business investment at the margin. 
Residential 
investment
•	 Residential investment is expected to increase over 2026, albeit more slowly 
than projected in the February Statement. The Middle East conflict has increased 
construction input costs via higher diesel and materials prices. Higher interest rates 
are also expected to dampen activity somewhat. Building consents — which tend to 
have high completion rates — have increased significantly over the past six months.    
Higher net immigration and housing supply policy changes are expected to support 
an increase in construction activity.
Government
•	 Government spending is assumed to be consistent with fiscal forecasts in the Half 
Year Economic and Fiscal Update (HYEFU) 2025, updated for December 2025 
quarter GDP data.
•	 Total government expenditure (consumption and investment) has declined as a share 
of the economy from its peak in 2021, but increased over the last year. We assume that 
government expenditure will remain around current levels in real terms, declining as a 
share of the economy. Our projections are consistent with the HYEFU 2025, adjusted 
for data revisions and the stronger‑than‑expected starting point in the December 
2025 quarter, while we await the publication of the Budget on 28 May.
Export 
volumes
•	 Services export volumes experienced strong growth over summer. We assume that 
service export volumes in the March 2026 quarter were about 10 percent higher 
than a year earlier.
•	 The Middle East conflict has increased prices and reduced availability of flights, 
making it more difficult to travel to New Zealand. This, along with lower global 
demand, is assumed to reduce service export volumes in the second half of 2026. 
However, the decrease is partially offset by a lower exchange rate.
•	 Goods export volumes are projected to grow at a similar rate to potential GDP, as 
higher dairy and meat volumes are offset by lower global demand for other goods 
exports. Dairy production, and to a lesser extent meat production, have increased in 
response to elevated prices.


53
Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Global factors
Export prices
•	 Export prices are assumed to decrease toward their long‑term average level in real 
foreign currency terms. Much of this decrease has already been observed in dairy 
auctions to date, but will take time to flow through to the national accounts measure 
of export prices. Prices for meat exports are expected to remain high, and prices for 
other export categories are assumed to increase in line with global inflation in the 
medium term.
Import prices
•	 We assume Dubai crude oil prices average US$104 per barrel in the June 2026 
quarter, 56 percent higher than their level in the December 2025 quarter. We 
assume oil prices then decrease, settling at US$84 per barrel in the medium term, 
about 25 percent higher than before the conflict. Our oil price assumption is based 
on our usual approach of using oil futures prices, adjusted for risk using a term 
structure model.
•	 Non‑oil import prices are assumed to increase in the near term as global firms face 
higher costs for energy, fertiliser, and shipping.
•	 Import prices then decline in real terms over the medium term but remain materially 
higher than assumed in the February Statement, and even more so in New Zealand 
dollar terms due to a lower New Zealand dollar exchange rate. The pass‑through 
of higher non‑oil import prices to consumer prices takes longer than the direct 
pass‑through of oil import prices to consumer fuel prices. Higher non‑oil import 
prices therefore add to inflationary pressure in the period that monetary policy can 
affect.
Global interest 
rates and 
exchange rate
•	 Market participants’ expectations for global policy interest rates are about 50 basis 
points higher than our February Statement assumption. All else equal, higher global 
interest rates put downward pressure on the New Zealand dollar, which adds to 
inflationary pressure in New Zealand.
•	 The New Zealand dollar trade‑weighted index (TWI) is assumed to remain at 66.6 
through the projection, about 2.1 percent lower than in the February Statement.
Labour market
Employment 
and wages 
•	 Reduced economic activity is expected to lower demand for labour, resulting in 
a higher unemployment rate. The unemployment rate is projected to increase to 
5.4 percent in the June 2026 quarter and remain near this level until mid‑2027. We 
expect this to occur as firms’ margins are compressed, and the rate of hiring slows 
while the population continues to grow. Total employment is projected to remain 
broadly unchanged in the June 2026 quarter, before beginning to grow again.
•	 Same‑job wage growth is at a level consistent with headline inflation near the target 
mid‑point. The relatively high unemployment rate and compressed business margins 
will make it difficult for employees to bargain for pay increases.
•	 Spare capacity in the labour market is currently contributing to disinflationary 
pressure. We expect the unemployment rate to decrease toward the end of the 
projection in line with the recovering output gap.
Migration
•	 Despite the outlook for weaker labour market conditions, this projection assumes a 
higher rate of net immigration than the February Statement. Recent data has shown 
a decrease in outward migration. Meanwhile, the rate of inward migration has been 
increasing. 
•	 Net working‑age immigration increased to about 9,000 in the March 2026 quarter. 
We assume a slight decrease in net working‑age immigration in the near term, 
before gradually rising towards 9,000 per quarter in the medium term.


Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
54
Inflation 
Headline CPI 
inflation
•	 Annual CPI inflation is forecast to increase to 4.2 percent in the June 2026 quarter. 
Direct effects of petrol and diesel prices are expected to contribute 1.2 percentage 
points to annual inflation in that quarter.
•	 Annual CPI inflation is projected to return to near the target mid‑point in the 
September 2027 quarter. Petrol and diesel prices are expected to contribute about 
‑0.5 percentage points to annual inflation in the June 2027 quarter. Indirect and 
second-round price increases are projected to keep annual inflation higher than 
otherwise during 2027.
•	 In the medium term, inflation is projected to settle near 2 percent as price‑setting 
behaviour adapts to a low‑inflation environment, and as administered price inflation 
and tradables inflation normalise. 
•	 The average of core inflation measures has declined to 2.3 percent over the past 
year. We expect these to converge toward our 2 percent target mid‑point over time.
Non‑tradables
•	 Non‑tradables inflation is projected to remain at about 3.5 percent in 2026. The 
more negative output gap and the higher OCR continue to put downward pressure 
on non‑tradables inflation. However, this is mostly offset during 2026 by indirect 
price increases, particularly for domestic airfares, road transport, and house 
construction.
•	 Meanwhile, elevated price‑setting behaviour puts upward pressure on non‑tradables 
inflation throughout the projection, with its effect decreasing slowly. With these 
assumptions, annual non‑tradables inflation remains broadly unchanged in 2026, 
before declining to around 3 percent in the December 2027 quarter.
Tradables
•	 Annual tradables inflation is forecast to increase to 5.6 percent in the June 2026 
quarter. Tradables inflation will increase in the near term due to higher fuel prices 
and will remain higher than otherwise in the medium term due to higher non‑oil 
import prices and a lower exchange rate.
•	 Tradables inflation then rapidly declines in 2027 as the June 2026 quarter fuel price 
increase falls out of the annual calculation. From the June 2027 quarter onwards, 
fuel has a negative contribution to annual tradables inflation, while price increases 
for other tradables goods remain higher than assumed in the February Statement.


55
Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Figure 5.3
Unemployment rate
(unemployed people as a share of the labour force,
seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Charts
Figure 5.1
Inflation components
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Dotted lines show the projections from the February Statement. The 
shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI 
inflation over the medium term.
Figure 5.2
Private sector LCI wage inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 5.4
Real house prices and sustainable indicators
(index)
Source: Cotality, RBNZ estimates.
Note: See Brunton (2021), Measures for assessing the sustainability of house 
prices in New Zealand. The indicator range may be revised from time to time as 
certain assumptions change, such as neutral interest rates. The indicator range has 
been projected in line with our projections for wages and population growth. The 
projection assumes the neutral interest rate remains at its current level.
Figure 5.5
Production GDP
(annual average)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 5.6
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
56
Figure 5.7
Dubai oil price
(quarterly average)
Source: LSEG, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 5.8
Price‑setting behaviour
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: Measures have been standardised over history to make them 
comparable given differences in historical averages and degrees of variability 
between measures. The vertical axis shows how many standard deviations 
away from its historical average each measure is, where zero indicates the 
historical average. The shaded areas show the range of modelled and survey 
measures. Modelled measures include adaptive measures of the form used 
in NZSIM with varying sensitivities to recent inflation, and a measure based 
on the simple average of headline inflation over the past 3 years. Survey 
measures include 1‑ and 2‑year ahead inflation expectations from the Survey 
of Expectations, and 1‑year ahead inflation expectations from the Household 
Expectations Survey. See chapter 4.1 in the August 2024 Statement for further 
discussion.


57
Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
 Chapter 
06
Appendices
Wellington. Photo: Ross Kendall


58
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Chapter 6.
Appendices
Appendix 1: Statistical tables
Table 6.1
Key forecast variables
GDP growth 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Annual
Unemployment 
rate
TWI
OCR
2024
Mar
0.2
0.6
4.0
4.4
71.6
5.5
Jun
-0.6
0.4
3.3
4.7
71.4
5.5
Sep
-1.2
0.6
2.2
4.9
70.9
5.4
Dec
0.0
0.5
2.2
5.1
69.5
4.6
2025
Mar
1.1
0.9
2.5
5.1
67.8
4.0
Jun
-0.9
0.5
2.7
5.2
69.1
3.4
Sep
0.9
1.0
3.0
5.3
68.4
3.1
Dec
0.2
0.6
3.1
5.4
66.4
2.5
2026
Mar
1.0
0.9
3.1
5.3
67.2
2.3
Jun
0.0
1.6
4.2
5.4
66.6
2.3
Sep
0.2
1.1
4.3
5.4
66.6
2.5
Dec
0.5
0.4
4.1
5.4
66.6
2.8
2027
Mar
0.7
0.5
3.7
5.4
66.6
3.0
Jun
0.8
0.4
2.4
5.4
66.6
3.1
Sep
1.0
0.8
2.0
5.2
66.6
3.1
Dec
1.0
0.4
2.0
5.1
66.6
3.1
2028
Mar
0.9
0.5
2.0
4.9
66.6
3.2
Jun
0.8
0.4
2.0
4.7
66.6
3.2
Sep
0.8
0.8
2.0
4.6
66.6
3.2
Dec
0.7
0.3
2.0
4.5
66.6
3.3
2029
Mar
0.7
0.5
2.0
4.5
66.6
3.3
Jun
0.7
0.3
2.0
4.4
66.6
3.3


59
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Table 6.2
Measures of inflation and inflation expectations
2024
2025
2026
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Inflation (annual rates)
CPI
2.2
2.2
2.5
2.7
3.0
3.1
3.1
CPI non‑tradables
4.9
4.5
4.0
3.7
3.5
3.5
3.5
CPI tradables
-1.6
-1.1
0.3
1.2
2.2
2.6
2.5
Sectoral factor model estimate 
of core inflation
3.2
3.0
2.8
2.7
2.7
2.8
2.7
CPI trimmed mean (30% measure)
2.7
2.5
2.2
2.4
2.2
2.5
2.3
CPI weighted median
2.8
2.6
2.2
2.2
2.2
1.7
1.6
GDP deflator (expenditure)
3.4
5.4
4.2
4.1
3.0
3.2
Inflation expectations 
Survey of Expectations
Tara‑ā‑Pūkenga (SOE)
1 year ahead
2.4
2.0
2.1
2.4
2.4
2.4
2.6
3.4
2 years ahead
2.0
2.1
2.1
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.4
2.5
5 years ahead
2.1
2.2
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.2
2.3
2.2
10 years ahead
2.0
2.2
2.1
2.2
2.2
2.2
2.3
2.2
Inflation expectations 
RBNZ Business Expectations 
Survey Tara‑ā‑Umanga (BES)
1 year ahead
2.2
2.1
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.4
2.6
3.7
2 years ahead
2.2
2.2
2.5
2.5
2.6
2.4
2.6
2.9
5 years ahead
2.8
2.8
3.0
3.1
3.2
2.8
2.7
2.7
10 years ahead
3.1
3.3
3.7
3.9
3.6
3.6
3.2
2.9
Inflation expectations 
RBNZ Household Expectations 
Survey Tara‑ā‑Whare (HES)
1 year ahead
4.1
4.1
4.9
5.6
6.0
5.5
5.2
5.6
2 years ahead
3.1
3.7
3.9
4.7
4.6
4.3
3.4
4.9
5 years ahead
3.4
3.4
3.6
3.7
4.1
3.8
3.3
4.0


60
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Table 6.3
Measures of labour market conditions	
(seasonally adjusted, changes expressed in annual percent terms, unless specified otherwise)	
2024
2025
2026
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Household Labour Force Survey
Unemployment rate
4.9
5.1
5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4
5.3
Underutilisation rate
11.7
12.2
12.4
12.8
12.9
12.9
12.9
Labour force participation rate
71.1
70.8
70.7
70.5
70.3
70.5
70.4
Employment rate 
(% of working‑age population)
67.6
67.2
67.1
66.8
66.6
66.7
66.3
Employment growth
-0.6
-1.3
-0.9
-1.3
-0.7
0.2
0.4
Average weekly hours worked
33.3
33.1
32.9
32.7
33.1
33.3
33.5
Number unemployed
(thousand people)
149
155
156
158
160
165
163
Number employed 
(million people)
2.89
2.88
2.88
2.87
2.87
2.89
2.89
Labour force (million people)
3.04
3.04
3.03
3.03
3.03
3.05
3.05
Extended labour force
(million people)
3.14
3.13
3.14
3.14
3.14
3.15
3.15
Working‑age population
(million people, age 15+ years)
4.27
4.28
4.29
4.30
4.31
4.32
4.34
Quarterly Employment Survey — QES
Filled jobs growth
-1.4
-0.8
-1.9
-1.2
0.2
-0.1
1.1
Average hourly earnings growth 
(private sector, ordinary time)
3.2
4.0
3.9
4.6
4.1
3.5
3.6
Other data sources
Labour cost index growth, adjusted 
(private sector, ordinary and overtime)
3.3
3.0
2.6
2.3
2.1
2.0
2.0
Labour cost index growth, unadjusted
(private sector, ordinary time)
4.5
3.9
3.7
3.5
3.3
3.3
3.2
Estimated net working‑age 
immigration (thousands, quarterly)
-0.1
-0.7
0.2
2.4
1.5
4.8
9.0
Change in all vacancies index* 
-31.4
-27.2
-21.7
-7.6
3.5
6.4
11.8
Note: The all vacancies index is produced by MBIE as part of the monthly Jobs Online report, which shows changes in job vacancies advertised 
by businesses on internet job boards. The unadjusted labour cost index (LCI) is an analytical index that reflects quality change in addition to price 
change (whereas the official LCI measures price changes only). For definitions of underutilisation, the extended labour force, and related concepts, 
see Statistics New Zealand (2016), Introducing underutilisation in the labour market. 
* The all vacancies index is a non‑seasonally adjusted series.


61
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Table 6.4
Composition of real GDP growth
(annual average percent change, seasonally adjusted, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
Final consumption 
expenditure
Private
4.5
2.5
0.2
6.0
3.2
1.1
0.0
1.5
1.4
3.1
3.9
Public authority
3.1
5.5
7.1
8.0
2.6
1.1
-1.3
3.2
-0.3
-0.6
-0.3
Total
4.2
3.2
1.8
6.5
3.1
1.1
-0.3
1.9
1.0
2.2
2.9
Gross fixed 
capital formation
Residential
0.1
2.7
2.1
3.0
-1.3
-4.8
-12.7
-2.8
8.5
11.4
7.4
Other
7.0
3.0
-2.2
10.6
5.3
0.1
-2.7
-0.1
0.6
8.0
6.2
Total
5.2
2.9
-1.2
8.6
3.7
-1.1
-4.9
-0.6
2.2
8.7
6.4
Final domestic 
expenditure
4.4
3.1
1.1
7.0
3.2
0.6
-1.4
1.3
1.3
3.7
3.7
Stockbuilding*
-0.2
-0.2
-0.3
0.6
0.3
-1.4
0.4
0.3
0.0
0.0
0.1
Gross national 
expenditure
4.3
2.8
-0.1
8.1
3.7
-0.8
-1.0
1.7
1.3
3.7
3.9
Exports of goods 
and services
3.3
0.2
-17.9
2.5
5.7
8.3
3.3
2.3
1.8
2.0
3.1
Imports of goods 
and services
4.7
1.3
-15.7
16.8
4.2
-1.3
1.5
4.7
-0.1
4.4
5.0
Expenditure on GDP
3.8
2.5
0.2
4.4
4.0
1.5
-0.7
0.9
1.9
3.0
3.3
GDP (production)
3.3
2.3
-0.3
4.3
3.3
1.8
-0.9
0.7
1.7
3.1
3.4
GDP (production, 
March qtr to March qtr)
3.4
0.8
4.7
0.3
3.1
1.6
-0.7
1.2
1.4
3.8
3.0
* Percentage point contribution to the growth rate of GDP.


62
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Table 6.5
Summary of economic projections
(annual percent change, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
Price measures
CPI 
1.5
2.5
1.5
6.9
6.7
4.0
2.5
3.1
3.7
2.0
2.0
Labour costs
2.0
2.4
1.6
3.1
4.5
3.8
2.6
2.0
1.8
1.9
2.2
Export prices
(in New Zealand dollars) 
1.2
6.9
-6.1
20.6
1.0
-2.3
10.9
2.4
2.0
0.9
1.6
Import prices
(in New Zealand dollars) 
4.1
2.3
-2.8
18.7
7.9
-4.4
6.7
-0.5
6.9
-0.1
0.0
Monetary conditions
OCR (year average)
1.8
1.2
0.3
0.5
3.1
5.5
4.9
2.8
2.7
3.1
3.2
TWI (year average)
73.4
71.7
72.4
74.0
71.2
71.0
69.9
67.8
66.6
66.6
66.6
Output
GDP (production, annual 
average % change)
3.3
2.3
-0.3
4.3
3.3
1.8
-0.9
0.7
1.7
3.1
3.4
Potential output (annual 
average % change)
3.1
2.5
-0.1
1.9
3.4
2.8
1.5
1.3
1.9
2.3
2.5
Output gap (% of potential 
GDP, year average)
0.6
0.4
0.1
2.6
2.5
1.5
-0.9
-1.5
-1.7
-0.9
-0.1
Labour market
Total employment 
(seasonally adjusted)
1.3
2.4
0.0
2.3
2.9
0.9
-0.9
0.4
1.7
2.8
2.5
Unemployment rate (March 
qtr, seasonally adjusted)
4.2
4.2
4.6
3.3
3.5
4.4
5.1
5.3
5.4
4.9
4.5
Trend labour productivity 
0.7
0.9
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.3
0.4
0.5
Key balances
Current account balance 
(% of GDP)
-3.9
-2.4
-2.5
-6.5
-8.3
-5.7
-4.3
-3.7
-4.5
-5.0
-5.1
Terms of trade
(SNA measure, annual 
average % change)
-2.1
2.1
-0.5
0.4
-5.1
-0.9
3.4
5.0
-5.5
0.8
1.4
Household saving rate
(% of disposable income)
-1.1
1.3
7.5
2.5
-2.2
1.0
1.5
2.0
1.9
-0.5
0.0
World economy
Trading‑partner GDP 
(annual average % change)
3.5
1.7
-0.3
6.3
3.1
3.2
3.0
3.2
2.4
2.8
3.0
Trading‑partner CPI 
(TWI‑weighted)
1.4
2.5
0.9
4.1
4.8
2.2
1.8
2.2
2.7
2.0
2.0


63
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Appendix 2: Chart pack
Figure 6.1
Composition of CPI inflation
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 6.2
Output gap and output gap indicators
(share of potential)
Source: NZIER, MBIE, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The output gap indicators based on information from labour market surveys 
are shown separately from the other indicators. For each group of indicators, the 
shaded area shows the range of values and the line shows the mean value. The 
output gap estimate in the final quarter is based on our near‑term GDP estimate.
Figure 6.3
Unemployment and underutilisation rates
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 6.4
OCR and nominal neutral OCR indicator suite
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area indicates the range between the maximum and minimum 
values from our suite of long‑run nominal neutral OCR indicators. See Castaing et al. 
(2024), Estimates of New Zealand’s nominal neutral interest rate.
Figure 6.5
GDP and potential GDP
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.6
Measures of core inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for 
annual CPI inflation over the medium term.


64
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. May 2026
Figure 6.7
Inflation expectations
(annual, years ahead) 
Source: RBNZ Survey of Expectations.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for 
annual CPI inflation over the medium term.
Figure 6.9
House price inflation
(annual) 
Source: REINZ.
Source: Stats NZ, Global Dairy Trade, LSEG, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.12
Terms of trade, dairy, and oil price indices
(index = 100 in the September 2008 quarter, quarterly average)
Figure 6.10
Mortgage interest rates
Source: interest.co.nz, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The rates shown for the fixed terms are the average of the advertised 
rates from ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac, shown as weekly data. The floating 
rate represents the monthly yield on floating housing debt from the RBNZ 
Income Statement survey.
Figure 6.8
Private sector wage growth
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 6.11
New Zealand dollar exchange rates
(monthly average) 
Source: NZFMA, RBNZ.
