BANK: RBNZ
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: Monetary Policy Statement February 2026
DATE: 17/02/2026
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/monetary-policy-statements/2026/feb-180226/mps_report_feb2026.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Monetary Policy
Statement. 
February 2026
B.33


ii
Policy assessment. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026                 
Policy assessment.
OCR on hold at 2.25% with inflation  
expected to fall
Annual consumers price inflation was slightly 
above the Monetary Policy Committee’s  
1 to 3 percent target band at the end of 2025. 
Increases in food and electricity prices and local 
council rates were the biggest contributors to 
above-target inflation. 
The economy is at an early stage in its recovery. 
With ongoing strength in commodity prices, 
economic activity in the agricultural sector 
and regional New Zealand remains strong. 
Although residential and business investment is 
increasing, households remain cautious in their 
spending. The labour market is stabilising, but 
unemployment remains elevated. House price 
growth remains weak, dampening household 
wealth and inclination to spend.
In response to previous cuts in the OCR, 
economic growth is broadening across sectors of 
the economy, such as manufacturing, construction 
and some retail. Economic growth is expected to 
increase over 2026. 
Inflation is most likely returning to within the 
Committee’s 1 to 3 percent target band in the 
current quarter. The Committee is confident that 
inflation will fall to the 2 percent midpoint over 
the next 12 months due to spare capacity in the 
economy, modest wage growth, and core inflation 
within the target band. 
Risks to the inflation outlook are balanced.  
The global environment remains highly uncertain. 
Domestically, greater caution by households in 
their spending decisions could slow the pace 
of New Zealand’s economic recovery, risking 
inflation falling below the target midpoint. But with 
demand increasing in the economy, businesses 
could try to increase prices faster than expected, 
leaving inflation above the target midpoint. 
The Committee agreed to hold the OCR at  
2.25 percent. If the economy evolves as 
expected, monetary policy is likely to remain 
accommodative for some time. The Committee 
will continue to assess incoming data carefully. 
As the recovery strengthens and inflation falls 
sustainably towards the target midpoint, monetary 
policy settings will gradually normalise.
Anna Breman 
Governor 
Figure i.1
Official Cash Rate (OCR)
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


iii
Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
Report and supporting notes published at:
www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary‑policy/monetary‑policy‑statement
Subscribe online: www.rbnz.govt.nz/email‑updates
Copyright © 2026 Reserve Bank of New Zealand
This report is published pursuant to section 129
of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 2021. 
ISSN 1770‑4829
Thank you to RBNZ staff for photography in this report. 
Cover: Marlborough Sounds. Photo: Jamie Antwis
Monetary Policy Framework
The Monetary Policy Committee operates and makes 
decisions under the Monetary Policy Framework that 
comprises the following key components:
•	 the Remit;
•	 the Charter;
•	 the Code of Conduct; and
•	 the monetary policy strategy.
The corresponding documents to these components 
and additional information can be accessed on our 
website under the Monetary Policy Framework.


1
Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
The projections were finalised on 12 February 2026. The Official Cash Rate (OCR) 
projection incorporates an outlook for monetary policy that is consistent with the MPC’s 
monetary policy assessment, which was finalised on 18 February 2026. 
Contents
Policy assessment	
ii
1.	
Summary record of meeting	
2
2.	 Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook	
6
3.	 Global economy and financial markets	
18
4.	 Special topics	
27
	
Recent developments in inflation and the outlook for key drivers	
29
5.	 Economic projections	
33
6.	 Appendices	
39
	
Appendix 1: Statistical tables 	
40
	
Appendix 2: Chart pack 	
45
Monetary Policy Statement.
February 2026


Abel Tasman National Park. Photo: Rebecca Williams
Summary 
record of 
meeting
Chapter 
01


3
Chapter 1. Summary record of meeting. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
Chapter 1. 
Summary record of meeting
A significant easing in monetary policy since August 2024 is supporting a 
recovery in economic activity. Annual consumers price inflation increased 
to 3.1 percent in the December 2025 quarter, slightly above the Monetary 
Policy Committee’s 1 to 3 percent target range. The Committee is 
confident, however, that with significant excess capacity in the economy, 
inflation will fall to around the mid-point of the target range over the next 
12 months.
Headline inflation is expected to fall to 
near the mid-point of the target band 
The Committee noted that headline inflation is 
most likely returning to the target band in the March 
2026 quarter. Recent increases in inflation have 
been driven by higher tradables inflation, partly due 
to larger increases in volatile items such as food, 
international airfares, and overseas accommodation. 
Tradables inflation is expected to fall back over the 
next 12 months due to relatively stable import prices 
and some support from the recent appreciation in the 
New Zealand dollar.
Inflation has also been held up by some components 
of non-tradables inflation that are less sensitive to 
monetary policy, particularly administered prices. 
These are prices that are set or heavily influenced 
by central or local government. Inflation in these 
components has been due to a lagged response 
to previous high inflation and a range of structural 
factors. The Committee expects there to be less 
inflation in some administered prices over the coming 
year, such as electricity lines fees, university fees and 
vehicle licensing fees.
Components of the non-tradables basket that are 
sensitive to monetary policy have declined to around 
historic average levels. Measures of core inflation 
have remained stable, albeit mostly above the target 
midpoint. Rates of wage inflation remain consistent 
with inflation trending back towards 2 percent. 
The Committee emphasised the importance that 
higher near-term inflation not become embedded 
in longer-run expectations. Inflation expectations 
for professional forecasters and business leaders 
increased slightly across all tenors, but long-term 
expectations remain close to the target mid-point. 
Inflation expectations of households have continued 
to decline from elevated levels. 
Significant spare capacity remains
The Committee noted that there is still significant 
spare capacity in the economy. The output gap is 
estimated to be -1.5 percent of potential GDP in the 
December 2025 quarter. 
Spare capacity in the labour market is substantial but 
stabilising. While the unemployment rate increased 
to 5.4 percent, key measures of employment 
strengthened over the December quarter. The labour 
market is expected to continue to strengthen as the 
nascent recovery in economic activity broadens 
through 2026. 
Continued spare capacity, subdued wage growth 
and measures of core inflation within the target band 
provide the Committee with confidence that the 
conditions are in place to return and sustain inflation 
at 2 percent over the medium term.
Economic activity is now recovering
Economic activity began recovering over the second 
half of last year in response to strong export prices 
and supportive monetary policy settings. GDP 
increased by 1.1 percent in the September quarter, 
after falling 1.0 percent in the June quarter. The 
Committee noted that measured GDP data has been 
more volatile than usual, in part due to a range of 
temporary factors and measurement issues. 


4
Chapter 1. Summary record of meeting. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
There are signs that the recovery is broadening 
across the economy, although the September quarter 
GDP likely overstates the true level of momentum in 
the economy. Residential and business investment 
both increased from low levels, and measures 
of investment intentions and building consent 
issuance have all increased. More timely measures 
of economic activity such as the QSBO, PMI, and PSI 
suggest that growth has been maintained in 2025Q4 
and 2026Q1.
The economic recovery has been uneven across 
sectors and regions. Stronger activity has been 
observed in the rural economy and in the primary 
sector. Consumer spending has been constrained 
by low growth in employment income and the 
negative effect of falling real house prices on 
household wealth.
House prices have continued to edge downwards 
despite lower mortgage rates and a modest pick-up 
in housing market activity. This possibly reflects weak 
population growth and elevated long-term interest 
rates. House price growth is expected to gradually 
increase over 2026 and then grow at around the rate 
of household income growth over the medium term. 
Household consumption is projected to increase over 
the medium term as past reductions in the Official 
Cash Rate (OCR) continue to support demand. The 
Committee noted that labour market conditions are 
likely to become more important relative to house 
prices in influencing consumption. 
Government expenditure is assumed to grow at a 
subdued pace over the medium term, consistent 
with the Half Year Economic and Fiscal Update 2025 
projections.
Domestic financial conditions have 
tightened since November
The New Zealand dollar Trade Weighted Index has 
appreciated, reflecting higher domestic interest rates 
and a weakening US dollar. Wholesale interest rates 
beyond 12 months have increased due to higher 
global interest rates and investor expectations of 
future increases in the OCR. Banks have passed 
these increases through to fixed-term mortgage rates.
The flow of mortgage borrowing priced in the 
1–2-year terms increased substantially since 
November. While the average mortgage rate 
has declined to 5.1 percent, further downward 
adjustments are expected to be less than assumed 
in November. 
Global growth has been resilient but 
risks remain high
The Committee noted that the global economy was 
more resilient than expected in 2025. Tariffs have 
had less impact on global growth than previously 
expected, while strong investment in artificial 
intelligence technology has supported exports from 
our trading partners in Asia. Expansionary fiscal policy 
has also supported growth in a number of economies. 
The Committee continues to expect trade barriers to 
present a headwind to growth, with trading partner 
growth expected to weaken slightly over 2026.
On a trade-weighted basis, global inflation has 
declined, but there has been significant divergence 
across countries. Tariff policies have increased 
inflation pressure in some economies such as the US, 
but these have been offset by disinflationary pressure 
in China and the broader Asia region. 
Geopolitical developments over recent months have 
led to continued high economic uncertainty and 
financial market volatility. The US dollar has declined, 
while the prices of oil and precious metals have risen, 
along with sovereign bond term premia. 
The domestic financial system 
remains stable
The Committee was briefed on financial system 
stability. Measures of domestic financial stress have 
eased as lower interest rates reduce debt servicing 
pressures. Non-performing housing loans have also 
declined, and banks expect further reductions in 
housing and commercial property impairments over 
2026. The Committee agreed that there is currently 
no material trade-off between meeting its inflation 
objectives and maintaining financial system stability.
Risks to the outlook for inflation are 
balanced
There are upside and downside risks to the 
near-term outlook for inflation. The Committee noted 
the contribution that administered price inflation had 
played in recent inflation outturns and the risk that this 
could remain high for longer than currently assumed. 
Conversely, the Committee discussed the risk that 
volatile components of tradable inflation could fall 
more rapidly.


5
Chapter 1. Summary record of meeting. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
The Committee discussed the risks around firms’ 
price-setting behaviour. While weak demand has 
constrained the ability of firms to pass on higher costs, 
the Committee noted the risk that changing price 
setting behaviour could result in higher inflation. In this 
context the Committee also discussed the risk that the 
output gap could be smaller than currently estimated, 
accentuating the risk that firms raise prices as demand 
improves. This could lead to more persistence in 
domestically generated inflation pressure that would 
require tighter monetary policy than otherwise.   
Members noted risks regarding the speed of the 
economic recovery. The Committee noted the risk that 
household spending could be slower to recover than 
currently assumed, particularly if house price growth 
remains subdued. This could lead to households 
continuing to maintain higher levels of precautionary 
saving. Conversely members noted a risk that higher 
export incomes and the return of capital to dairy 
farmers from the sale of Fonterra’s consumer brands 
business could spur higher investment and consumer 
spending by farmers. 
The global outlook is uncertain
The Committee noted that the global economic 
outlook continues to be highly uncertain. In the 
near-term, key uncertainties relate to the direction 
of global trade policy, market valuations of artificial 
intelligence investment and geopolitical tensions. 
Downside risks remain to growth in China as policy 
makers attempt to maintain growth targets in the face 
of weak domestic demand. Continued excess capacity 
and subdued demand in China could create greater 
disinflationary pressure.
Over the longer term, the Committee noted risks 
associated with unsustainable fiscal dynamics in 
several countries. This could put ongoing pressure 
on central bank independence and create conditions 
for more persistent global inflation. This could lead to 
higher long-term global real interest rates and create 
risks to global financial stability.
The Committee reached consensus to 
hold the OCR at 2.25 percent
The Committee discussed the monetary conditions 
required to achieve their medium-term inflation 
mandate. 
The Committee agreed that the economic recovery 
remains nascent, and a premature normalisation of 
monetary conditions could dampen the recovery 
and lead inflation to undershoot the target. The 
Committee also considered the risk that policy remains 
accommodative for too long, leading inflation to persist 
above the mid-point of the target range for longer.
Members agreed that the monetary policy stance 
would need to remain accommodative for some time 
to support a sustained recovery in economic activity. 
There is a risk that prolonged caution on the part of 
households could slow the recovery in consumption 
activity, particularly in the context of a recent tightening 
in financial conditions. Members also noted global 
risks that could slow domestic economic recovery. 
Significant excess capacity, modest wage growth, 
and core inflation within the target band provides 
confidence that inflation will return to the midpoint of 
the target band. 
Members noted the risk of inflation remaining more 
persistent, given surveys showing somewhat elevated 
inflation expectations and business pricing intentions. 
One member supported maintaining the OCR at 
current levels for now but noted that if economic 
activity recovers as expected, monetary stimulus 
could begin to be withdrawn somewhat earlier without 
compromising the economic recovery. Another 
member noted that responding too quickly to firms’ 
pricing intentions could reinforce perceptions of strong 
demand and encourage firms to align on further price 
increases.
On Wednesday 18 February the Committee reached 
consensus to hold the OCR at 2.25 percent. The 
forward OCR path reflects a somewhat stronger 
economic outlook and balanced risks to inflation.
If the economy evolves as expected, monetary policy 
is likely to remain accommodative for some time. The 
Committee will continue to assess incoming data 
carefully. As the recovery strengthens and inflation 
falls sustainably towards the target midpoint, monetary 
policy settings will gradually normalise. 
Attendees:
MPC members:
Anna Breman (Chair), Carl Hansen, Hayley Gourley, 
Karen Silk, Paul Conway, Prasanna Gai
Treasury Observer: 
Struan Little
MPC Secretary: 
Chris Bloor


Tāmaki Makaurau. Photo: Jamie Antwis 
Chapter 
02
Economic 
assessment 
and monetary 
policy outlook


7
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
Chapter 2.
Economic assessment and 
monetary policy outlook
Key points
Headline inflation is slightly above the top 
of the Monetary Policy Committee’s 1 to 
3 percent target range. Annual consumers 
price index (CPI) inflation increased to 
3.1 percent in the year to the December 
2025 quarter. Tradables inflation has been 
increasing since late 2024, partly due to 
larger increases in volatile prices such as 
food, international airfares, and overseas 
accommodation. Some components of 
non‑tradables inflation, including household 
energy costs and local council rates, have 
remained elevated. Other components, such 
as housing costs, continued to decline through 
2025. Measures of core inflation — which 
attempt to look through volatility — are all 
within the 1 to 3 percent target band. However, 
most measures remain above the 2 percent 
target mid‑point. 
Inflation is projected to return to within the 
target band in the first quarter of 2026. 
Some one‑off price increases from a year ago 
will drop out of the annual calculation, and 
spare capacity is continuing to moderate price 
pressures. We expect annual CPI inflation 
to return to near the 2 percent mid‑point of 
the target range over the next year as price 
setters continue to adapt to a low inflation 
environment.
Significant spare capacity is reducing 
underlying inflationary pressure in 
New Zealand. The output gap — the 
difference between GDP and the economy’s 
potential output — is estimated to have 
been around 1.5 percent in the December 
2025 quarter. Spare capacity is reducing 
domestic inflationary pressure, partly 
offsetting the upward pressure from global 
factors, administered price increases, and 
the persistent effects of past high inflation on 
price‑setting behaviour.
Economic activity is recovering, supported 
by high export prices and past reductions 
in the OCR. The MPC reduced the OCR from 
5.50 percent in mid‑2024 to 2.25 percent in 
November 2025, resulting in significant easing 
in financial conditions for households and 
firms in New Zealand. We expect economic 
growth to continue as this easing contributes 
to stronger demand, even as export 
commodity prices moderate from recent highs 
and government spending shrinks as a share 
of domestic activity. Economic growth will 
reduce spare capacity over time. 
Global and domestic risks could affect 
growth and inflation in New Zealand. 
The current international environment is 
characterised by elevated geopolitical and 
policy uncertainty and diverging economic 
conditions across countries. Domestically, 
inflationary pressure has been stronger than 
expected and could be more persistent than 
assumed. On the other hand, support for 
domestic demand from lower interest rates 
and high commodity prices has decreased in 
recent months, and momentum in economic 
growth could fade, reducing medium‑term 
inflationary pressure.
Conditional on the central economic outlook, 
we project that the OCR will remain around 
its current level in the near term, before 
gradually increasing from late 2026 as the 
economic recovery continues. Compared 
to the November Statement, the OCR is 
projected to increase slightly sooner. This 
reflects modestly more persistent inflationary 
pressure than previously assumed, and 
increasing confidence that economic growth 
will continue. 


8
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
Figure 2.1
Production GDP
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Production GDP is a measure of the volume of production and is expressed in 
2009/2010 prices.
Economic assessment
1	
Although headline production GDP is seasonally adjusted, it currently appears to have a remaining predictable seasonal pattern. 
This results in reported GDP growth being overstated in March quarters and understated in June quarters (see chapter 5).
Economic activity rebounded in 
September 2025 quarter
Real production GDP increased by 
1.1 percent in the September 2025 quarter, 
following a 1.0 percent contraction in the 
June 2025 quarter (figure 2.1). September 
quarter growth was much stronger than the 
0.4 percent expansion expected at the time 
of the November Statement. Growth was 
broad‑based across sectors of the economy. 
However, reported quarterly GDP has been 
more volatile than usual. This, in part, reflects 
temporary factors that reduced economic 
activity in the June quarter and unwound in 
the September quarter. It also likely reflects 
changing seasonal patterns that may have 
caused official measures to overstate the 
volatility in underlying real economic activity 
in recent years.1
Timely indicators of economic activity 
suggest the economy continued to grow in 
the December 2025 quarter. In the Quarterly 
Survey of Business Opinion (QSBO), firms 
reported improved sentiment and higher 
levels of activity than in the September 2025 
quarter. The Performance of Manufacturing 
and Performance of Services Indices also 
improved, particularly in December. The 
Reserve Bank’s GDP nowcasting model, 
Kiwi-GDP, incorporates information from 
these data and a broad range of other 
indicators. It suggests that GDP continued 
to grow in the December 2025 and March 
2026 quarters.
Significant spare capacity remains 
in the New Zealand economy 
Significant spare capacity in the 
New Zealand economy is reducing 
inflationary pressure. Declining economic 
activity led to the emergence of significant 
spare capacity in the New Zealand economy 
in the middle of 2024. Since then, GDP 
growth has been volatile but low on average. 
The output gap is estimated to have been 
around -1.5 percent of potential GDP in the 
December 2025 quarter (figure 2.2). Spare 
capacity is reducing domestic inflationary 
pressure in New Zealand, partly offsetting 
the upward pressure from global factors, 
administered price increases, and the 
persistent effects of past high inflation on 
price‑setting behaviour.
Source: Stats NZ, NZIER, MBIE, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: The shaded area shows the range of indicators in the suite. 
Figure 2.2
Output gap and indicator suite
(share of potential, seasonally adjusted) 


9
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
Global economic growth has 
been resilient to policy and 
geopolitical uncertainty 
The global economy experienced steady 
growth in 2025, despite headwinds 
from US tariff policies and elevated 
uncertainty (see chapter 3). GDP growth in 
New Zealand’s trading partners remained 
stable in 2025 (figure 2.3). The impact 
of tariffs on global growth has been 
smaller than initially expected when the 
US announced new tariffs in early April 
2025. Global effective tariff rates have not 
increased as much as initially expected, and 
global trade networks have adapted quickly. 
Additionally, strong AI‑related investment 
has supported demand in the US, which 
in turn has supported exports in several 
of New Zealand’s trading partners in Asia. 
Bloomberg consensus forecasts estimate 
that annual New Zealand trading‑partner 
growth was 3.1 percent in 2025.
Trading‑partner growth is expected to 
decrease slightly in 2026. Trade barriers 
and geopolitical uncertainty are still expected 
to present headwinds to global growth. 
Bloomberg consensus forecasts project that 
annual New Zealand trade‑weighted global 
growth will slow to 2.9 percent in 2026, close 
to historical average growth rates. 
Geopolitical and policy uncertainty has 
contributed to volatility in global financial 
markets since the November Statement. 
Rising geopolitical tensions and extensive 
protests in Iran have contributed to 
higher global oil prices since January. In 
government bond markets, term premia have 
increased. Higher term premia may reflect 
investor concerns about debt sustainability, 
economic volatility, and central bank 
independence. These concerns have also 
had an influence in currency markets. The US 
dollar index has depreciated about 3 percent 
since the November Statement. Weakness 
in the US dollar and Japanese yen and 
increases in New Zealand interest rates have 
led the New Zealand dollar to appreciate 
since the November Statement.
Trading partner inflation is projected 
to stabilise around 2 percent next 
year (figure 2.4). Annual New Zealand 
trade‑weighted global inflation declined to 
1.8 percent in 2025. Trends in inflationary 
pressure are diverging across our major 
trading partners. Inflation has remained low 
in emerging Asia, and very low in China. 
Inflation in the US is above target, but has 
continued to ease gradually despite some 
tariff‑related price increases. Meanwhile, 
inflation in Australia has increased and is 
above the target range.
Source: Stats NZ, Haver Analytics, Consensus Economics, Bloomberg, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: Global GDP growth is based on 16 of New Zealand’s largest trading partners.
Figure 2.3
Global GDP growth
(annual, weighted by New Zealand trade)
Figure 2.4
Global CPI inflation
(annual, weighted by New Zealand trade)
Source: Stats NZ, Haver Analytics, Consensus Economics, Bloomberg, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: Global CPI inflation is based on 17 of New Zealand’s largest trading partners.


10
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
Risks to global growth remain elevated. 
Further escalation of geopolitical risks could 
weigh on global trade volumes and increase 
uncertainty, weighing on demand. Similarly, 
if the productivity benefits of AI technology 
are smaller than expected, investment 
could slow, reducing global trade and 
GDP. Concerns about fiscal sustainability in 
some economies, including Japan and the 
US, could put further upward pressure on 
government bond yields. Any of these events 
could lead to a weakening in risk appetite 
that may contribute to lower asset prices 
and tighter global funding conditions. If any 
materialised, these risks would dampen 
domestic economic activity in New Zealand, 
reducing inflationary pressure.
The global inflation outlook is also 
uncertain. The risks that could lead to 
lower global growth and risk appetite could 
also lead to either higher or lower inflation 
in New Zealand. Geopolitical events can 
lead to higher and more volatile oil prices, 
while shocks that reduce investor risk 
appetite could lead to a depreciation of 
the New Zealand dollar, putting upward 
pressure on tradables inflation, especially in 
the near term. Over the medium term, trade 
barriers could increase global prices through 
less efficient supply chains. Alternatively, 
trade barriers could put further downward 
pressure on prices in tariff‑affected countries, 
especially China, resulting in lower import 
costs for New Zealand. Furthermore, many 
countries, including New Zealand, have 
entered into new trade agreements in 2025 
and 2026 that could benefit trade and 
reduce inflation in the medium term. 
Strong export performance has 
supported growth in New Zealand
Prices for New Zealand’s exports rose 
substantially from the middle of 2024 to 
the middle of 2025, supporting export 
sector incomes (figure 2.5). Dairy, meat, and 
horticulture prices accounted for most of the 
increase. Higher prices have reflected both 
resilient demand and reduced global supply 
for some of our key export commodities. 
High export prices and a depreciating 
New Zealand dollar exchange rate over 
the second half of 2025 have supported 
incomes and domestic spending.  More 
recently, dairy prices have moderated, while 
some other export prices have continued to 
increase. Meat prices are expected to remain 
elevated in the near term, supported by 
constrained global supply and the reversal of 
additional US tariffs on a wide range of food 
items. Over the medium term, we assume 
that goods export prices decline, converging 
to around their 10‑year average in real 
foreign currency terms.
Higher prices are contributing to increased 
agricultural production and exports. Goods 
export volumes increased by 3.8 percent 
in the September 2025 quarter. Timely 
production and trade data suggest that 
goods export volume growth will continue, 
particularly for meat and dairy. 
Figure 2.5
New Zealand export prices
(real, foreign currency terms) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


11
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
An ongoing recovery in exports of services 
has also contributed to GDP growth. 
Short‑term visitor arrivals to New Zealand 
have increased compared to the previous 
year, reflecting increased airline capacity. 
The number of travellers on holiday or 
visiting friends and family has recently 
recovered to around pre‑pandemic levels. 
However, business travel remains well 
below previous peaks, and visitors appear 
to be spending less per visit, on average. 
Exports of non‑travel services have grown 
steadily since the COVID‑19 pandemic as 
New Zealand businesses have expanded 
their IT, business, and technical services 
exports to Australia and the US. Over 
the medium term, exports of services 
are assumed to grow slightly faster than 
potential output, supported by resilient 
demand in these economies.
Private investment is showing 
early signs of recovering
Business investment has been cyclically 
low since the middle of 2024, as 
significant spare capacity and elevated 
global uncertainty have discouraged 
investment. However, business investment 
rebounded more strongly than expected 
in the September 2025 quarter. Business 
sentiment and investment intentions also 
improved in the December 2025 quarter. 
High export commodity prices in 2025 
are likely to support business investment 
in the near term (see chapter 4.1 in the 
November Statement). Over the medium 
term, a gradual reduction in spare capacity 
is expected to drive growth in business 
investment (figure 2.6). 
Residential investment increased in the 
September quarter from low levels, slightly 
earlier than expected. We expect growth in 
residential investment to accelerate from early 
2026, supported by accommodative monetary 
policy and improving economic conditions 
(figure 2.7). This is consistent with strong 
growth in building consents over the second 
half of 2025 and other signs of increasing 
housing demand, including household 
credit growth. 
Figure 2.6
Business investment
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.7
Residential investment
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


12
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
Household spending is growing 
modestly 
Household consumption has increased 
broadly in line with population growth in 
recent quarters (figure 2.8). Consumption 
grew by 1.8 percent in the year to the 
September 2025 quarter. This rate of 
growth is faster than population growth, but 
below historical averages. Consumption 
has been constrained by low growth 
in employment income and falling real 
household wealth due to falling real house 
prices. Households have been saving, 
possibly in response to limited employment 
opportunities and uncertainty about the 
economic outlook. 
Household consumption is projected to 
increase over the medium term, as past 
reductions in the OCR continue to support 
demand. Higher population growth, 
stabilising real wealth, and higher real 
incomes — including from higher primary 
sector revenue — are also assumed to 
support consumption.
Government expenditure is 
expected to decline as a share 
of the economy 
Government expenditure (consumption 
and investment) has declined as a share 
of the economy from its peak in 2021, 
but has increased over the last year. We 
assume that government expenditure 
grows at a subdued pace over the medium 
term, declining as a share of the economy 
(figure 2.9). Our projections are consistent 
with the Half-Year Economic and Fiscal 
Update 2025, adjusted for data revisions 
and the stronger‑than‑expected starting 
point in the September 2025 quarter.
Figure 2.9
Government consumption and investment
(share of potential, seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ, NZ Treasury, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.8
Private consumption
(per working-age person, seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 


13
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
Sustained economic growth 
will lead to a reduction in 
spare capacity
The output gap is projected to close 
over the medium term as GDP growth 
outpaces potential output growth. The 
MPC reduced the OCR from 5.50 percent 
in mid‑2024 to 2.25 percent in November 
2025, resulting in a significant easing in 
financial conditions for households and 
firms in New Zealand. Additionally, strong 
export revenues supported incomes and 
enabled some exporters to pay down debt. 
We expect economic growth to continue 
as past monetary easing and high export 
prices contribute to stronger domestic 
demand. This will reduce spare capacity 
gradually over time (figure 2.10).
The labour market will take 
time to recover 
Spare capacity in the labour market 
is substantial but stabilising. The 
unemployment rate increased to 
5.4 percent, as growth in employment 
was outpaced by growth in the labour 
force (figure 2.11). Other measures of 
labour market capacity pressure were 
mixed — some measures of labour market 
capacity pressure that we monitor eased, 
while others tightened (figure 2.12). Most 
measures of labour market tightness 
remain at levels consistent with substantial 
spare capacity (see chapter 4.2 in the 
November Statement). However, labour 
market conditions are showing early 
signs of improvement. Total hours worked 
increased in the second half of 2025 and 
employment increased in the December 
2025 quarter.
Figure 2.10
Output gap 
(share of potential, seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 
Figure 2.11
Unemployment rate
(unemployed people as a share of the labour force, seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


14
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
Over time, recovering economic activity 
will support growth in employment and a 
reduction in spare capacity in the labour 
market. Measures of labour market slack 
tend to lag broader measures of spare 
capacity and estimates of the output gap. 
Employment is expected to increase with 
a delay as economic activity increases, 
as firms may initially choose to offer more 
hours to existing workers to meet increasing 
demand, rather than hiring more workers. 
The projected decline in the unemployment 
rate is even more gradual, as greater 
employment opportunities are assumed 
to encourage more people to enter the 
labour force.
Spare capacity is contributing to slower 
nominal wage inflation. Wage inflation has 
declined substantially since its peak in 2023. 
Annual wage inflation, as measured by the 
labour cost index (LCI, ordinary and overtime, 
private sector) declined to 2.0 percent in 
the December 2025 quarter, consistent 
with the November Statement projection. 
Wage inflation is assumed to remain around 
its current level over the medium term 
(figure 2.13). Slower wage inflation represents 
smaller cost increases for businesses and 
will help to reduce domestic inflationary 
pressure.
Figure 2.13
Private sector LCI wage inflation
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.12
Labour market indicators
Source: Stats NZ, NZIER, MBIE, RBNZ estimates.
Note: See Ball (2024), Assessing and communicating labour market indicators of inflationary pressure.


15
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
Inflation is temporarily above 
the MPC’s target range, but is 
expected to return to near the 
target mid-point in early 2027
Headline inflation is slightly above the 1 to 
3 percent target range. Annual CPI inflation 
increased to 3.1 percent in the December 
2025 quarter (figure 2.14). This was more than 
the 2.7 percent expected at the time of the 
November Statement. Non‑tradables inflation 
had been easing gradually before stabilising 
in the December 2025 quarter, whereas 
tradables inflation increased substantially 
over 2025. 
All measures of core inflation remain 
within the target range, but most are 
above the target mid‑point. Core inflation 
measures use a variety of approaches to 
strip away temporary or volatile components 
of inflation, to give a sense of underlying 
inflationary pressure. They tend to be a 
better predictor of future inflation than 
the headline number. Movements across 
different annual core inflation measures were 
mixed in the December 2025 quarter, with 
some increasing and others decreasing.  All 
measures remain within the 1 to 3 percent 
target range. However, the average of the 
five main measures we monitor remains 
above the target mid-point at 2.4 percent. 
Further declines in core inflation will be 
necessary to see inflation settle sustainably 
near 2 percent. 
Annual non‑tradables inflation remained at 
3.5 percent in the December 2025 quarter 
(figure 2.15). This was stronger than expected 
in the November Statement. Inflation in 
sectors most sensitive to monetary policy, 
such as new housing construction, remains 
below historic averages. However, inflation 
in administered prices, such as electricity 
and local council rates, has remained 
elevated and is contributing significantly to 
non‑tradables inflation.2 Inflation increased 
in the December 2025 quarter in some more 
volatile non‑tradables components, such as 
domestic airfares and accommodation. 
2	
This is based on the ‘central and local government charges’ series produced by Stats NZ. It incorporates a wide range of prices set or 
heavily influenced by central or local government. Items contributing to high inflation in this series at present include local authority rates, 
electricity, university fees, and vehicle relicensing fees.
Annual tradables inflation increased to 
2.6 percent. This was above our November 
Statement forecast of 2.0 percent. Much 
of the increase in tradables inflation was 
accounted for by international air transport 
and fuel prices, both of which are highly 
volatile components. However, there were 
also increases across a broad range of 
tradables items. 
Figure 2.14
Headline and core inflation measures
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The dashed lines represent the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for inflation over 
the medium term. The shaded area shows the range of core inflation measures. The core 
inflation measures include the sectoral factor model, factor model, trimmed mean (30%), 
weighted median, and CPI excluding food and energy.
Figure 2.15
Headline inflation, tradables inflation, 
and non‑tradables inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI 
inflation over the medium term.


16
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
The depreciation in the New Zealand dollar 
exchange rate over 2025 likely contributed to 
stronger tradables inflation in the December 
quarter. Annual food price inflation declined 
in the December quarter and is expected to 
reduce further in the near term.
Inflation is projected to return to the 
target range in the March 2026 quarter 
(see chapter 4). Some significant one‑off 
price changes during 2025 will fall out of 
the annual calculation in the coming year. 
For example, effective from 1 January 2025, 
the Government replaced the first‑year Fees 
Free scheme with a final‑year Fees Free 
policy, meaning that neither scheme applied 
to university fees due in 2025. That one‑off 
increase in measured university fees will 
not be repeated in 2026 and will partially 
reverse as students under the new scheme 
reach their final year of study. Electricity lines 
charges increased significantly in April 2025. 
These charges are scheduled to increase 
further in each of the next few years, but by a 
smaller amount.
The effects of past high inflation continue 
to influence price‑setting behaviour. In our 
Survey of Expectations, inflation expectations 
of professional forecasters and business 
leaders increased at all horizons (figure 2.16). 
In the Tara‑ā‑Umanga — Business 
Expectations Survey, which is based on 
a much larger and more representative 
sample of New Zealand businesses, inflation 
expectations have increased at the one- 
and two‑years‑ahead horizons but declined 
five years and ten years ahead. In the 
Tara‑ā‑Whare — Household Expectations 
Survey, inflation expectations declined 
(figure 2.17). One-year ahead household 
expectations remain elevated relative to 
history. Higher inflation expectations are 
consistent with higher experienced inflation, 
especially at shorter horizons (see chapter 
4.2 in the August 2025 Statement). This can 
make inflation more persistent, and means, 
all else equal, that tighter monetary policy 
is required to ensure price stability in the 
medium term. 
Spare capacity will continue to reduce 
underlying inflationary pressures and 
non‑tradables inflation. Headline inflation 
is projected to converge to near the 
2 percent target mid‑point over the next 
year, as some one‑off price increases drop 
out of the annual calculation, tradables 
inflation declines, and spare capacity and 
lower wage growth continue to moderate 
domestic price pressures. Over the 
medium term, price‑setting behaviour is 
assumed to normalise as households and 
business continue to adapt to a low‑inflation 
environment. This will enable continued 
economic growth and a reduction in spare 
capacity without upward pressure on inflation. 
Figure 2.17
Inflation expectations of households
(annual, years ahead) 
Source: RBNZ Tara‑ā‑Whare — Household Expectations Survey.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI 
inflation over the medium term.
Figure 2.16
Inflation expectations of professional 
forecasters and business leaders
(annual, years ahead) 
Source: RBNZ Survey of Expectations.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI 
inflation over the medium term.


17
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
Monetary policy outlook
Conditional on the central economic 
outlook, we project that the OCR will 
remain around its current level in the near 
term, before gradually increasing from late 
2026 (figure 2.18). We assume price‑setting 
behaviour will continue to adapt to a 
low‑inflation environment, easing inflationary 
pressure. We also expect that past reductions 
in the OCR will support an ongoing recovery 
in domestic activity and a reduction in spare 
capacity over time. As the economy recovers, 
the MPC expects to increase the OCR 
gradually as necessary to contain inflationary 
pressure and ensure that inflation settles 
sustainably near the target mid‑point. 
Compared to the November Statement, the 
OCR is projected to increase slightly sooner. 
This reflects modestly more persistent 
inflationary pressure than previously 
assumed, and increasing confidence that 
economic growth will continue.
Figure 2.18
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


18
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
Chapter 
03
Global 
economy 
and financial 
markets
Queenstown. Photo: Justine Lee


19
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026 
Chapter 3.
Global economy and financial markets
Key points
Global growth was resilient in 2025 but is 
expected to slow modestly in 2026. The 
effects of tariffs on the global economy have 
been less significant than initially anticipated. 
Strong investment in AI technology 
supported exports from our trading partners 
in Asia in 2025 and is expected to remain a 
growth driver through 2026. Trade barriers 
are still expected to present a headwind to 
global growth, with trading‑partner growth 
expected to weaken slightly over 2026. 
Inflation remains low in China, and this has 
spilt over to much of emerging Asia. Excess 
supply and weak domestic demand are 
keeping inflation low in China and weighing 
on inflation across the broader Asia region. 
Tariffs are adding to upward pressure on 
US inflation, though their impact has been 
smaller than expected so far, with lagged 
effects still expected to flow through over 
2026. Domestic inflationary pressures have 
continued to increase in Australia.
 
Financial and economic conditions across 
advanced economies have diverged over 
the past year. Differences in monetary policy 
settings reflect varied outlooks for activity 
and inflation over the medium term. Global 
equity markets have increased since the 
start of 2026 despite recent volatility. The 
US dollar has weakened, as geopolitical 
events have reduced investor appetite to 
hold US dollars at the margin. Prices for 
oil and precious metals have increased 
significantly amid growing policy uncertainty 
and increased geopolitical tensions.
Domestic financial conditions have 
tightened since the November Statement. 
Financial market participants have lifted their 
expectation for the level of the OCR over 
2026, and longer‑term retail interest rates 
have increased. The New Zealand dollar 
has appreciated on a trade‑weighted basis, 
reflecting higher domestic interest rates and 
a weak US dollar.


20
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
Global economic conditions
Global growth was resilient to 
headwinds in 2025
The global economy experienced steady 
growth in 2025, despite headwinds from 
US tariff policies and elevated uncertainty 
(figure 3.1). Bloomberg consensus forecasters 
estimate that New Zealand’s trading-partner 
growth was 3.1 percent in 2025. This is 
well above the forecasts of 2.4 percent 
growth made in May following US tariff 
announcements in April 2025. 
US GDP growth remained resilient in 2025, 
despite higher tariffs, moderately restrictive 
monetary policy, and a softening labour 
market. The US economy grew 2.3 percent 
in the year to the September 2025 quarter, 
and is expected to have grown by 2.2 
percent over 2025. This resilience has been 
supported by strong private non‑residential 
investment, as AI‑related firms have 
invested heavily in building infrastructure. 
Household consumption has also remained 
firm, increasing 2.6 percent in the year to 
September 2025 despite subdued consumer 
confidence and heightened uncertainty. 
GDP growth in the US is expected to remain 
steady in 2026, with Bloomberg consensus 
forecasts suggesting a modest increase in 
growth to 2.4 percent in 2026. 
Exports continue to support growth in 
China, while domestic demand remains 
historically weak. Recent activity data show 
that strong external sector performance 
has continued to offset weakness in the 
housing sector and subdued household and 
business confidence. Although China met 
its 5 percent GDP target in 2025, underlying 
domestic momentum remains soft. Growth in 
retail sales and private investment has been 
particularly weak. Retail sales increased just 
0.9 percent year-on-year in December, while 
fixed asset investment declined 3.8 percent 
over the same time period. For both series, 
these are the lowest annual rates of growth 
in over three decades when excluding 
periods of lockdown due to the COVID-19 
pandemic. The strength in the external sector 
in 2025 has reduced the need for additional 
broad‑based stimulus. Instead, Chinese 
authorities have focused on targeted 
measures to support the domestic economy, 
aimed at stabilising stressed sectors rather 
than materially boosting aggregate demand.   
Figure 3.1
Trading‑partner growth
(annual)
Source: Haver Analytics, Bloomberg, Consensus Economics, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: Projections show consensus forecasts from Bloomberg for 2025, 2026 and 2027, 
and Consensus Economics for 2028 and beyond. The trading‑partner aggregate is based 
on 16 of New Zealand’s largest trading partners.


21
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026 
Australian economic activity has continued 
to recover following years of below‑trend 
growth. GDP growth in the year to the 
September 2025 quarter was 2.1 percent as 
growth continued to steadily increase across 
the year. Private investment supported 
growth in the September quarter as growth 
in household spending slowed. Earlier in the 
year, household spending had supported 
growth when private investment remained 
low. Labour market conditions also remain 
tight, with the unemployment rate falling 
0.2 percentage points to 4.1 percent in 
December. The unemployment rate in 
Australia has risen just 0.7 percentage 
points since its lowest point this cycle in 
October 2022. 
Trade‑weighted global inflation has 
eased, led by disinflation in Asia
New Zealand trade‑weighted global 
inflation is estimated to have been 
1.8 percent in 2025 (figure 3.2). This is 
down from 2.0 percent in 2024 and below 
forecasts made at the start of 2025. While 
tariff policies increased inflationary pressure 
in some economies, notably the US, these 
effects have been more than offset by 
disinflationary pressures in China and the 
broader Asia region. Due to higher inflation 
in Asia, New Zealand trade‑weighted global 
inflation is expected to increase modestly this 
year, to around 2.0 percent. 
Inflation in China remained very low 
in 2025, reflecting excess supply and 
subdued domestic demand. Excess supply 
in several industries has placed downward 
pressure on prices. Authorities have looked 
to address this through targeted measures, 
including campaigns to support supply 
reductions. They have also tightened 
regulatory oversight across energy‑intensive 
industries such as steel, cement, and coal, as 
well as selected manufacturing sectors linked 
to renewable energy equipment and electric 
vehicles. While these measures are expected 
to lift producer and consumer prices 
modestly, annual CPI inflation is still expected 
to remain low, at 0.7 percent in 2026. 
Inflationary pressures in the US have eased 
gradually over recent months. Higher goods 
inflation, partly reflecting tariff‑related price 
increases, has been more than offset by a 
larger decrease in services inflation. Annual 
CPI inflation was 2.7 percent in December, 
down from 3.0 percent in September. Core 
inflation (excluding food and energy) eased 
to 2.6 percent in December, down from 
3.3 percent at the start of 2025. Inflation 
is expected to remain above the Federal 
Reserve’s target through 2026 as the 
lagged effect of tariff‑related price increases 
continues to increase goods prices while 
services disinflation persists.
Australian inflation has increased over 
the second half of 2025. After a period of 
steady disinflation, annual headline inflation 
increased to 3.6 percent in the December 
2025 quarter, with trimmed mean inflation at 
3.4 percent. Inflation in Australia has been 
supported by stronger domestic demand and 
housing‑related price pressures, amplified by 
high population growth and ongoing supply 
constraints. Bloomberg consensus forecasts 
indicate Australian inflation is expected to 
remain above the 2 to 3 percent target range 
of the Reserve Bank of Australia (RBA) in the 
first half of 2026.
Figure 3.2
Trading‑partner inflation
(annual)
Source: Haver Analytics, Bloomberg, Consensus Economics, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: Projections show consensus forecasts from Bloomberg for 2025, 2026 and 2027, 
and Consensus Economics for 2028 and beyond. The trading‑partner aggregate is based 
on 17 of New Zealand’s largest trading partners.


22
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
Global financial conditions
Divergent economic conditions 
have driven recent changes in 
global financial markets
Market pricing for central bank policy 
rates has continued to diverge across 
jurisdictions, reflecting differences in 
domestic economic conditions (figure 3.3). 
Since the November Statement, the Federal 
Reserve and Bank of England (BoE) have 
each lowered their policy rate by 25 basis 
points, whilst the European Central Bank 
(ECB) and the Bank of Canada (BoC) have 
left their policy rates unchanged. In contrast, 
the RBA increased its policy rate by 25 basis 
points in early February and is expected to 
tighten monetary policy further. Financial 
market participants now expect varying 
policy paths moving forward, with the Federal 
Reserve and BoE expected to ease further, 
while the BoC and ECB are expected to 
remain on hold. This reflects differences in 
current stances of monetary policy relative to 
estimates of neutral rates, as well as differing 
domestic economic conditions. 
Policy rate expectations and short‑term 
bond yields have increased across 
jurisdictions. A slightly stronger economic 
outlook since the November Statement has 
put upward pressure on short‑term yields. 
This has been largest in Australia, Japan and 
New Zealand, with smaller increases across 
other jurisdictions.
Longer‑term bond yields have increased 
in most of our trading partners since the 
November Statement. This is most notable 
in Japan, where Prime Minister Takaichi’s 
proposal for increased fiscal spending 
and a general election in early February 
heightened concerns for Japan’s debt 
sustainability and inflation outlook. Changes 
elsewhere have been more moderate as 
term premia, which reflect the additional 
compensation demanded by investors for 
holding long‑term assets, have continued 
to increase. 
Policy uncertainty and changes in near‑term 
monetary policy expectations have 
driven moves in currency markets. The 
US dollar index is down 2.75 percent since 
the November Statement (figure 3.4). This 
reflects a similar dynamic that contributed 
to the US dollar depreciating after tariffs 
were announced in early April 2025, when 
investors became more cautious about their 
exposure to US dollars.  
Figure 3.3
Policy rate expectations
Source: Bloomberg. 
Figure 3.4
US dollar index and NZ dollar TWI
(nominal)
Source: Bloomberg, RBNZ.


23
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026 
The Japanese yen has also depreciated 
materially and is now around 9 percent 
weaker on a trade-weighted basis than 
in mid‑2025, driven by expectations of 
expansionary fiscal policy amidst already 
high debt levels and inflation. The Australian 
dollar has appreciated significantly due to 
expectations for higher policy rates.
Global equity prices have continued their 
upward trend despite concerns about 
heightened geopolitical risk (figure 3.5). 
The MSCI World Index has increased 
4.5 percent since the November Statement, 
despite some periods of short‑lived 
declines in risk appetite in response to 
recent geopolitical events and AI-related 
uncertainty. Japanese equity prices have 
been particularly strong over this period 
due to expectations for additional fiscal 
stimulus, yen depreciation and rising 
inflation expectations, with the TOPIX 
increasing 15.7 percent since the November 
Statement. Although the US S&P 500 was 
higher over the same time period, prices in 
the technology sector have been volatile 
and have declined since the November 
Statement. These moves have come in 
response to concerns over future corporate 
earnings in AI-exposed companies, and more 
recent fears that software companies could 
be affected by increased AI integration. 
Oil and precious metals prices have 
increased since the November Statement. 
Oil prices have increased 8.1 percent since 
the November Statement amid recent 
tensions in Iran, which raised concerns 
about oil supply. Brent crude oil prices have 
settled to levels broadly comparable with the 
average over 2025. Precious metals prices 
have increased sharply in recent months to 
new record highs. Uncertainty surrounding 
safe‑haven assets in countries including the 
US, euro area, and Japan have contributed to 
higher metals prices over 2025.
Figure 3.5
Global equity prices
(index = 100 on 30 December 2019)
Source: Bloomberg.
Note: Daily closing values of headline equity price indices in local currency terms. Indices 
are S&P/NZX 50 (New Zealand), Euro Stoxx 50 (euro area), S&P 500 (United States), TOPIX 
(Japan), S&P/ASX 200 (Australia), and MSCI World (World).


24
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
Figure 3.6
Financial market participants’ 
expectations for the OCR
Source: Bloomberg.
Note: The blue line shows expectations for the OCR immediately before the November Statement. 
Each data point represents market expectations of the level of the OCR at a given point in the 
future, as measured by overnight indexed swap pricing. 
Domestic financial conditions
3	
For an overview of how interest rate swap rates relate to retail mortgage rates in New Zealand, see Wynands (2024), Transmission 
accomplished? Monetary policy pass‑through to bank funding costs and mortgage rates.
Wholesale interest rates have 
increased
Financial market participants have 
increased their expectations for the level of 
the OCR over 2026 (figure 3.6). This increase 
occurred in the days immediately after the 
November Statement, and after a sequence 
of strong domestic data releases in January. 
Financial market participants expect the OCR 
to increase by around 30 basis points by 
October 2026, and around 40 basis points 
by February 2027.
Swap rates have increased by around 40 
to 60 basis points for tenors of two years 
and further out (figure 3.7). Higher swap 
rates largely reflect increases in financial 
market participants’ expectations for the 
OCR. Higher global interest rates since 
the November Statement – particularly in 
Australia – have also contributed to higher 
domestic interest rates, but to a lesser extent 
than domestic factors. 
Recent longer‑term mortgage fixing 
by households may have resulted in 
higher‑than‑otherwise swap rates since the 
November Statement. In addition to financial 
markets participants’ expectations for the 
OCR, swap rates are likely to have been 
affected by longer-term mortgage-fixing 
behaviour in recent months. This is because 
commercial banks hedge the interest rate 
risk of a fixed‑term mortgage.3 Increased 
demand by commercial banks to hedge 
interest rate risk in the swap market can push 
swap rates higher. This effect can be larger in 
December and January, when liquidity in the 
swap market can be lower than usual. 
Source: Bloomberg.
Figure 3.7
New Zealand interest rate swaps 


25
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026 
A larger share of new mortgage lending 
was fixed for longer terms in December, 
which may have put further upward 
pressure on swap rates. In November, 
almost half of new mortgage lending had 
been set on floating mortgage rates, likely 
reflecting household expectations for 
lower mortgage rates after the November 
Statement (figure 3.8). The share of new 
mortgage lending being fixed for at least 
one year increased from around 40 percent 
in November to around 70 percent in 
December, likely due to households deciding 
to fix for longer terms in anticipation of 
higher interest rates in the future. Market 
participants reported that mortgage hedging 
demand had contributed to higher swap 
rates since the November Statement.
Retail interest rates have 
increased
Higher wholesale interest rates have 
transmitted to retail interest rates. 
Advertised fixed‑term mortgage rates 
have increased by around 35 to 60 basis 
points for terms of two years and longer 
since the November Statement (figure 3.9). 
Term deposit rates for terms of two years 
and longer have increased by around 45 
to 50 basis points over the same period. 
Retail interest rates with tenors of one 
year or shorter have changed by less than 
longer‑term retail interest rates, consistent 
with movements in wholesale interest rates.
Close to 40 percent of fixed mortgage 
lending is estimated to be due to refix in 
the first half of 2026. The share of fixed 
mortgage lending that is being refixed 
each quarter remains elevated by historical 
standards, reflecting mortgage borrowers’ 
recent preference for shorter-term 
mortgage rates. 
Figure 3.9
New Zealand mortgage rates
(terms in years) 
Source: interest.co.nz.
Note: The 6‑month to 3‑year mortgage rates shown are the average of the latest advertised 
fixed‑term rates on offer from ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac for mortgages with a loan‑to 
value ratio of less than 80 percent. The 4‑ and 5‑year mortgage rates are the average of the 
latest advertised fixed‑term rates on offer from ASB, BNZ, and Westpac.
Figure 3.8
Proportion of new mortgage 
lending volume by term
Source: RBNZ.


26
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
Figure 3.10
New Zealand dollar trade‑weighted index
(nominal)
Source: RBNZ.
The average mortgage yield on residential 
mortgage loans declined to 5.1 percent in 
December 2025, from a peak of around 
6.4 percent in October 2024. We estimate 
that the average mortgage yield may fall 
slightly further, despite recent increases in 
advertised mortgage rates. This is because 
the average mortgage holder is still estimated 
to be moving onto lower interest rates.
The exchange rate has 
appreciated
The New Zealand dollar trade-weighted 
index (TWI) has appreciated by 4.2 percent 
since the November Statement (figure 3.10). 
The appreciation partly reflects changes 
in interest rate differentials between 
New Zealand and our trading partners. 
New Zealand interest rates, such as the 
two‑year swap rate, have increased by more 
than equivalent interest rates in many of 
our trading partners since the November 
Statement. Recent weakness in the US dollar 
has put further upward pressure on the New 
Zealand dollar TWI. The US dollar, along with 
currencies closely linked to it, specifically the 
Chinese yuan, the Hong Kong dollar, and the 
Vietnamese dong, accounts for 40 percent of 
New Zealand’s TWI basket.


27
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026 
Chapter 
04
Special topics
Waimarino. Photo: John Knowles


28
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
Chapter 4. 
Special topics 
Before the publication of each Statement, Reserve Bank staff 
provide analyses of some topical issues to the Monetary Policy 
Committee. 
A topic for the February Statement was recent developments in inflation and the 
outlook for key drivers.  
Special topics in the past 12 months
Topic
Date/publication
How are high commodity prices affecting the 
New Zealand economy?
November 2025 Statement (Chapter 4)
A closer look at our measures of labour market 
spare capacity
November 2025 Statement (Chapter 4)
Household sector developments and outlook
August 2025 Statement (Chapter 4)
Assessing developments in inflation expectations
August 2025 Statement (Chapter 4)
How does uncertainty affect the New Zealand economy?
May 2025 Statement (Chapter 4)
The transmission of higher global tariffs to the 
New Zealand economy
May 2025 Statement (Chapter 4)
The implications of global tariffs for the 
New Zealand economy
February 2025 Statement (Chapter 4)
Outlook for some of New Zealand’s key 
commodity exports
February 2025 Statement (Chapter 4)


29
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
Recent developments in inflation and the outlook 
for key drivers
Summary
•	 Annual headline inflation decreased 
steadily from its 2022 peak but began 
to increase again in 2025, reaching 
3.1 percent in the December 2025 
quarter. The earlier decline reflected 
a combination of easing non‑tradables 
inflation and very weak tradables inflation. 
The recent increase reflects stronger 
tradables inflation and a slowing in the 
decline of non‑tradables inflation. 
•	 Annual tradables inflation increased 
from historically low levels in 2024 
to elevated levels over 2025. This 
increase was accounted for by several 
factors, including higher prices for food, 
international travel and accommodation, 
stabilising petrol prices following earlier 
declines, and a depreciation of the 
New Zealand dollar exchange rate. We 
forecast annual tradables inflation to 
decline to around its long‑run trend of 
about 1 percent by mid‑2027.
•	 Annual non‑tradables inflation 
continued to decrease over 2025 but 
remains elevated due to historically high 
administered price inflation. We expect 
that annual non-tradables inflation will 
decline to around 3 percent by late 2026.
•	 We expect spare capacity to reduce 
inflationary pressure. Our central 
projections assume that price‑setting 
behaviour continues to adapt to 
a low‑inflation environment and 
administered price inflation declines. If 
any of these evolve differently to what we 
assume, this would result in either higher 
or lower non‑tradables inflation than our 
forecast.
•	 Our central projections assume that 
the New Zealand dollar exchange rate 
remains unchanged and that import 
price inflation is low. There are risks in 
both directions to these assumptions, 
which would result in higher or lower 
tradables inflation than we assume.
Recent inflation developments 
Annual headline inflation declined from 
its peak in 2022 to around the target 
mid‑point by late 2024 (figure 4.1). 
While headline inflation evolved broadly 
as we expected, non‑tradables inflation 
declined more slowly than anticipated. 
The slower decline in non‑tradables inflation 
is consistent with spare capacity in the 
economy taking longer to emerge than 
assumed. During this time, tradables inflation 
fell sharply to historically low levels, partly 
accounted for by declines in fuel prices. 
Annual non‑tradables inflation continued 
to decline in 2025, albeit more gradually 
than we had initially expected. Significant 
spare capacity and price‑setting behaviour 
adjusting to a low‑inflation environment 
continued to reduce inflationary pressure. 
However, the decline was slower than 
expected, partly due to historically 
high inflation in administered prices.  
Administered prices refers to prices set 
or heavily influenced by central or local 
government. 
Figure 4.1
Inflation components 
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI 
inflation over the medium term.


30
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
Administered price inflation increased only 
slowly during the high‑inflation period from 
2021 to 2022, but then increased rapidly. 
This increase added significant upward 
pressure to non‑tradables inflation over late 
2024 and 2025. While some movements 
in administered prices are related to 
macroeconomic conditions, for instance 
increasing labour costs, many are not. 
Administered price changes are relatively 
less sensitive to monetary policy, because 
prices often reflect policy decisions rather 
than decisions by firms. Administered price 
changes may also reflect demand conditions 
and cost pressures in the economy, but 
often respond with a longer lag than prices 
set by firms.  
Annual tradables inflation increased 
from very low to elevated levels over 
2025. Increasing tradables inflation 
reflected several factors, including higher 
food prices, increasing overseas travel 
and accommodation costs, stabilising 
petrol prices following earlier declines, 
and a depreciation in the New Zealand 
dollar exchange rate. Monetary policy in 
New Zealand has less influence on tradables 
inflation, as tradables goods and services are 
more heavily affected by global conditions. 
While headline inflation is above the 1 to 
3 percent target range, all measures of 
core inflation have declined to be within 
the target range. To get a broader picture 
of underlying inflationary pressure, the 
Reserve Bank looks at a suite of core inflation 
measures, which excludes the impact of 
more volatile price movements and one‑off 
price shifts. On average, core inflation 
measures have remained broadly flat at 
around 2.4 percent over 2025 (figure 4.2).
The outlook for key drivers 
of inflation
We expect headline inflation to return to 
around the 2 percent target mid‑point 
by early 2027 as non‑tradables inflation 
returns to around 3 percent and tradables 
inflation declines to around 1 percent. 
Underlying drivers for non‑tradables and 
tradables inflation suggest that headline 
inflation will decline. However, this outlook 
depends on several key assumptions. If key 
drivers of inflation evolve differently to what 
we currently assume, this would result in a 
different outlook for inflation. Monetary policy 
may need to adjust accordingly to ensure we 
meet our inflation target.
Significant spare capacity in the economy is 
assumed to continue to reduce inflation. A 
negative output gap emerged from the middle 
of 2024, as economic activity contracted. The 
economy has been operating with significant 
spare capacity since then, which has reduced 
inflation, particularly for non‑tradables goods 
and services. 
Figure 4.2
Measures of core inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI 
inflation over the medium term.


31
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
We estimate that the output gap was 
around ‑1.5 percent of potential, seasonally 
adjusted GDP in the December 2025 
quarter. We use a suite of indicators to 
assess the current output gap, but there is 
always significant uncertainty around this 
assumption (figure 4.3). We forecast the 
output gap to close over the medium term 
as lower interest rates continue to support 
stronger demand.
Given its key role in driving inflation, the 
pace at which the output gap closes is a 
key risk to the inflation outlook. If economic 
growth accelerates more quickly than we 
assume, this could place additional upward 
pressure on non‑tradables inflation. However, 
if growth isn’t as strong as  we expect and 
spare capacity persists, this could result in 
lower non‑tradables inflation and headline 
inflation declining below the 2 percent target 
mid‑point.
The experience of high inflation over 
2021 to 2023 is resulting in persistent 
inflationary pressure, but we assume 
that this will fade over the medium term. 
Price‑setting behaviour describes how 
firms adjust their prices based on past 
and expected future inflation.4 We monitor 
a range of modelled and survey‑based 
measures of price‑setting behaviour to inform 
our judgements and assess risks to inflation 
persistence (see chapter 4.1 in the August 
2024 Statement). Our projections assume 
that price‑setting behaviour is adapting to a 
low inflation environment, and that this will 
continue to reduce inflationary pressure over 
the medium term (figure 4.4). 
The range of measures we monitor 
suggest there is a risk of price‑setting 
behaviour adjusting down either more 
quickly or more slowly than we assume. 
Higher non‑tradables inflation than we had 
expected over 2025 could be a sign that 
price‑setting behaviour is adapting more 
slowly than we have assumed. If this is the 
case, non‑tradables inflation may remain 
high for longer than we anticipate, resulting 
in headline inflation taking longer to return to 
the 2 percent target mid‑point.
4	
See Kendall and Sing (2025), How well do different measures of price-setting behaviour explain non-tradables inflation?
Figure 4.4
Price‑setting behaviour and range of measures
(standardised over history)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: Measures have been standardised over history to make them comparable given 
differences in historical averages and degrees of variability between measures. The vertical 
axis shows how many standard deviations away from its historical average each measure 
is, where zero indicates the historical average. Survey measures include household 
expectations for inflation 1 year ahead and businesses’ 1- and 2-year-ahead inflation 
expectations. Modelled measures include the measure from NZSIM, more flexible variations 
of the NZSIM measure that are more sensitive to inflation data, and a measure based on 
the simple average of headline inflation over the past 3 years. Projections are based on 
estimated historical relationships with headline inflation, and conditional on our current 
projection for inflation.
Figure 4.3
Output gap and indicator suite
(share of potential, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, NZIER, MBIE, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area shows the range of indicators in the suite. The vertical line shows 
the final quarter of published GDP data.


32
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
Administered price inflation remains high 
relative to its historical average (figure 4.5). 
When inflation increased sharply over 2021 
to 2022, administered price inflation was 
slower to rise than other non‑tradables 
components. However, administered price 
inflation then increased quickly over 2023 
and 2024, and remained historically high in 
2025, contributing to a slower reduction in 
the overall rate of non‑tradables inflation. 
Our projections assume that administered 
price inflation will decline over time. Inflation 
in some administered price components is 
likely to ease in 2026, for instance: 
•	 electricity, as annual regulated lines charge 
increases are smaller than in 2025; 
•	 university fees, which showed a large 
measured price increase in the March 
2025 quarter due to a policy change 
from first-year to final-year free tertiary 
education, which is not repeated and 
expected to partially reverse; and
•	 vehicle licensing fees, which increased in 
the March 2025 quarter and March 2026 
quarter and are not currently scheduled to 
increase further.5
However, we are uncertain about the extent 
of decline in inflation in these categories, 
and about the likely trends in inflation for 
other administered prices. Higher than 
expected inflation in administered prices 
remains a key risk. For example, while local 
council rates increases slowed slightly in 
2025, they remain historically elevated 
amidst ongoing local council funding 
pressures. 
We assume that the New Zealand dollar 
exchange rate remains unchanged over 
the projection. The New Zealand dollar 
exchange rate is a key determinant of 
tradables inflation, influencing the price we 
pay for imported goods and services. The 
New Zealand dollar depreciated over 2025, 
contributing to higher import costs, but has 
appreciated since the beginning of the year. 
5	
Note that due to a measurement error, Stats NZ incorporated the price effect of the March 2025 quarter increase in vehicle licensing fees in 
the June 2025 quarter CPI.
While we assume that the New Zealand 
dollar exchange rate remains unchanged 
over the projection period, it is likely that 
the exchange rate will move over time, 
contributing to variations in tradables inflation 
relative to our forecasts. A range of global 
and domestic risks could result in a higher or 
lower New Zealand dollar (see chapter 3).
We assume that the cost of New Zealand’s 
imports evolves in line with historical 
trends, contributing to low tradables 
inflation. Our projections assume that 
New Zealand’s import prices increase by 
about 1 percent per year in foreign currency 
terms, around their historical average. This 
follows several years of small declines 
in import prices, after a sharp increase 
during the COVID‑19 pandemic. Import 
prices could fall further if trade is redirected 
and New Zealand receives cheaper 
imports from economies facing higher US 
tariffs (see chapter 4.2 of the May 2025 
Statement). Conversely, deglobalisation or 
trade barriers could result in higher import 
prices, due to higher production costs for 
firms using tariffed inputs and less efficient 
supply chains.
Figure 4.5
Contributions to administered price inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 


33
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
Chapter 
05
Economic 
projections
Matiu Island. Photo: Trent Lockyer


Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
34
Chapter 5.
Economic projections
This chapter summarises the central economic projections 
that the MPC considered when making their policy assessment. 
The projections were finalised on 12 February 2026.
Inflation is slightly above the target range, 
but spare capacity in the economy is 
expected to continue to put downward 
pressure on inflation. Annual CPI inflation 
was 3.1 percent in the December 2025 
quarter due to both high tradables inflation 
and administered price inflation, both of 
which are less responsive to monetary policy. 
The average of core inflation measures was 
2.4 percent and has declined slightly over 
the past year.
We project annual CPI inflation to decrease 
to near the 2 percent target mid‑point in 
the March 2027 quarter. Annual tradables 
inflation is projected to decline and annual 
non‑tradables inflation is projected to 
decrease as spare capacity reduces 
inflationary pressure in the economy, 
price‑setting behaviour adapts to a 
low‑inflation environment, and administered 
price inflation normalises. 
A recovery in economic activity has begun, 
and this is expected to reduce spare 
capacity over the next two years. The output 
gap is assumed to have been ‑1.5 percent of 
potential GDP in the December 2025 quarter. 
Timely indicators suggest that economic 
growth is now above potential growth, and 
we project the output gap to gradually close 
as past monetary easing continues to pass 
through to stronger demand.
The New Zealand labour market has 
remained weak. The unemployment rate 
increased to 5.4 percent in the December 
2025 quarter. This was accounted for by 
more people entering the labour force. 
The employment and participation rates 
increased, which indicates an increase in 
both labour demand and labour supply. 
Same‑job wage growth has decreased to 
a level consistent with headline inflation 
near the target mid‑point. Spare capacity 
in the labour market is reducing inflationary 
pressure. We expect the unemployment rate 
to decrease over the projection in line with 
the recovering output gap.
This projection assumes the OCR remains 
at 2.25 percent until about late 2026, 
before gradually increasing towards 
3 percent, consistent with our suite of 
indicators of the long‑term nominal 
neutral OCR.
These projections represent what we 
believe to be the most likely path for 
the economy, conditional on a range of 
assumptions. However, it is only one of many 
possible paths. Global developments and the 
evolution of the domestic economy are likely 
to be different to our assumptions.


35
Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
Table 5.1 
Key projection assumptions
Economic growth and capacity pressure
Production
•	 GDP increased 1.1 percent in the September 2025 quarter. Timely indicators suggest 
growth continued in the December 2025 quarter, especially in manufacturing and 
construction. Higher activity is consistent with the decreases in interest rates since 
August 2024.
•	 We assume that GDP growth was 0.5 percent in the December 2025 quarter and 
will be 1.1 percent in the March 2026 quarter. Although the headline GDP growth 
measure is seasonally adjusted, it currently appears to have a remaining predictable 
seasonal pattern. Our March 2026 quarter assumption accounts for our estimate 
that residual seasonality will add 0.4 percentage points to Stats NZ’s published 
numbers, and represents underlying growth of 0.7 percent. This residual seasonality 
is assumed to reverse in the June 2026 quarter, and does not affect the medium 
term of the projection. We have not accounted for residual seasonality in quarters 
after June 2026.
•	 GDP is assumed to be increasing more quickly than potential GDP, supported by 
lower real interest rates, reduced uncertainty levels compared to mid-2025, and the 
lagged effect of high export revenue (figure 5.5).
Domestic 
capacity 
pressures
•	 The output gap is assumed to have been ‑1.5 percent of potential GDP in the 
December 2025 quarter. This is 0.1 percentage points less negative than at the 
November Statement.
•	 The output gap is assumed to be narrowing in response to the lagged effect of 
reductions in real interest rates, reduced uncertainty, and relatively high export 
prices over the past 18 months. We assume the output gap will increase to 
‑0.8 percent at the end of 2026, and -0.4 percent at the end of 2027.
Consumption
•	 Consumption growth continues to increase and contribute to narrowing the output 
gap. However, this growth remains modest as the population is only increasing 
gradually. Low consumption growth is consistent with low house price growth 
constraining household net wealth, and low real household income growth.
•	 Over the medium term, consumption is assumed to strengthen, supported by lower 
interest rates, stabilising real wealth, and increasing real incomes. The household 
savings rate has been positive in the past year, which is consistent with a negative 
output gap and elevated unemployment.
•	 House price growth is assumed to remain low in the near term due to a high stock 
of houses available for sale and low price momentum. Although house prices have 
been roughly unchanged in nominal terms for three years, they are still high relative 
to our estimates of sustainable house prices. We project our suite of sustainable 
house price indicators consistent with our forecasts for household income growth 
and population growth (figure 5.4). We assume that house prices will converge 
toward their sustainable level in the medium term, which results in a projection of 
modest real house price growth.
Business 
investment
•	 Business investment is projected to increase over the medium term, responding to 
lower interest rates and a narrowing negative output gap. Reduced spare capacity 
increases the incentives for firms to invest in capital.
•	 Timely indicators show both investment intentions and general business sentiment 
improved over the December 2025 quarter.
•	 The capital review is assumed to result in slightly higher business investment over 
the long term. See more information on the bank capital requirements below. The 
Investment Boost policy is also assumed to support business investment over the 
projection.


Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
36
Residential 
investment
•	 Residential investment has decreased significantly over the past three years, but 
recent increases in new dwelling consents suggest that a recovery has begun.
•	 Residential investment is projected to increase over the medium term, as lower 
interest rates strengthen developer balance sheets, support housing demand, and 
increase the incentive to build.
Government
•	 Government spending is assumed to be consistent with fiscal forecasts in the 
Half Year Economic and Fiscal Update 2025, updated for new September 2025 
quarter GDP data. 
•	 Real government consumption is projected to decline as a percentage of potential 
GDP over the medium term.
Export and 
import 
volumes
•	 Export volumes are projected to grow quickly in the near term due to greater 
services exports, such as tourism. Over the medium term, we assume export 
volumes grow at a similar rate to potential GDP.
•	 Import volumes are assumed to evolve in line with other components of GDP over 
the medium term.
Bank capital 
requirements
•	 In December 2025, the Reserve Bank announced it would reduce banks’ 
requirements for Common Equity Tier 1 capital relative to the settings in the 2019 
capital review. We use estimates of changes to banks’ cost of funding as the basis 
for the assumed effect in this projection.
•	 All else equal, the new bank capital requirements are expected to decrease 
bank lending rates by about 8 basis points compared to settings prior to the 
announcement.
•	 We assume lower bank lending spreads lead to an increase in long‑term GDP of 
8 basis points. We implemented this in our forecast via an increase in business 
investment, which leads to a larger capital stock and higher potential GDP in the 
long term.
Global factors
Global interest 
rates and 
exchange rate
•	 Expectations for global policy interest rates are about 15 basis points higher than our 
November Statement assumption. This is mostly accounted for by higher interest rate 
expectations in Australia following higher‑than‑expected CPI inflation (see chapter 3). 
All else equal, higher global interest rates would put downward pressure on the 
New Zealand dollar, which adds to inflationary pressure in New Zealand.
•	 This projection assumes the New Zealand dollar TWI is about 3 percent higher 
than the November Statement assumption (68 vs 66 in the November Statement). 
Despite higher global interest rates, the New Zealand dollar TWI appreciated. 
This appreciation is broadly consistent with higher New Zealand interest rates and 
economic activity.
Export prices
•	 Export prices are expected to decrease toward their long‑term average level in real 
foreign currency terms. Much of this decrease has already been observed in dairy 
auctions to date, but will take time to flow through to the national accounts measure 
of export prices. Prices for meat exports are expected to remain high, and prices for 
other export categories are assumed to increase in line with global inflation in the 
medium term.
Import prices
•	 Prices for imports to New Zealand have continued to decrease relative to global CPI. 
We assume import prices will increase broadly in line with historical average rates 
over the medium term.


37
Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
Labour market
Employment 
and wages 
•	 The unemployment rate increased to 5.4 percent in the December 2025 quarter. 
This was accounted for by more people entering the labour force. The employment 
and participation rates along with total hours worked increased, which indicates an 
increase in both labour demand and labour supply.
•	 Same‑job wage growth has decreased to a level consistent with headline inflation 
near the target mid‑point. 
•	 Spare capacity in the labour market is currently contributing disinflationary pressure. 
We expect the unemployment rate to decrease over the projection in line with the 
recovering output gap.
Migration
•	 Net working‑age immigration has been gradually increasing over the past year, as 
New Zealand’s labour market has begun to stabilise. We assume a gradual increase 
in net working‑age immigration over the medium term, to an annual rate of about 
30,000 people, as the labour market recovers.
Inflation 
Headline CPI 
inflation
•	 Annual CPI inflation is forecast to decrease to 2.8 percent in the March 2026 
quarter, down from 3.1 percent in the December 2025 quarter. In the medium term, 
inflation is projected to decrease as price‑setting behaviour adapts to a low‑inflation 
environment, and as administered price inflation and tradables inflation normalise. 
We project annual CPI inflation to return to near our 2 percent target mid‑point in the 
March 2027 quarter.
•	 The average of core inflation measures has declined slightly to 2.4 percent over 
the past year. We expect these to converge towards our 2 percent target mid‑point 
over time.
Non‑tradables
•	 Annual non‑tradables inflation is forecast to decrease to 3.4 percent in the March 
2026 quarter, down from 3.5 percent in the December 2025 quarter.
•	 We expect non‑tradables inflation to evolve according to a Phillips curve 
relationship, which is primarily a function of the output gap and price‑setting 
behaviour. The negative output gap is putting downward pressure on non‑tradables 
inflation, as price‑setting behaviour continues to adapt to a low‑inflation 
environment.
Tradables
•	 Annual tradables inflation is forecast to decrease to 1.7 percent in the March 2026 
quarter, down from 2.6 percent in the December 2025 quarter. Lower petrol prices, 
easing food price inflation, and the base effect of a high quarterly rate one year earlier 
contribute to the lower near‑term annual tradables forecast.
•	 Relative to the November Statement, tradables inflation is slightly lower from late 2025 
to late 2026 due to the pass‑through of the higher New Zealand dollar exchange rate, 
and slightly lower import prices over recent quarters. We assume a similar end point 
for tradables inflation in line with its long‑term trend.


Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
38
Figure 5.3
Unemployment rate
(unemployed people as a share of the labour force,
seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Charts
Figure 5.1
Inflation components
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Dotted lines show the projections from the November Statement. The 
shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI 
inflation over the medium term.
Figure 5.2
Private sector LCI wage inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 5.4
Real house prices and sustainable indicators
(index)
Source: Cotality, RBNZ estimates.
Note: See Brunton (2021), Measures for assessing the sustainability of house 
prices in New Zealand. The indicator range may be revised from time to time as 
certain assumptions change, such as neutral interest rates. The indicator range has 
been projected in line with our projections for wages and population growth. The 
projection assumes the neutral interest rate remains at its current level.
Figure 5.5
Production GDP growth
(annual average)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 5.6
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


39
Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
 Chapter 
06
Appendices
Tunnel Beach. Photo: Cameron Grubb


40
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
Chapter 6.
Appendices
Appendix 1: Statistical tables
Table 6.1
Key forecast variables
GDP growth 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Annual
Unemployment 
rate
TWI
OCR
2024
Mar
0.2
0.6
4.0
4.4
71.6
5.5
Jun
-0.6
0.4
3.3
4.7
71.4
5.5
Sep
-1.3
0.6
2.2
4.9
70.9
5.4
Dec
0.1
0.5
2.2
5.1
69.5
4.6
2025
Mar
1.1
0.9
2.5
5.1
67.8
4.0
Jun
-1.0
0.5
2.7
5.2
69.1
3.4
Sep
1.1
1.0
3.0
5.3
68.4
3.1
Dec
0.5
0.6
3.1
5.4
66.4
2.5
2026
Mar
1.1
0.6
2.8
5.3
67.8
2.2
Jun
0.5
0.4
2.7
5.2
68.0
2.3
Sep
0.6
0.8
2.5
5.1
68.0
2.3
Dec
0.6
0.4
2.3
5.0
68.0
2.4
2027
Mar
0.7
0.4
2.1
4.9
68.0
2.5
Jun
0.7
0.4
2.0
4.8
68.0
2.6
Sep
0.7
0.8
2.0
4.8
68.0
2.7
Dec
0.7
0.4
2.0
4.7
68.0
2.8
2028
Mar
0.7
0.4
2.0
4.6
68.0
2.9
Jun
0.7
0.4
2.0
4.6
68.0
2.9
Sep
0.7
0.8
2.0
4.5
68.0
3.0
Dec
0.7
0.4
2.0
4.5
68.0
3.0
2029
Mar
0.7
0.5
2.0
4.4
68.0
3.0


41
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
Table 6.2
Measures of inflation and inflation expectations
2024
2025
2026
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Inflation (annual rates)
CPI
3.3
2.2
2.2
2.5
2.7
3.0
3.1
CPI non‑tradables
5.4
4.9
4.5
4.0
3.7
3.5
3.5
CPI tradables
0.3
-1.6
-1.1
0.3
1.2
2.2
2.6
Sectoral factor model estimate 
of core inflation
3.5
3.2
3.0
2.9
2.7
2.7
2.8
CPI trimmed mean (30% measure)
3.8
2.7
2.5
2.2
2.4
2.2
2.5
CPI weighted median
3.5
2.8
2.6
2.2
2.2
2.2
1.7
GDP deflator (expenditure)
3.3
3.4
5.4
4.2
4.1
2.8
Inflation expectations 
Survey of Expectations
Tara‑ā‑Pūkenga (SOE)
1 year ahead
2.7
2.4
2.0
2.1
2.4
2.4
2.4
2.6
2 years ahead
2.3
2.0
2.1
2.1
2.3
2.3
2.3
2.4
5 years ahead
2.3
2.1
2.2
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.2
2.3
10 years ahead
2.2
2.0
2.2
2.1
2.2
2.2
2.2
2.3
Inflation expectations 
RBNZ Business Expectations 
Survey Tara‑ā‑Umanga (BES)
1 year ahead
2.2
2.1
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.4
2.6
2 years ahead
2.2
2.2
2.5
2.5
2.6
2.4
2.6
5 years ahead
2.8
2.8
3.0
3.1
3.2
2.8
2.7
10 years ahead
3.1
3.3
3.7
3.9
3.6
3.6
3.2
Inflation expectations 
RBNZ Household Expectations 
Survey Tara‑ā‑Whare (HES)
1 year ahead
5.3
4.1
4.1
4.9
5.6
6.0
5.5
5.2
2 years ahead
3.6
3.1
3.7
3.9
4.7
4.6
4.3
3.4
5 years ahead
3.0
3.4
3.4
3.6
3.7
4.1
3.8
3.3


42
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
Table 6.3
Measures of labour market conditions	
(seasonally adjusted, changes expressed in annual percent terms, unless specified otherwise)	
2024
2025
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Household Labour Force Survey
Unemployment rate
4.7
4.9
5.1
5.1
5.2
5.3
5.4
Underutilisation rate
11.9
11.7
12.2
12.4
12.8
13.0
13.0
Labour force participation rate
71.6
71.1
70.8
70.7
70.5
70.3
70.5
Employment rate 
(% of working‑age population)
68.3
67.6
67.2
67.1
66.8
66.6
66.7
Employment growth
0.1
-0.6
-1.3
-0.9
-1.3
-0.7
0.2
Average weekly hours worked
33.3
33.3
33.1
33.0
32.7
33.1
33.2
Number unemployed
(thousand people)
143
149
155
156
158
161
165
Number employed 
(million people)
2.91
2.89
2.88
2.88
2.87
2.87
2.89
Labour force (million people)
3.05
3.04
3.04
3.03
3.03
3.03
3.05
Extended labour force
(million people)
3.16
3.14
3.13
3.14
3.14
3.14
3.16
Working‑age population
(million people, age 15+ years)
4.26
4.27
4.29
4.29
4.30
4.31
4.33
Quarterly Employment Survey — QES
Filled jobs growth
-0.2
-1.4
-0.9
-1.8
-1.2
0.2
-0.1
Average hourly earnings growth 
(private sector, ordinary time)
3.9
3.2
4.0
3.9
4.6
4.1
3.5
Other data sources
Labour cost index growth, adjusted 
(private sector, ordinary and overtime)
3.6
3.3
3.0
2.6
2.3
2.1
2.0
Labour cost index growth, unadjusted
(private sector, ordinary time)
4.8
4.5
3.9
3.7
3.5
3.3
3.3
Estimated net working‑age 
immigration (thousands, quarterly)
5.1
-0.2
-0.8
0.2
2.7
1.3
2.6
Change in all vacancies index* 
-33.4
-31.4
-27.2
-21.7
-7.6
3.5
6.4
Note: The all vacancies index is produced by MBIE as part of the monthly Jobs Online report, which shows changes in job vacancies advertised 
by businesses on internet job boards. The unadjusted labour cost index (LCI) is an analytical index that reflects quality change in addition to price 
change (whereas the official LCI measures price changes only). For definitions of underutilisation, the extended labour force, and related concepts, 
see Statistics New Zealand (2016), Introducing underutilisation in the labour market. 
* The all vacancies index is a non‑seasonally adjusted series.


43
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
Table 6.4
Composition of real GDP growth
(annual average percent change, seasonally adjusted, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
Final consumption 
expenditure
Private
4.5
2.5
0.2
6.0
3.2
1.1
0.0
1.8
2.3
3.2
3.6
Public authority
3.1
5.5
7.1
8.0
2.6
1.1
-1.3
2.3
0.3
-0.4
-0.3
Total
4.2
3.2
1.8
6.5
3.1
1.1
-0.3
1.9
1.8
2.3
2.7
Gross fixed 
capital formation
Residential
0.1
2.7
2.1
3.0
-1.3
-4.8
-12.6
0.9
10.7
8.0
6.0
Other
7.0
3.0
-2.2
10.5
5.3
0.1
-2.8
1.3
4.9
5.4
5.0
Total
5.2
2.9
-1.2
8.6
3.7
-1.1
-4.9
1.2
6.0
6.0
5.3
Final domestic 
expenditure
4.4
3.1
1.1
7.0
3.2
0.6
-1.4
1.8
2.8
3.2
3.3
Stockbuilding*
-0.2
-0.2
-0.3
0.6
0.3
-1.4
0.4
0.1
0.4
0.0
0.0
Gross national 
expenditure
4.3
2.8
-0.1
8.1
3.8
-0.8
-1.0
1.9
3.2
3.2
3.3
Exports of goods 
and services
3.3
0.2
-17.9
2.5
5.6
8.3
3.3
3.2
2.8
1.8
2.1
Imports of goods 
and services
4.7
1.3
-15.7
16.8
4.3
-1.2
1.4
4.4
3.9
3.7
3.8
Expenditure on GDP
3.8
2.5
0.2
4.4
4.0
1.5
-0.7
1.4
2.8
2.7
2.8
GDP (production)
3.3
2.3
-0.3
4.3
3.3
1.8
-0.8
0.9
2.8
2.8
2.9
GDP (production, 
March qtr to March qtr)
3.4
0.8
4.7
0.3
3.1
1.6
-0.7
1.7
2.4
2.9
2.9
* Percentage point contribution to the growth rate of GDP.


44
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
Table 6.5
Summary of economic projections
(annual percent change, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
2029
Price measures
CPI 
1.5
2.5
1.5
6.9
6.7
4.0
2.5
2.8
2.1
2.0
2.0
Labour costs
2.0
2.4
1.6
3.1
4.5
3.8
2.6
1.9
2.0
2.1
2.1
Export prices
(in New Zealand dollars) 
1.3
7.0
-6.0
20.7
1.0
-2.2
10.9
0.1
-0.1
2.2
2.3
Import prices
(in New Zealand dollars) 
4.1
2.3
-2.9
18.7
8.0
-4.3
6.7
-3.7
0.4
1.0
1.4
Monetary conditions
OCR (year average)
1.8
1.2
0.3
0.5
3.1
5.5
4.9
2.8
2.4
2.7
3.0
TWI (year average)
73.4
71.7
72.4
74.0
71.2
71.0
69.9
67.9
68.0
68.0
68.0
Output
GDP (production, annual 
average % change)
3.3
2.3
-0.3
4.3
3.3
1.8
-0.8
0.9
2.8
2.8
2.9
Potential output (annual 
average % change)
3.1
2.5
-0.1
1.9
3.5
2.8
1.6
1.5
2.0
2.4
2.5
Output gap (% of potential 
GDP, year average)
0.6
0.4
0.1
2.6
2.5
1.5
-1.0
-1.5
-0.8
-0.5
-0.1
Labour market
Total employment 
(seasonally adjusted)
1.3
2.4
0.0
2.3
2.9
0.9
-0.9
0.7
2.4
2.1
2.0
Unemployment rate (March 
qtr, seasonally adjusted)
4.2
4.2
4.6
3.3
3.5
4.4
5.1
5.3
4.9
4.6
4.4
Trend labour productivity 
0.7
0.9
1.0
0.8
0.7
0.6
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.5
0.6
Key balances
Current account balance 
(% of GDP)
-3.9
-2.4
-2.5
-6.5
-8.3
-5.7
-4.3
-3.1
-3.4
-3.6
-3.8
Terms of trade
(SNA measure, annual 
average % change)
-2.1
2.1
-0.5
0.4
-5.0
-0.9
3.4
5.4
-0.5
0.9
1.1
Household saving rate
(% of disposable income)
-1.1
1.3
7.5
2.5
-2.2
1.0
2.3
3.7
1.7
-0.4
World economy
Trading‑partner GDP 
(annual average % change)
3.5
1.7
-0.3
6.3
3.1
3.2
3.0
3.0
2.9
2.7
2.7
Trading‑partner CPI 
(TWI‑weighted)
1.4
2.4
0.8
4.1
4.7
2.2
1.8
2.0
2.0
2.0
2.0


45
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
Appendix 2: Chart pack
Figure 6.1
Composition of CPI inflation
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 6.2
Output gap and output gap indicators
(share of potential)
Source: NZIER, MBIE, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The output gap indicators based on information from labour market surveys 
are shown separately from the other indicators. For each group of indicators, the 
shaded area shows the range of values and the line shows the mean value. The 
output gap estimate in the final quarter is based on our near‑term GDP estimate.
Figure 6.3
Unemployment and underutilisation rates
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 6.4
OCR and nominal neutral OCR indicator suite
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area indicates the range between the maximum and minimum 
values from our suite of long‑run nominal neutral OCR indicators. See Castaing et al. 
(2024), Estimates of New Zealand’s nominal neutral interest rate.
Figure 6.5
GDP and potential GDP
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.6
Measures of core inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for 
annual CPI inflation over the medium term.


46
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. February 2026
Figure 6.7
Inflation expectations
(annual, years ahead) 
Source: RBNZ Survey of Expectations.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for 
annual CPI inflation over the medium term.
Figure 6.9
House price inflation
(annual) 
Source: REINZ.
Source: Stats NZ, Global Dairy Trade, Bloomberg, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.12
Terms of trade, dairy, and oil price indices
(index = 100 in the September 2008 quarter, quarterly average)
Figure 6.10
Mortgage interest rates
Source: interest.co.nz, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The rates shown for the fixed terms are the average of the advertised 
rates from ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac, shown as weekly data. The floating 
rate represents the monthly yield on floating housing debt from the RBNZ 
Income Statement survey.
Figure 6.8
Private sector wage growth
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 6.11
New Zealand dollar exchange rates
(monthly average) 
Source: NZFMA, RBNZ.
