BANK: RBNZ
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: Monetary Policy Statement November 2025
DATE: 25/11/2026
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/monetary-policy-statements/2025/nov-261125/monetary-policy-statement-november-2025.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Monetary Policy
Statement. 
November 2025
B.33


ii
Policy assessment. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Policy assessment.
OCR lowered to 2.25%
Annual consumers price inflation increased to 
3 percent in the September quarter. However, with 
spare capacity in the economy, inflation is expected 
to fall to around 2 percent by mid-2026. 
Economic activity was weak over mid-2025 but is 
picking up. Lower interest rates are encouraging 
household spending, and the labour market 
is stabilising. The exchange rate has fallen, 
supporting exporters’ incomes. 
Global economic growth has benefited from 
strong AI-related investment but is expected to 
slow in 2026 as trade barriers weigh on activity. 
Risks to the inflation outlook are balanced. 
Greater caution on the part of households 
and businesses could slow the pace of 
New Zealand’s economic recovery. Alternatively, 
the recovery could be faster and stronger than 
expected if domestic demand proves more 
responsive to lower interest rates. 
The Committee voted to reduce the OCR by  
25 basis points to 2.25 percent. Future moves 
in the OCR will depend on how the outlook for 
medium-term inflation and the economy evolve.
Christian Hawkesby 
Governor 
Figure i.1
Official Cash Rate (OCR)
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


iii
Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Report and supporting notes published at:
www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary‑policy/monetary‑policy‑statement
Subscribe online: www.rbnz.govt.nz/email‑updates
Copyright © 2025 Reserve Bank of New Zealand
This report is published pursuant to section 129
of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 2021. 
ISSN 1770‑4829
Thank you to RBNZ staff for photography in this report. 
Cover: Clifton County Cricket Club, Te Awanga – Christian Hawkesby
Monetary Policy Framework
The Monetary Policy Committee operates and makes 
decisions under the Monetary Policy Framework that 
comprises the following key components:
•	 the Remit;
•	 the Charter;
•	 the Code of Conduct; and
•	 the monetary policy strategy.
The corresponding documents to these components 
and additional information can be accessed on our 
website under the Monetary Policy Framework.


1
Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
The projections were finalised on 20 November 2025. The Official Cash Rate (OCR) 
projection incorporates an outlook for monetary policy that is consistent with the MPC’s 
monetary policy assessment, which was finalised on 26 November 2025. 
Contents
Policy assessment	
ii
1.	
Summary record of meeting	
2
2.	 Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook	
6
	
Box A: Summary of recent business visits	
9
3.	 Global economy and financial markets	
19
4.	 Special topics	
28
	
4.1	 	How are high commodity prices affecting the New Zealand economy?	
30
	
4.2		A closer look at our measures of labour market spare capacity	
34
5.	 Economic projections	
39
	
Box B: Updates to our suite of neutral interest rate indicators	
44
6.	 Appendices	
46
	
Appendix 1: Statistical tables 	
47
	
Appendix 2: Chart pack 	
52
Monetary Policy Statement.
November 2025


Mangawhai. Photo: Paul Conway
Summary 
record of 
meeting
Chapter 
01


3
Chapter 1. Summary record of meeting. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Chapter 1. 
Summary record of meeting
Annual consumers price inflation increased to 3 percent in the September 
quarter, the top of the Monetary Policy Committee’s 1 to 3 percent target 
band. Significant spare capacity remains in the economy and inflation is 
expected to fall to around 2 percent by mid-2026. The significant reduction 
in the OCR since August 2024 is expected to support a recovery in 
economic activity.
Annual inflation is at the top of the target 
band but expected to moderate
The Committee noted that both core and 
non‑tradables inflation have continued to decline. 
Annual tradables inflation increased in September 
due to petrol prices and high food price inflation 
but is expected to decline over the medium term. 
Annual headline CPI inflation increased due to 
higher tradables inflation along with high inflation in 
household energy costs and local council rates. As 
these dissipate, this will support headline CPI inflation 
returning to near the 2 percent mid-point of the target 
range in mid-2026.
Household inflation expectations have fallen but 
remain high relative to recent history. The inflation 
expectations of professional forecasters and business 
leaders have remained stable at slightly above the 
2 percent target midpoint. 
The economic recovery stalled 
in the June quarter
Committee members considered how US tariff 
policy announcements and broader geoeconomic 
uncertainty disrupted New Zealand’s nascent 
economic recovery. Greater uncertainty likely led to 
increased precautionary behaviour by households 
and businesses, dampening consumption and  
investment. 
However, while measured GDP declined by 
0.9 percent in the June quarter, this likely overstates 
the weakness in the economy through this period. 
The Committee noted that an unusually large 
seasonal balancing item contributed to the weakness 
in the headline figure. This is expected to be reversed 
over the next few data releases. 
Some industry-specific factors may also have 
constrained supply. For example, high milk prices and 
unfavourable weather conditions likely contributed to 
higher livestock retention and lower meat production 
in the first half of 2025. Limited access to domestic 
energy sources and higher energy prices are likely to 
have weighed on manufacturing more generally. 
Significant spare capacity remains
The Committee discussed the balance between 
supply capacity and demand. In addition to short-run 
factors, the economy’s medium-term supply capacity 
has been reduced by weak growth in productivity and 
the working age population. Estimates suggest that 
annual potential output growth is currently around 
1.5 percent. 
Weak economic activity has resulted in significant 
spare capacity opening in the economy since 
mid-2024. Unemployment and measures of 
labour underutilisation have increased, and firms 
are reporting that it is now relatively easy to find 
workers. While job losses are not high compared to 
past economic downturns, job vacancies and job 
transitions have been low, so it has been relatively 
difficult for unemployed people to transition back 
to work.
Economic conditions have been variable across 
different sectors and regions of the economy. 
High prices for New Zealand’s commodity exports 
have lifted incomes in the rural economy. This has 
supported economic activity in rural areas, although 
debt reduction by farmers has meant measures of 
on‑farm investment have not yet increased to the 
extent seen in previous commodity price cycles. The 
level of economic activity remains low in industries 
reliant on domestic demand. 


4
Chapter 1. Summary record of meeting. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Financial conditions have eased and 
the financial system remains stable
The Committee discussed the easing in domestic 
financial conditions that has occurred. Wholesale 
interest rates have declined and the New Zealand 
dollar Trade Weighted Index has depreciated since 
August. Cuts to the OCR have reduced borrowing 
costs and mortgage rates. The average yield on 
mortgages has fallen to 5.4 percent. With close to 
40 percent of fixed rate mortgages due to reprice 
over the December and March quarters, the 
average mortgage yield is expected to fall further to 
4.7 percent by September 2026 based on current 
market pricing. 
Measures of domestic financial stress have eased 
as lower interest rates reduce debt servicing 
pressures. Early arrears, which provide an early 
indicator of impaired lending, have declined. 
Non‑performing housing loans have also declined, 
and banks expect further reductions in housing 
and commercial property impairments over 2026. 
Non-performing loans in the business sector remain 
elevated, although at lower levels than in previous 
downturns.  
Economic activity is recovering
Committee members discussed an improvement 
in near-term indicators of economic activity from 
their lows in the June quarter, suggesting a return 
to modest GDP growth in the September quarter. 
Feedback from recent business visits also suggests 
that, while activity remains weak, demand has 
stabilised. 
The Committee noted that there are also some early 
signs of stabilisation in labour demand, with job 
vacancies and total hours worked increasing in the 
September quarter. This is expected to broaden into 
a wider improvement in labour market conditions 
over coming quarters, which will support household 
confidence and spending. 
Relative weakness in the labour market over the 
past two years has contributed to higher outward 
migration from New Zealand, particularly to 
Australia. Regional disparities in housing and labour 
markets have also likely encouraged higher internal 
migration. Outward migration is expected to reduce 
as the New Zealand economy and labour market 
recovers, with net migration expected to increase 
towards long-run trends.
Future growth in house prices
is expected to be moderate
Members discussed that house prices, in aggregate, 
have remained stable to date despite lower 
mortgage interest rates and a modest pick-up in 
housing market activity. Stable house prices could 
reflect weak population growth and elevated 
long-term interest rates. Supply side reforms in 
the housing market, such as less restrictive zoning 
laws, may also be moderating the extent to which 
increases in housing demand contribute to house 
price inflation. 
The Committee assessed that upcoming reductions 
in mortgage loan-to-value ratio requirements are 
unlikely to have a material effect on house prices, 
especially with debt-to-income restrictions now 
in place. House price growth is expected to be 
moderate over the projection period, broadly in line 
with growth in nominal incomes. 
Global growth has been resilient 
but is expected to slow
Members noted that tariffs have had less impact on 
the global economy than initially expected, reflecting 
the imposition of lower tariff rates than originally 
envisaged, inventory management, and adjustments 
in global supply chains. Global growth has also 
been supported by higher investment in artificial 
intelligence (AI) technology, particularly in the US, 
which has boosted exports from Asia. Higher demand 
for exports has supported economic growth in China, 
despite weakness in domestic demand.
Global growth is expected to slow modestly in 
2026. This reflects an anticipated weakening in 
global export demand as the pace of AI investment 
slows. The Committee still expects trade barriers 
to weigh on global economic activity and to have 
a modest disinflationary effect on New Zealand. 
Risks to the outlook for inflation 
are balanced
The Committee discussed the risk that price setting 
behaviour by businesses may become more 
sensitive to upside inflation surprises, given recent 
high inflation and inflation expectations remaining 
above the target mid-point. Spare capacity in the 
economy has reduced business profit margins and 
some restoration in margins is expected as demand 
improves. This restoration in margins could occur 
more rapidly than anticipated, which would pose 
an upside inflation risk. 


5
Chapter 1. Summary record of meeting. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Members noted there are risks around the speed 
of the recovery. Some members highlighted the risk 
that continued caution on the part of households 
and businesses could further slow the recovery 
in domestic demand, which could see inflation 
fall below the target midpoint. Conversely, other 
members highlighted the possibility of a faster 
recovery if house prices and household spending 
increase more quickly than assumed given lower 
mortgage rates, leading to more persistence in 
medium-term inflation pressures. Members also 
discussed the possibility of a stronger increase 
in on-farm investment stemming from high export 
commodity prices and the expected return of capital 
to dairy farmers in 2026 from the sale of Fonterra’s 
consumer brands business. 
The Committee discussed risks to the global outlook. 
Investment in AI technologies has been a significant 
driver of global growth and equity returns over the 
past year. Uncertainty remains around the returns 
from AI adoption. There is a risk of a more significant 
correction in equity markets and reduced investment 
if heightened investor expectations are not met. 
Inflation remains high in several advanced 
economies. Global policy uncertainty also remains 
high. The Committee noted downside risks to growth 
in China, as policy makers attempt to maintain 
growth in the face of weak domestic demand and an 
increasingly fragmented global trading environment. 
The Committee also noted uncertainty about US 
economic policy, and the associated risk of higher 
US inflation.
The Committee discussed the risk that unsustainable 
fiscal dynamics and increased politicisation of central 
banks globally could create the conditions for higher 
and more persistent inflation. 
The Committee voted to lower the OCR 
to 2.25 percent
The Committee discussed the options of holding 
the OCR at 2.5 percent and lowering the OCR to 
2.25 percent, noting low tolerance for prolonging 
the return of inflation to the target mid-point.
The case for holding the OCR emphasised the 
considerable reduction in the OCR to date, which is 
still working its way through the economy. Economic 
indicators are recovering, and economic activity is 
expected to strengthen through 2026. Particular 
emphasis was placed on the upside risks to inflation 
and output. Leaving the OCR unchanged at this 
meeting would provide the optionality to lower the 
OCR in the future if required.
The case for a further reduction in the OCR 
emphasised significant excess capacity in 
the economy. This provides confidence that 
medium‑term inflation will return to, and remain 
around, the target mid-point. The economic recovery 
is at an early stage, and the inflation outlook 
provides scope to place more emphasis on avoiding 
unnecessary volatility in output and employment. 
With this context, retention of the easing in overall 
monetary conditions delivered to date would support 
an enduring recovery in economic activity.
The Committee discussed how to balance the 
achievement of their inflation mandate with the 
need to avoid unnecessary instability in output, 
employment, interest rates and the exchange rate. 
On Wednesday 26 November the Committee voted 
by 5 to 1 to reduce the OCR by 25 basis points to 
2.25 percent. The Committee noted that a reduction 
in the OCR would help to underpin consumer and 
business confidence and lean against the risk that 
the economy recovers more slowly than needed to 
meet the inflation objective.
Future moves in the OCR will depend on how the 
outlook for medium-term inflation and the economy 
evolves.
Attendees:
MPC members:
Christian Hawkesby (Chair), 
Carl Hansen, Hayley Gourley, Karen Silk, 
Paul Conway, Prasanna Gai
Treasury Observer: 
James Beard
MPC Secretary: 
Chris Bloor


Muriwai. Photo: Brendan Manning
Chapter 
02
Economic 
assessment 
and monetary 
policy outlook


7
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Chapter 2.
Economic assessment and 
monetary policy outlook
Key points
Significant spare capacity in the 
New Zealand economy is reducing 
inflationary pressure. Weak economic activity 
led to the emergence of significant spare 
capacity in the New Zealand economy in 
the middle of 2024. This spare capacity is 
continuing to reduce inflationary pressure. 
Measures of annual core inflation have 
declined sharply and are approaching 
2 percent. Non-tradables inflation has also 
declined. Quarterly non-tradables inflation 
is around historical average rates. Excluding 
the upward influence of administered prices, 
quarterly non-tradables inflation is below 
historical averages. 
Inflation is near the top of the Monetary 
Policy Committee’s 1 to 3 percent target 
range, but will decline to near 2 percent in 
the middle of next year. Annual consumers 
price index (CPI) inflation increased to 
3.0 percent in the year to the September 2025 
quarter. High inflation rates in a few important 
categories are holding up overall inflation 
at present, despite spare capacity in the 
economy. Prices for food, household energy, 
and local rates have increased substantially 
over the past year. We expect annual CPI 
inflation to return to near the 2 percent 
mid-point of the target range in the middle 
of 2026, as inflation rates for these items 
decline, price-setting behaviour adapts to a 
low-inflation environment, and spare capacity 
continues to reduce underlying inflation. Spare 
capacity in the economy is assumed to be 
absorbed over the medium term, supporting 
annual CPI inflation to stabilise at 2 percent 
as price-setting behaviour adjusts. Inflation 
expectations from our Survey of Expectations 
are slightly above 2 percent across short and 
long horizons.
Significant OCR reductions since August 
2024 are supporting demand, which 
will contribute to spare capacity being 
absorbed over time. The MPC has reduced 
the OCR from 5.50 percent in mid-2024 to 
2.50 percent following the October 2025 
Monetary Policy Review. These reductions 
have resulted in significant easing in financial 
conditions for households and firms in 
New Zealand. Borrowing rates have declined 
and the New Zealand dollar exchange rate 
has depreciated. We expect economic 
growth to increase as this easing transmits to 
stronger demand, resulting in spare capacity 
being absorbed over time. High dairy, meat, 
and horticulture prices are also supporting 
demand via higher incomes in the agricultural 
sector, although this has only had a limited 
flow through to stronger investment. In 
contrast, subdued growth in government 
spending, low net immigration, and higher 
global tariffs are reducing demand.
Conditional on the central economic outlook, 
we project that the OCR will be lower than at 
the time of the August Statement. This mostly 
reflects our assessment of a larger degree of 
spare capacity in the economy over 2025 and 
a lower outlook for export prices. A lower path 
for the OCR is required to keep inflation near 
2 percent over the medium term. Price‑setting 
behaviour is assumed to continue to adapt to 
a low-inflation environment, easing inflationary 
pressure. Therefore, if the output gap does not 
close as projected, inflation will decline below 
2 percent, all else equal. The outlook for 
output, inflation, and interest rates is subject to 
considerable uncertainty.


8
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Figure 2.1
Production GDP
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Production GDP is a measure of the volume of production and is expressed in 
2009/2010 prices.
Economic assessment
Economic activity contracted in the 
June 2025 quarter
The New Zealand economy contracted 
by 0.9 percent in the June 2025 quarter, 
following 0.9 percent growth in the March 
2025 quarter (figure 2.1). Reported quarterly 
GDP has been more volatile than usual, likely 
overstating true volatility in economic activity.1 
Notwithstanding this, GDP was 0.6 percent 
lower than a year earlier, consistent with 
continued weakness in economic activity 
over this period. Over the past year, activity 
in goods-producing industries has declined, 
outweighing positive but low growth in the 
primary and services sectors. The level 
of activity remains low in industries reliant 
on domestic demand, including retail, 
construction, and parts of manufacturing. 
Energy shortages have also contributed to 
weaker economic activity in some sectors.
Economic growth has likely 
resumed, and will increase as 
lower interest rates transmit to 
higher demand
Timely indicators of activity suggest 
the economy grew in the September 
2025 quarter. Most timely indicators of 
economic activity have improved since 
the June 2025 quarter. This includes the 
Performance of Manufacturing Index and 
the Quarterly Survey of Business Opinion 
(QSBO). The Performance of Services 
Index remained at a subdued level in the 
September quarter. Employment was 
unchanged in the September quarter, but 
hours worked increased 0.9 percent. The 
Reserve Bank’s GDP nowcasting model, 
Kiwi‑GDP, incorporates information from 
these indicators and others. It also suggests 
GDP is likely to have grown in the September 
2025 quarter. On balance, timely indicators 
suggest a low but positive growth rate in 
the September 2025 quarter. This is also 
consistent with our recent discussions with 
firms, many of whom noted that while the 
level of activity remains weak, demand has 
begun to stabilise (see box A).
1	
Although headline production GDP is seasonally adjusted, it currently appears to have a remaining predictable seasonal pattern. This 
results in reported GDP growth being understated in June quarters (see chapter 5).


9
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Box A 
Summary of recent business visits
We regularly meet with a range of 
businesses to improve our industry 
knowledge and understanding of 
economic conditions. In October, Reserve 
Bank and Treasury staff spoke with 
businesses and industry organisations 
across New Zealand. Overall, we heard 
similar messages from businesses to our 
previous round of discussions in July.
Overall, businesses reported that 
demand and activity remain subdued, 
although the agricultural sector reported 
robust demand. Demand for New Zealand 
meat, dairy, and horticulture products 
has continued to be strong. Higher 
commodity prices and the depreciation 
in the New Zealand dollar are supporting 
exporter incomes (see chapter 4.1). In 
contrast, firms in industries more reliant on 
domestic demand, such as construction 
and retail, continued to report weak 
demand. Many firms reported that demand 
has stopped deteriorating but is yet to 
meaningfully pick up. 
Businesses reported an easing in overall 
cost pressures. In aggregate, costs are 
not growing as quickly as recent years. 
However, the weaker New Zealand 
dollar has increased costs for imported 
materials, and businesses noted that 
energy and insurance costs remain at 
elevated levels. Lower interest rates have 
reduced debt‑servicing costs for many 
firms, including farmers and growers with 
high debt levels. Businesses continued 
to report difficulties passing on costs to 
customers due to weak demand. Domestic 
customers were noted as being very price 
sensitive. Some businesses are relying on 
discounting to maintain sales, resulting in 
profit margins being squeezed. Exporters 
were an exception to this, with many 
businesses reporting they were able to 
pass on higher costs to customers due to 
strong demand.
Labour market conditions remain weak. 
Businesses reported a high volume 
of applications for vacant roles. Some 
businesses are choosing not to fill 
vacancies, and most are cautious about 
increasing their headcounts. Overall, 
businesses reported very low levels of 
staff turnover, with average staff tenure 
increasing across all sectors. Weak labour 
market conditions were resulting in smaller 
wage increases than in recent years.
Investment intentions remain subdued, 
reflecting weak demand and uncertainty 
about the economic outlook. Larger 
businesses with strong balance sheets 
and some in stronger-performing export 
sectors reported cautiously continuing 
investment. More domestically oriented  
businesses noted that their investment 
plans were more focused on managing 
costs and maintaining existing facilities. 
Overall, feedback from businesses 
supports our near-term projections for 
the New Zealand economy. Demand 
has stopped deteriorating. Easing overall 
cost pressures and continued low pricing 
power are consistent with our projection 
for consumer price inflation to decline 
in 2026.


10
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
We assume that GDP expanded by 
0.4 percent in the September 2025 
quarter, and that growth will increase in 
the December 2025 quarter. We assume 
that weak economic activity in the June 
2025 quarter partly reflected temporary 
factors, such as a decline in export volumes 
following strength earlier in the year, high 
global economic uncertainty, energy 
shortages, and measurement challenges. 
Our projection for GDP growth over the 
second half of 2025 is similar to the August 
Statement. GDP growth is expected to 
increase as lower interest rates continue to 
transmit to domestic demand, high export 
commodity prices support incomes, and 
the effect of temporary factors weighing on 
activity wane. Available timely indicators are 
consistent with GDP growth increasing in the 
December 2025 quarter. However, the level 
of GDP is assumed to be slightly lower over 
the projection period than at the time of the 
August Statement.
Household spending is growing at 
a subdued pace  
Household consumption increased over the 
first half of 2025 (figure 2.2). Consumption 
grew by 1.5 percent in the year to the June 
2025 quarter. This rate of growth is slightly 
faster than population growth, but below 
historical averages. The weak labour market, 
low real income growth, and falling real 
household wealth (due to falling real house 
prices) have been restraining consumption 
(see chapter 4.1 in the August Statement). 
Household consumption growth is assumed 
to increase over the projection, supported 
by lower interest rates. Higher population 
growth, stabilising real wealth, and higher 
real incomes – including from higher primary 
sector revenue – are also assumed to 
support consumption.
Government expenditure is 
assumed to decline as a share of 
the economy
Government expenditure (consumption and 
investment) has declined as a share of the 
economy since late 2021, but increased 
over the first half of 2025. We assume 
that government expenditure grows at a 
historically subdued pace over the medium 
term, and so declines further as a share of 
the economy. Our projections are consistent 
with Budget 2025, adjusted for the 
higher-than-assumed level of government 
expenditure in the June 2025 quarter.
Private investment is expected to 
be subdued this year, but increase 
over the medium term
Business investment contracted in the 
June 2025 quarter, following increases in 
the previous two quarters. Weak business 
investment likely reflects both significant 
spare capacity in the economy and elevated 
global uncertainty (see chapter 4.1 in the 
May Statement). Business investment is 
expected to remain weak in the September 
2025 quarter, before increasing over the 
medium term as GDP growth strengthens 
and the effects of global uncertainty wane.
Residential investment remained broadly 
stable over the first half of 2025, following 
two years of significant declines. We expect 
residential investment to begin increasing 
from late 2025, consistent with increases in 
dwelling consents issued in recent months. 
Lower interest rates, higher population 
growth, government initiatives to improve 
housing supply, and modest increases in 
real house prices are assumed to encourage 
more residential construction over the 
medium term.
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.2
Private consumption
(seasonally adjusted)


11
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Net immigration has slowed, 
reducing potential GDP growth
Net immigration to New Zealand has 
remained historically low since late 2024 
(figure 2.3). This is partly due to weak 
economic and labour market conditions in 
New Zealand, especially relative to Australia. 
Slow population growth is weighing on 
consumption growth and housing demand, 
but is also reducing growth in labour supply. 
Our projections assume that annual potential 
GDP growth is currently around 1.5 percent. 
This is below historical averages, largely 
reflecting slow population growth, but also 
weak productivity. Annual potential GDP 
growth is assumed to increase to about 
2.5 percent in 2028, as population growth 
increases and productivity growth improves 
gradually towards the rate estimated prior to 
the COVID-19 pandemic.
The New Zealand economy has 
significant spare capacity
Significant spare capacity in the 
New Zealand economy has opened up 
since the middle of 2024. Volatility in 
quarterly GDP is resulting in volatility in 
our estimated output gap, but we estimate 
that the output gap will average about 
-1.5 percent of potential GDP over 2025 
(figure 2.4). Our estimate of the output gap 
over the second half of 2025 is slightly lower 
than assumed in the August Statement, 
consistent with lower economic activity and 
continued weakness in our suite of capacity 
pressure indicators. 
The output gap is assumed to close over 
the medium term as GDP growth begins 
to outpace potential from late 2025. GDP 
growth is assumed to strengthen as lower 
interest rates continue to transmit to stronger 
demand, and the dampening effect of high 
global economic uncertainty wanes. 
The labour market remains weak
Demand for labour is weak due to subdued 
economic activity, but appears to be 
stabilising. Employment was unchanged in 
the September 2025 quarter, following four 
quarters of consecutive declines. However, 
employment was 0.6 percent lower in the 
September 2025 quarter than a year earlier, 
while the working-age population grew by 
0.9 percent over the same period. While job 
vacancies remain well below pre-COVID-19 
levels, they have increased slightly in 
recent months. Total hours worked and paid 
increased in the September 2025 quarter, 
which may also indicate stronger labour 
demand.
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.3
Net immigration
(annual, share of working‑age population)
Figure 2.4
Output gap and indicator suite
(share of potential, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, NZIER, MBIE, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area shows the range of indicators in the suite. The vertical line shows the 
final quarter of published GDP data.


12
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
A range of measures suggests that 
labour market capacity pressures eased 
substantially during 2024 and over 2025 
to date. Most measures of labour market 
tightness are below their average levels 
since 2000 (figure 2.5). Some measures 
are at or close to their weakest levels 
since 2000. However, changes across the 
suite of measures were more mixed in the 
September 2025 quarter than in previous 
quarters. Overall, the range of measures 
is consistent with our assumption that the 
degree of spare capacity in the labour market 
and economy overall is substantial, but 
smaller than following the Global Financial 
Crisis (see chapter 4.2). The unemployment 
rate increased to 5.3 percent in the 
September 2025 quarter, and is assumed 
to remained broadly unchanged in the near 
term (figure 2.6). Over the medium term, the 
unemployment rate is projected to decline as 
economic growth recovers. 
Spare capacity in the labour market and 
lower inflation are contributing to slower 
nominal wage growth. Annual same-job 
wage growth, as measured by the labour 
cost index (LCI, ordinary and overtime, 
private sector) was 2.1 percent in the 
September 2025 quarter, down from a peak 
of 4.5 percent in early 2023. Wage growth is 
assumed to remain around this level over the 
medium term.
Figure 2.5
Labour market indicators
Source: Stats NZ, NZIER, MBIE, RBNZ estimates.
Note: See Ball (2024), Assessing and communicating labour market indicators of inflationary pressure.
Figure 2.6
Unemployment rate  
(unemployed people as a share of the labour force, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


13
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Global economic growth has been 
resilient to higher tariffs so far
Economic growth in New Zealand’s major 
trading partners has been resilient to 
higher global tariffs so far (see chapter 3). 
While higher tariffs and elevated global 
uncertainty are likely weighing on 
demand and production, GDP growth in 
New Zealand’s trading partners has not 
fallen as initially expected when the US 
announced much higher tariffs in early April. 
This resilience reflects a range of factors, 
including:
•	 US tariffs coming into effect at lower 
levels than originally announced on 
many economies, with exclusions for 
certain goods (and most economies not 
retaliating);
•	 global trading patterns adapting to higher 
tariffs;
•	 built-up inventories allowing US firms to 
pass through the cost of higher tariffs to 
their customers more slowly; and
•	 large-scale investment related to artificial 
intelligence in the US and associated 
strong demand for semiconductors and 
electronic equipment produced in Asia.
Forecasts for global growth have increased 
in recent months (figure 2.7). Consensus 
forecasts were initially downgraded sharply 
following the announcement of higher tariff 
rates by the US in early April. As economic 
growth has remained resilient, forecasts for 
growth this year have been revised upward, 
fully reversing the initial decline. However, 
forecasts for growth in 2026 have increased 
only slightly.
Headline inflation in New Zealand’s trading 
partners has declined over the past year. 
Annual inflation in China is slightly negative, 
in part reflecting spare capacity in some 
industrial sectors. Inflation in the US has 
increased in recent months, albeit by less 
than forecasters expected, as firms have 
passed on some of the cost of higher tariffs 
to consumers. In aggregate, consensus 
forecasts for inflation in New Zealand’s major 
trading partners have declined throughout 
this year (figure 2.8).
Figure 2.7
Evolution of trading-partner growth forecasts
(calendar year) 
Source: Bloomberg, RBNZ estimates.
Note: This figure shows the evolution of Bloomberg consensus forecasts for annual GDP 
growth in New Zealand’s trading partners in the 2025 and 2026 calendar years.
Figure 2.8
Evolution of trading-partner CPI inflation forecasts
(calendar year) 
Source: Bloomberg, RBNZ estimates.
Note: This figure shows the evolution of Bloomberg consensus forecasts for annual CPI 
inflation in New Zealand’s trading partners in the 2025 and 2026 calendar years.


14
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Higher tariffs and uncertainty 
are likely reducing inflationary 
pressure in New Zealand
Declining inflation in most of our trading 
partners and high global uncertainty are 
likely reducing inflationary pressure in 
New Zealand. Our assumptions about 
the effects of tariffs and uncertainty are 
similar to those in the August Statement 
(see chapter 5). However, disentangling 
the effects of these developments on the 
New Zealand economy from other factors is 
difficult.
New Zealand export prices have increased 
substantially, supporting incomes. Prices 
for New Zealand’s exports increased 
substantially between late 2024 and 
the middle of this year. Dairy, meat, and 
horticulture prices have accounted for 
most of the increase. Higher prices have 
reflected both increasing demand and 
reduced global supply for some of our key 
export commodities. High export prices 
are supporting incomes and spending in 
New Zealand. However, transmission of 
higher export prices to the economy appears 
to have differed from previous episodes of 
increasing export prices (see chapter 4.1). 
Farmers have been paying down debt, 
and measures of on-farm investment have 
remained relatively subdued. In addition, 
the New Zealand dollar exchange rate has 
depreciated since late 2024, when it has 
appreciated in most prior episodes.
Timely measures indicate that aggregate 
export prices will decline over the second 
half of 2025 (figure 2.9). Timely measures 
of dairy prices have declined materially 
since the start of the year. We assume that 
this leads to New Zealand export prices 
declining in aggregate over the second 
half of 2025. This reflects the normal lag 
between timely commodity price indicators 
and official measures of export prices. Over 
the medium term, we assume that export 
prices settle near historical average levels in 
real terms.
Export volumes declined in the June 2025 
quarter. Goods export volumes declined 
in the June 2025 quarter, although they 
remained higher than in the second half of 
2024. Some export shipments may have 
been brought forward into the March 2025 
quarter due to uncertainty about global 
tariff policy. Higher prices are encouraging 
increased production for some export 
goods, such as dairy and fruit. Service export 
volumes declined slightly in the June 2025 
quarter, to a similar level to a year prior. We 
assume that service export volumes grow 
faster than the overall economy over the 
medium term, supported by increasing 
international flight capacity to New Zealand. 
However, we assume that service exports 
remain a smaller share of overall economic 
activity than before the COVID-19 pandemic 
over the medium term.
The New Zealand dollar exchange rate 
is lower than at the time of the August 
Statement. International oil prices are 
slightly lower. The lower New Zealand dollar 
exchange rate mostly reflects developments 
in New Zealand, in particular lower interest 
rates (see chapter 3). 
Figure 2.9
New Zealand export prices
(real, foreign currency terms)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


15
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Inflation is near the top of 
the MPC’s target range, but 
expected to return near the 
2 percent target mid-point in the 
middle of 2026
Annual headline CPI inflation increased 
to 3.0 percent in the September 2025 
quarter. Annual non-tradables inflation 
decreased to 3.5 percent, as expected in 
the August Statement. Annual tradables 
inflation increased to 2.2 percent, slightly 
higher than expected in the August 
Statement.
Annual core inflation measures have 
declined significantly since 2023, but 
remain in the top half of our target 
range (figure 2.10). Movements in annual 
core inflation measures were mixed in 
the September 2025 quarter, with the 
average of measures declining slightly to 
2.4 percent. Quarterly measures of core 
inflation were unchanged on average in 
the September 2025 quarter, and are at 
a rate consistent with 2 percent inflation if 
sustained. 
Inflation expectations of professional 
forecasters and business leaders remain 
slightly higher than 2 percent (figure 2.11). 
1-year ahead inflation expectations from 
our Survey of Expectations remained 
unchanged at 2.4 percent in the 
December 2025 quarter. 10-year ahead 
inflation expectations were unchanged at 
2.2 percent. Mean 1-year ahead household 
inflation expectations eased slightly in 
the December 2025 quarter, but remain 
relatively high. Household inflation 
expectations are high across many 
advanced economies, possibly reflecting 
global factors such as higher tariffs and 
increasing food prices (see chapter 4.2 
in the August Statement). 1- and 2-year 
ahead inflation expectations from our 
Business Expectations Survey declined to 
2.4 percent in the December 2025 quarter.
Figure 2.10
Headline and core inflation measures 
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ.
Note: The dashed lines represent the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for inflation over 
the medium term. The shaded area shows the range of core inflation measures. The core 
inflation measures include the sectoral factor model, factor model, trimmed mean (30%), 
weighted median, and CPI excluding food and energy.
Figure 2.11
Inflation expectations
(annual, years ahead)
Source: RBNZ Survey of Expectations.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI 
inflation over the medium term.


16
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Annual tradables inflation increased 
to 2.2 percent in the September 2025 
quarter from 1.2 percent in the June 2025 
quarter (figure 2.12). Slower disinflation in 
petrol prices accounted for most of the 
increase in annual tradables inflation in 
the quarter. Continued high inflation for 
food and recreation accounts for tradables 
inflation being above its historical average. 
For example, prices have been rising for 
dairy, meat, fruit, vegetables, overseas 
accomodation, and streaming services.  
Annual tradables inflation is expected 
to decrease over the medium term as 
inflation in food and recreation eases. The 
depreciation in the New Zealand dollar 
exchange rate since the middle of 2025 is 
likely to moderate the decline in tradables 
inflation over the next year.
Annual non-tradables inflation continues 
to decline, from 3.7 percent in the June 
2025 quarter to 3.5 percent in the 
September 2025 quarter (figure 2.13). 
Declining non-tradables inflation reflects 
spare capacity in the economy and 
price‑setting behaviour adapting to a 
low‑inflation environment.
Inflation in administered prices is 
contributing significantly to non-tradables 
inflation. While annual administered 
inflation eased in the September 2025 
quarter, it remains very high compared 
to its historical average (figure 2.14).2 In 
contrast, annual inflation in non-tradables 
categories that are relatively sensitive to 
monetary policy is below pre-COVID-19 
rates.3 For instance, annual new dwelling 
construction inflation was 0.8 percent in 
the September 2025 quarter, its lowest 
level since 2009. Quarterly non-tradables 
inflation is around pre-COVID-19 rates, and 
lower excluding the upward influence of 
administered prices.
2	
This is based on the ‘central and local government charges’ 
series produced by Stats NZ. It incorporates a wide range of 
prices set or heavily influenced by central or local government. 
Items contributing to high inflation in this series at present 
include local authority rates, electricity, university fees, and 
vehicle relicensing fees.
3	
See Åstebøl and Patel (2025), Sectoral heterogeneity in 
monetary policy pass-through in New Zealand.
Figure 2.12
Tradables inflation 
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Quarterly tradables inflation has been seasonally adjusted by RBNZ.
Figure 2.13
Non-tradables inflation 
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Quarterly non-tradables inflation has been seasonally adjusted by RBNZ.
Figure 2.14
Composition of non-tradables inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Administered inflation is measured using the ‘central and local government charges’ 
series produced by Stats NZ.


17
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Spare capacity in the economy will continue 
to flow through to lower non-tradables 
inflation over the coming year. Price-setting 
behaviour is assumed to continue to adapt 
to a low-inflation environment over the 
medium term, placing downward pressure 
on non‑tradables inflation. We expect 
inflation rates to decrease across a range of 
non-tradables categories. Lower growth in 
labour costs will contribute to lower inflation, 
particularly for labour-intensive services. 
Rental inflation will continue to decrease. 
Rental inflation for new tenants has declined 
significantly, reflecting low population and 
income growth, and this is feeding through 
to lower inflation for the stock of rentals over 
time. The negative output gap is projected 
to close over the medium term, resulting in 
annual non-tradables inflation stabilising at 
around 3 percent in the second half of the 
projection period.
Inflation for non-tradables items less 
sensitive to monetary policy is high, but 
has begun to ease. Local authority rate 
increases — which take effect in September 
quarters — are contributing significantly to 
non-tradables inflation. While rate increases 
for 2025 were lower on average than last 
year, they are still substantially higher than 
historical averages. Household energy price 
inflation has increased substantially over 
the past year, and increases in electricity 
lines charges regulated by the Commerce 
Commission added significantly to prices in 
the June 2025 quarter. While further lines 
charge increases will occur in future years, 
these will be smaller than the 2025 increase. 
Insurance inflation has fallen from high rates 
experienced following severe storms and 
floods in 2023 and is likely to decline further 
over the next couple of quarters. We expect 
administered inflation to ease over time in 
line with lower general inflation pressures, 
but to remain higher than other non-tradables 
categories for some time. 
Annual headline inflation is forecast 
to return to near the 2 percent target 
mid‑point by the middle of 2026 (figure 2.15). 
Inflation for food, household energy, and 
local rates is currently well above historical 
averages, resulting in headline inflation at 
the top of the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target 
range. The expected decline of annual CPI 
inflation reflects both continued broad-based 
easing in underlying inflation and lower rates 
of inflation for food and administered prices. 
Quarterly CPI inflation is at a level consistent 
with annual inflation near 2 percent if 
sustained.
 
Figure 2.15
CPI inflation 
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for inflation over the 
medium term. Quarterly CPI inflation has been seasonally adjusted by RBNZ.


18
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Monetary policy outlook
Conditional on the central economic 
outlook, we project that the OCR will 
be lower than at the time of the August 
Statement (figure 2.16). The MPC has been 
reducing the OCR since August 2024 as 
inflationary pressures have eased. Lower 
interest rates will support the output gap 
to close over the medium term, and hence 
inflation to settle near the 2 percent target 
mid-point. We assume that price‑setting 
behaviour continues to adapt to a 
low‑inflation environment, easing inflationary 
pressure. Therefore, if the output gap 
does not close, inflation will decline below 
2 percent, all else equal. Over the medium 
term, the OCR is assumed to return towards 
the middle of our range of long-term neutral 
estimates (see box B, chapter 5). Compared 
to the August Statement, the lower projected 
OCR mostly reflects our assessment of 
a larger degree of spare capacity in the 
economy over 2025 and a lower outlook 
for export prices. The outlook for output, 
inflation, and interest rates is subject to 
considerable uncertainty.
Figure 2.16
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


19
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Chapter 
03
Global 
economy 
and financial 
markets
Mount Taranaki. Photo: Karan Dasgupta


20
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Chapter 3.
Global economy and financial markets
Key points
The global economy has proved more 
resilient than anticipated so far in 2025 but 
global growth is expected to slow modestly 
in 2026. The effects of tariffs on the global 
economy have been less significant than 
initially anticipated. Additionally, demand for 
inputs for investment in artificial intelligence 
(AI) technology has supported exports from 
our trading partners in Asia. Trade barriers 
still present a headwind to global growth, 
with trading‑partner growth expected to 
weaken over the course of 2026.
Inflation remains low in China and much of 
emerging Asia, but has increased in some 
advanced economies since the start of the 
year. Excess supply is keeping inflation low 
in China and weighing on inflation across 
the broader region. Tariffs are adding to 
upward pressure on US inflation, though 
their impact has been smaller than expected 
so far. Domestic inflationary pressures have 
increased in Australia.
Financial and economic conditions across 
advanced economies have diverged over 
the past year. Differences in monetary 
policy settings reflect varied outlooks for 
activity and inflation over the medium term. 
Global equity markets remain strong, led by 
continued gains in the US technology sector. 
The US dollar has stabilised, but remains 
significantly below its level at the start of the 
year. Oil prices have fallen to around their 
lowest levels in about four years amid strong 
supply and easing geopolitical tensions in 
the Middle East.
Domestic financial conditions have eased 
since the August Statement. Wholesale 
interest rates have declined, and the 
New Zealand dollar (NZD) trade‑weighted 
index (TWI) has depreciated. These 
developments largely reflect weaker 
domestic data and downward revisions to 
market participants’ expectations for the 
OCR. Mortgage and term deposit rates 
continue to decline, and bank funding costs 
have increased.


21
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Global economic conditions
Global growth has been more 
resilient than expected
Global growth forecasts for 2025 have 
continued to be revised higher, in part 
due to a surge in artificial intelligence 
investment. Bloomberg consensus 
forecasts for many of New Zealand’s trading 
partners have been revised higher since 
the August Statement. Annual New Zealand 
trade‑weighted global growth is expected 
to be 2.9 percent in 2025. Expectations 
have improved materially since the low of 
2.4 percent at the time of the May Statement. 
Forecasts are now similar to expectations 
at the start of this year, and to the pace of 
growth in 2024 (figures 2.7 and 3.1).
US import demand and the adjustment of 
global supply chains to tariffs, particularly 
across Asia, have bolstered global growth. 
Forecasts for several Asian economies have 
been revised upwards this year, including 
China and Taiwan where investment in 
AI‑related technology has supported export 
demand. US GDP growth has also been 
supported by significant investment in AI 
infrastructure. 
Annual trading-partner growth is 
anticipated to slow to 2.6 percent over 
2026, unchanged from the August 
Statement. This slowdown largely reflects 
expectations of weaker global trade. This is 
partly accounted for by a slowdown in the 
pace of growth in AI-related investment and 
continued price pressures from higher tariffs 
in the US. 
Chinese growth has remained robust, 
supported by strong exports despite 
ongoing weakness in domestic 
demand. China’s economy grew by a 
stronger‑than‑expected 4.8 percent in 
the year to the September 2025 quarter. 
Over the same period, exports increased 
6.7 percent, but domestic demand has 
softened. Retail sales grew just 2.6 percent 
in the year to the September quarter, the 
weakest rate since August 2024, while fixed 
asset investment has fallen to its lowest level 
outside of the COVID-19 pandemic.
Despite these challenges, medium-term 
growth forecasts for China have been 
revised higher. This comes following the 
recent Fourth Plenum of the Communist 
Party’s Central Committee, where authorities 
reaffirmed long-term GDP growth targets 
consistent with average annual GDP growth 
of between 4 and 5 percent over the next 
decade.
Figure 3.1
Trading‑partner GDP growth
(annual)
Source: Haver Analytics, Bloomberg, Consensus Economics, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Projections show consensus forecasts from Bloomberg for 2025 and 2026, and 
Consensus Economics for 2027 and beyond. The trading-partner aggregate is based on 
New Zealand’s 16 largest trading partners.


22
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Some of our key trading partners 
are facing upward pressure on 
inflation
Trading-partner inflation has increased, 
but by less than expected at the start of 
the year. Aggregate annual trading-partner 
inflation declined to 1.6 percent over the first 
half of the year and is expected to average 
1.8 percent in 2025. This is lower than the 
2.2 percent expected at the beginning of 
2025. Two factors have affected this: tariffs 
have had a smaller effect on US inflation than 
expected, and deflationary pressure has 
continued in China. Annual trading-partner 
inflation has since increased to 1.8 percent 
in the September quarter and is expected 
to rise further to an average of 2 percent in 
2026 (figure 3.2). 
Inflation in China remains low but is 
expected to increase. High manufacturing 
capacity in China has contributed to deflation 
over most of 2025. However, a recently 
launched campaign to reduce ‘oversupply’ is 
expected to put upward pressure on inflation 
over the medium term. In the year to October, 
consumer prices increased 0.1 percent and 
producer prices fell 2 percent. Low Chinese 
inflation is exerting downward pressure on 
inflation in other economies in Asia. 
US inflation has continued to increase 
gradually and is expected to stay elevated 
over the coming year. CPI inflation increased 
to 3 percent in the year to September, 
largely due to rising goods prices offsetting 
declining inflation in key categories like 
energy and rents. The pass-through of 
tariff costs to consumers has been slower 
than expected. The effective tariff rate on 
US imports has been lower than initially 
estimated, as firms have delayed tariff 
payments, shifted to other suppliers, and 
drawn down inventories imported before the 
tariffs were imposed. Where tariffs have been 
incurred, firms have been cautious in raising 
prices significantly. In addition, reductions in 
hiring and lower wage increases have limited 
the impact on profit margins. With inventories 
depleting and fewer options to delay tariff 
payments, pass‑through to consumer prices 
has increased in recent months. Bloomberg 
consensus forecasts imply further tariff 
pass‑through, contributing to elevated 
inflation over the next year.
Australian inflation has increased in 
response to domestic capacity pressures. 
Annual headline inflation in Australia 
increased from 2.1 percent in the June 
quarter to 3.2 percent in the September 
quarter as energy subsidies expired. 
Underlying inflationary pressure has 
increased. Annual trimmed mean inflation, 
the Reserve Bank of Australia’s (RBA) 
preferred measure of core inflation, rose to 
3 percent in the September quarter. This was 
materially higher than anticipated, prompting 
the RBA to revise up their assessment of 
capacity pressure.
Figure 3.2
Trading‑partner inflation
(annual)
Source: Haver Analytics, Bloomberg, Consensus Economics, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Projections show consensus forecasts from Bloomberg for 2025 and 2026, and 
Consensus Economics for 2027 and beyond. The trading-partner aggregate is based on 
New Zealand’s 17 largest trading partners.


23
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Global financial conditions
Divergent economic and monetary 
policy developments have led 
to varied movements in global 
interest rates
Differences in monetary policy settings 
reflect varied outlooks for activity and 
inflation over the medium term. Since the 
August Statement, the Federal Reserve and 
Bank of Canada have lowered their policy 
rates, while the European Central Bank, Bank 
of England, and the RBA have left theirs 
unchanged. Financial market participants 
still expect most major central banks will 
continue easing, but the extent of this varies 
(figure 3.3). 
Policy rate expectations and short‑term 
bond yields in the US, Canada, and 
New Zealand have declined. Weak 
economic activity has prompted further 
easing from several central banks, putting 
downward pressure on short-term yields. 
In contrast, the Australian 2-year yield has 
increased since the August Statement, in 
response to greater capacity pressure in the 
economy. 
Term premia and global long-term 
rates have decreased as US economic 
uncertainty has eased. The US 10-year 
government bond yield has declined 
15 basis points, as the term premium has 
declined. Term premia reflect the additional 
compensation demanded by investors for 
holding long-term assets. Greater uncertainty 
about the future of the economy had caused 
term premia in the US and globally to rise 
over the first half of the year. As tariffs have 
settled at a lower level than initially expected 
and the economic outlook has appeared 
less uncertain, term premia have declined 
over recent months. This has put downward 
pressure on long-term rates globally 
(figure 3.4).
Figure 3.3
Market‑implied path of policy rates
Source: Bloomberg. 
Figure 3.4
10-year government bond yields
Source: Bloomberg. 


24
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Global equity prices have continued 
to increase. The US S&P 500 index has 
increased 2.9 percent since the August 
Statement, supported by ongoing optimism 
about AI, continued monetary policy easing, 
and strong corporate earnings reports. 
Rising valuations continue to be highly 
concentrated in the technology sector. The 
Japanese Nikkei 225 index has increased 
14 percent since the August Statement, 
partly reflecting expectations for more 
accommodative fiscal policy. Increases 
in other major equity markets have been 
smaller. For example the Euro Stoxx 50 
index has increased 0.5 percent since the 
August Statement.
Oil prices have declined to around their 
lowest level since early 2021. Brent 
crude oil is trading at USD 64 per barrel, 
4.6 percent lower than at the time of the 
August Statement (figure 3.5). The decline 
largely reflects a strong supply outlook 
and easing geopolitical tensions in the 
Middle East. 
The US dollar has appreciated but 
remains weak relative to recent history. 
The US dollar index has appreciated 
2 percent since the August Statement, 
after falling 10 percent between January 
and August. The move comes despite US 
policy rate expectations falling by more 
than elsewhere, potentially reflecting an 
easing of investor concerns about policy 
uncertainty in the US.
Figure 3.5
Brent crude oil
Source: Bloomberg.


25
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Figure 3.6
Financial market participants’ 
expectations for the OCR
Source: Bloomberg.
Note: The blue line shows expectations for the OCR immediately before the August Statement. 
Each data point represents market expectations of the level of the OCR at a given point in the 
future, as measured by overnight indexed swap pricing.
Domestic financial conditions
Market participants have lowered 
their expectations for the OCR
Market participants have significantly 
reduced their expectations for the level of 
the OCR over the next year (figure 3.6). This 
is consistent with weaker-than-expected 
domestic GDP data for the June quarter (see 
chapter 2), and a faster pace of monetary 
policy easing compared to market participant 
expectations at the time of the August 
Statement. Wholesale interest rates have 
fallen since the August Statement, largely 
because of the same factors (figure 3.7). 
Domestic wholesale interest rate rates have 
declined by more than US and Australian 
rates, reflecting differences in expectations 
for growth, inflation, and monetary policy 
across each economy.
The New Zealand dollar has 
depreciated
The NZD TWI has depreciated by 
4.4 percent since the August Statement 
(figure 3.8). The depreciation in the NZD 
has been broad-based, with the NZD 
depreciating against most trading-partner 
currencies since the August Statement. The 
real NZD TWI, which accounts for changes in 
relative price levels between New Zealand 
and our trading partners, has fallen by less 
than the nominal TWI over the past year.
Source: Bloomberg.
Figure 3.7
New Zealand interest rate swaps 
Figure 3.8
New Zealand dollar trade‑weighted index
Source: RBNZ.


26
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Falling New Zealand interest rates have 
been the main driver of the lower NZD 
TWI. The spreads between the 2-year 
New Zealand interest rate swap and 
equivalent rates for the US and Australia 
have fallen to low levels (figure 3.9). Higher 
export commodity prices over much of 2025 
have contributed to the NZD TWI remaining 
higher than otherwise, although timely 
measures of dairy prices have declined since 
the middle of 2025 (see chapter 4.1). Global 
risk sentiment has also been supportive, with 
measures such as the MOVE and VIX indices 
remaining at relatively low levels.
Mortgage rates have followed 
wholesale rates lower
Mortgage and term deposit rates have 
fallen at all terms since the August 
Statement. Advertised mortgage rates 
peaked in December 2023 and have 
declined broadly in line with falls in 
equivalent wholesale rates, albeit with a lag 
(figure 3.10). The spread between 2-year 
mortgage rates and 2-year swap rates has 
been broadly stable since late 2023.
The average mortgage yield has continued 
to decline as borrowers re-fix on lower 
interest rates (figure 3.11). The average yield 
has decreased from its peak of 6.4 percent 
a year ago to 5.4 percent in September. The 
average mortgage yield will continue falling 
in coming months as the stock of mortgage 
lending continues to re-fix on lower rates.
Figure 3.9
2-year interest rate swap rate differentials
Source: Bloomberg, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The spread is calculated at the 2-year New Zealand interest rate swap rate minus 
the equivalent rate for the US and Australia. Prior to 2021 the US 2-year LIBOR swap rate is 
used as the US swap rate in this calculation.
Figure 3.10
2-year mortgage rate, swap rate, 
and mortgage-swap spread
Source: interest.co.nz, Bloomberg, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 3.11
New Zealand mortgage rates 
Source: interest.co.nz, RBNZ.
Note: The average mortgage yield is the monthly yield on the total stock of residential 
mortgages for registered banks. The other rates are the average of the advertised fixed-term 
rates on offer from ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac for mortgages with a loan to value ratio of 
less than 80 percent.


27
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
The weighted average cost of 
new bank funding has risen
Our estimate of the spread between the 
cost of new bank funding and short-term 
wholesale rates has increased since the 
August Statement. This is because interest 
rates on term deposit, saving, and transaction 
accounts have fallen by less than equivalent 
wholesale interest rates over this period 
(figure 3.12).
Credit growth has recovered as interest 
rates have fallen. Stronger credit growth 
could put upward pressure on bank funding 
costs by increasing competition for retail 
deposits or causing banks to increase their 
reliance on wholesale funding sources. 
However, banks remain well funded, in 
part due to annual growth in system-level 
deposits exceeding lending growth since 
mid-2023. 
Domestic and offshore wholesale 
funding conditions remain favourable. 
Investment‑grade credit spreads for financial 
institutions are at historically low levels. 
Recent periods of illiquidity in domestic and 
global short-term funding markets have 
not had a major impact on key domestic 
wholesale funding spreads. 
Figure 3.12
Term deposit spreads to wholesale rates 
(8‑week moving average)
Source: interest.co.nz, Bloomberg, RBNZ estimates. 


28
Chapter 3. Global economy and financial markets. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Chapter 
04
Special topics
Wahine Memorial Park, Breaker Bay. Photo: Ayesha Shafi


29
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Chapter 4. 
Special topics 
Before the publication of each Statement, Reserve Bank staff 
provide analyses of some topical issues to the Monetary Policy 
Committee. 
Topics for the November Statement included:
1.	 How are high commodity prices affecting the New Zealand economy?
2.	 A closer look at our measures of labour market spare capacity
Special topics in the past 12 months
Topic
Date/publication
Household sector developments and outlook
August 2025 Statement (Chapter 4)
Assessing developments in inflation expectations
August 2025 Statement (Chapter 4)
How does uncertainty affect the New Zealand economy?
May 2025 Statement (Chapter 4)
The transmission of higher global tariffs to the 
New Zealand economy
May 2025 Statement (Chapter 4)
The implications of global tariffs for the New Zealand 
economy
February 2025 Statement (Chapter 4)
Outlook for some of New Zealand’s key commodity 
exports
February 2025 Statement (Chapter 4)
Trends in production sectors of the New Zealand economy
November 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)
Summary of recent business visits
November 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)
Real interest rates and their effect on the economy
November 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)


30
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
How are high commodity prices affecting the 
New Zealand economy?
Summary
•	 Prices for New Zealand’s commodity 
exports have a major influence on 
the New Zealand economy. Goods 
exports make up about 70 percent of 
New Zealand’s total exports, and about 
18 percent of nominal GDP. As a result, 
commodity export prices have a large 
influence on New Zealand exporter 
incomes, and on investment and spending 
decisions in the economy.
•	 Recently, global conditions for 
New Zealand’s key export commodities 
have been favourable for New Zealand 
exporters. Global supply constraints 
for some of New Zealand’s key export 
goods, as well as robust global demand, 
have kept their prices elevated. This is 
particularly the case for dairy, meat, and 
horticulture products. 
•	 After adjusting for inflation, export 
commodity prices are only slightly above 
recent historical averages in foreign 
currency terms. In contrast to most of 
the previous episodes of elevated export 
prices, the recent depreciation of the 
New Zealand dollar is further supporting 
exporter returns.    
•	 Lower on-farm cost inflation and 
elevated commodity export prices 
have supported a recovery in exporter 
margins. On-farm expenses grew faster 
than headline inflation, which contributed 
to low margins for farmers since 2021. 
More recently, elevated export commodity 
prices have supported a recovery in 
farmers’ margins from these weak levels. 
Much of this improvement appears to 
have been used to pay down debt, 
although more farmers appear to be 
planning to invest. 
•	 Timely measures indicate New Zealand’s 
aggregate export prices will decline 
over the second half of 2025. Much 
of the recent strength in global export 
commodity prices can be accounted 
for by supply-side constraints. Dairy 
supply constraints are easing and global 
production is rising, putting downward 
pressure on dairy prices and, in turn, on 
overall commodity prices.
•	 Reserve Bank modelling finds that 
investment tends to increase, with 
a lag, following increases in export 
commodity prices. Given usual lags of up 
to a year, high export commodity prices 
in early 2025 are likely to contribute to a 
moderate increase in business investment 
over the December 2025 and March 
2026 quarters, supported by the output 
gap closing. However, there is a risk 
business investment may not respond as 
strongly as in past periods of elevated 
export prices. Farmers may continue 
to deleverage rather than invest. Some 
farmers may remain cautious after recent 
seasons of declining margins and may 
hold back on new investment given the 
more recent declines in some prices.


31
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Global conditions have contributed 
to elevated commodity prices for 
New Zealand exporters 
New Zealand’s goods export sector is an 
important part of our economy, making up 
about 18 percent of nominal GDP. Over the 
year to the June 2025 quarter, dairy, meat, 
and other food and agricultural products 
made up over 60 percent of New Zealand’s 
total goods exports. The prices of these 
products play an important role in influencing 
New Zealand exporter incomes, and hence 
local investment and spending decisions. 
New Zealand’s goods export volumes 
have grown at a slow pace, increasing only 
0.7 percent in the year to the June 2025 
quarter. Over the same period, global prices 
for New Zealand’s key commodity exports 
have increased significantly, with nominal 
goods exports increasing 11.7 percent.  
Export commodity prices have increased 
since late 2023, reflecting both constrained 
global supply and resilient demand 
(figure 4.1). Global beef and dairy prices 
increased as disease outbreaks – including 
avian flu in the US, and bluetongue and foot 
and mouth in parts of Europe – reduced 
production in key markets. Livestock 
numbers fell across Europe, the US, and 
China due to diseases, environmental 
regulation, and the natural cattle cycle. 
These factors further constrained global 
meat supply. In addition, demand for 
New Zealand’s horticulture products remains 
strong, particularly for goods such as kiwifruit, 
with prices being supported by robust 
demand from Asia.
However, real export prices are only slightly 
above historical averages. After accounting 
for the high rates of inflation experienced 
globally since 2021, New Zealand commodity 
prices are only slightly above recent 
historical averages in foreign currency terms 
(figure 4.2).
Figure 4.2
Commodity price index
(real, index = 100 in June 2021) 
Source: ANZ, Stats NZ, US Bureau of Labor Statistics, RBNZ estimates. 
Figure 4.1
World commodity price index 
(foreign currency terms, index = 100 in January 2015)
Source: ANZ. 


32
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
In contrast to previous periods of 
elevated export prices, the depreciating 
New Zealand dollar is increasing returns 
for our exporters. The real New Zealand 
dollar ANZ commodity price index peaked 
in the March 2025 quarter. In US dollar 
terms, commodity prices are still below 
their 2022 peak, while they remain slightly 
above the 2022 peak in New Zealand 
dollar terms. This difference reflects the 
significant depreciation in the New Zealand 
dollar exchange rate over this time. This 
depreciation differs to most previous 
periods of elevated export prices, when the 
New Zealand dollar tended to appreciate in 
response. For a given level of global export 
prices, a lower New Zealand dollar exchange 
rate increases exporter returns. 
Farmers’ margins have 
improved, but investment has 
remained subdued 
Increases in export commodity prices 
have led to a recovery in farmers’ margins 
from previously weak levels. During the 
2021/2022 increase in commodity prices,  
farmers’ expenses grew at a faster rate, 
which led to a narrowing in on-farm margins 
(figure 4.3). Growth in farmers’ expenses has 
slowed since late 2022, although overall 
growth in farmers’ expenses has been slightly 
higher than headline CPI since 2021. Most 
of the increase in export commodity prices 
since early 2024 has resulted in a recovery 
in farmers’ margins, unwinding the previous 
weakness. Only the more recent commodity 
price increases have led to farmers’ returns 
growing to an above-average level. 
Recently, farmers have prioritised debt 
reduction and balance sheet resilience. 
Farm cash flows have improved recently, 
accounted for by higher revenues, falling 
interest rates, and lower farm cost inflation. 
This has supported significant deleveraging 
in the agriculture sector. Farmers appear to 
be taking a somewhat cautious approach 
and are looking to increase balance sheet 
resilience after a period of tight margins. 
Higher incomes, particularly for dairy, have 
so far appeared to have a muted effect on 
economic activity. Higher exporter margins 
have had a limited effect on investment as 
farmers have prioritised debt repayment. 
More recently, however, some indicators of 
farmer confidence and farm investment have 
improved. We expect a moderate pick-up in 
spending and investment. 
Figure 4.3
New Zealand dollar commodity price index 
(real, index = 100 in June 2021)
Source: ANZ, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 


33
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Our forecasts assume global 
commodity prices will decline
Reserve Bank modelling finds that 
investment tends to increase, with a lag, 
following increases in export commodity 
prices. We recently updated previous 
Reserve Bank modelling and found 
consistent results.4 Historically, increases in 
export commodity prices result in stronger 
business investment, with a peak effect after 
around a year. This modelling implies that 
the current period of high export commodity 
prices is likely to contribute to a moderate 
increase in business investment over the 
December 2025 and March 2026 quarters. 
Business investment may not respond 
as strongly as in previous episodes of 
increasing export commodity prices. 
Farmers may continue to prioritise debt 
reduction over new investment. Farmers 
may remain cautious following recent 
financial pressures. In addition, recent 
industry engagements suggest that 
increasingly binding environmental and 
regulatory constraints may reduce expansion 
opportunities compared to history.
4	
See Kamber, Nodari, and Wong (2016), The Impact of Commodity Price Movements on the New Zealand Economy.
Timely measures indicate that 
New Zealand’s aggregate export prices 
will decline over the second half of 2025. 
Despite subdued global growth, demand 
for New Zealand’s key commodities has 
remained robust, providing support to prices. 
However, much of the recent strength in 
export commodity prices can be accounted 
for by global supply constraints. Some of 
these global supply constraints are now 
easing, and global production is increasing, 
particularly for dairy. Global milk supply has 
increased faster than industry expectations, 
leading to a faster-than-expected fall in 
dairy prices, as shown by Global Dairy Trade 
auctions since mid-2025. Our projections 
assume that New Zealand’s export prices 
decline over the medium term, settling 
around historical averages in real foreign 
currency terms (see chapter 5). In practice, 
export commodity prices are likely to 
remain variable, reflecting a range of factors 
including weather conditions, disease 
outbreaks, global economic conditions, and 
trade developments.


34
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
A closer look at our measures of labour market 
spare capacity
Summary
•	 Information about the labour market 
is crucial for understanding capacity 
pressure in the economy, and therefore 
the outlook for inflation. We monitor a 
wide range of measures of labour market 
capacity pressure, which examine the 
labour market from different angles. 
•	 All measures of labour market spare 
capacity have deteriorated substantially 
since 2023. The broad weakening in 
measures supports our assessment that 
there is a significant degree of spare 
capacity in the economy. However, there 
is a wide range of variation between 
measures, illustrating the uncertainty 
around our assumptions.
•	 Compared to history, it is hard for 
unemployed people to transition back to 
employment. While the share of workers 
becoming unemployed is not high 
compared to the past, job vacancies and 
job transitions are very low. 
•	 Wage growth is declining, broadly in 
line with historical relationships. Spare 
capacity in the labour market and lower 
inflation are contributing to lower wage 
growth. Wage growth is currently around 
levels consistent with annual headline CPI 
inflation at 2 percent.
•	 Labour demand may be starting to 
stabilise. Job vacancies have increased 
in recent months, and total hours worked 
increased in the September 2025 quarter. 
We expect labour market spare capacity 
to remain broadly stable over the next 
couple of quarters, before beginning to 
reduce with a lag once the output gap 
begins to close.
In this chapter, we discuss five categories that measure labour market capacity pressure: 
unemployment-based measures, other measures derived from Household Labour Force 
Survey (HLFS) data, job vacancies and transitions, measures from the Quarterly Survey of 
Business Opinion (QSBO), and wage growth.5 Finally, we discuss recent developments in 
timely labour market indicators, and the outlook for labour market capacity pressure. 
5	
See Robinson et al. (2019), Evaluating indicators of labour market capacity in New Zealand; 
Armstrong et al. (2016), Developing a labour utilisation composite index for New Zealand; 
Armstrong and Karagedikli (2017), The role of non-participants in labour market dynamics; 
Jacob and Robinson (2019), Suite as! Augmenting the Reserve Bank’s output gap indicator suite; 
Culling and Robinson (2020), Employment and hours worked adjustment in New Zealand’s labour market; 
Robinson (2020), Vacancies, unemployment and labour market slack in New Zealand; 
Ball (2024), Assessing and communicating labour market indicators of inflationary pressure; and 
Ball (2025), Gross labour market flows using administrative tax data (forthcoming) for more discussion of the 
measures considered in this chapter.


35
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Most unemployment-based 
measures show substantial spare 
capacity
All unemployment-based measures show 
large reductions in labour market capacity 
pressure over the past two to three years 
(figure 4.4). However, unemployment 
measures demonstrate varying degrees of 
weakness compared to historical averages. 
Broad measures, such as the aggregate 
unemployment rate and the underutilisation 
rate, remain well below their peaks following 
the global financial crisis (GFC). However, 
some of the unemployment measures we 
consider most cyclical have approached 
GFC peaks – for example, the youth 
unemployment rate (aged 15-24 years), 
and the medium-term unemployment 
rate (1-12 months unemployed). Higher 
unemployment among some groups who 
are most affected by the business cycle may 
indicate that there is more spare capacity 
in the labour market than suggested by the 
aggregate unemployment rate.
Figure 4.4
Unemployment-based indicators
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: Regional deviations in unemployment rates is constructed based on the average absolute deviation of unemployment rates in each 
sub-region compared to the national average. The underutilisation rate is calculated as the number of underutilised (which includes the 
underemployed, potential jobseekers and unemployed) over the extended labour force.
a. Unemployment rate
b. Youth unemployment rate (15-24y)
c. Medium- and long-term unemployment rates
d. Māori and Pasifika unemployment rates
e. Regional deviations in unemployment rates
f. Underutilisation rate


36
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Some unemployment measures may be 
starting to stabilise, consistent with our 
view that overall slack in the economy is 
stabilising. The aggregate unemployment 
rate has increased more slowly this year 
than in the prior two years. Some measures 
decreased in the September 2025 
quarter, for example Māori and Pasifika 
unemployment rates. However, other 
measures have continued to show increasing 
spare capacity, including regional deviations 
in unemployment.
Most other measures derived 
from the HLFS indicate high levels 
of spare capacity compared to 
history 
Measures based on employment rates and 
hours worked are around their weakest 
levels since 2000, excluding the COVID-19 
lockdowns (figures 4.5.a and 4.5.b). 
These measures are part of our suite of 
output gap indicators, and show the cyclical 
gap relative to an estimated long-run trend. 
The assumed trend of these indicators is 
uncertain – labour market capacity pressures 
could be higher or lower than estimated. The 
labour utilisation composite index, also part 
of our output gap indicator suite, is also close 
to its weakest level since 2000. 
The job separation rate is around its 
historical average, but the job-finding rate 
is at its lowest level in 30 years (figures 4.5.c 
and 4.5.d). The job separation rate – the 
share of people moving from employment to 
unemployment – has declined slightly over 
the last two quarters, suggesting that fewer 
firms are laying off workers. Although the 
share of workers moving into unemployment 
is not high by historical standards, the share 
of workers moving from unemployment to 
employment (the job-finding rate) is very low. 
Figure 4.5
Other HLFS-derived measures
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The monthly filled jobs, HLFS employment, and average hours worked gaps are constructed as a share of the working-age population 
and relative to an estimated long-run trend. They have been rescaled to match the mean and variance of the output gap. The labour 
utilisation composite is a principal component of a range of labour market variables from the HLFS, including various unemployment rates, the 
employment rate, and labour market flows, adapted from the method in Armstrong, Kamber, and Karagedikli (2016). It has been rescaled to 
match the mean and variance of the output gap. The job-finding rate is the probability of an unemployed person transitioning to employment 
in a quarter, while the job separation rate is the probability of an employed person transitioning to unemployment in a quarter, based on HLFS 
flow data. These rates account for indirect transition via ‘not in the labour force’ status — see Armstrong and Karagedikli (2017).
a. Employment rate gaps
b. Average hours worked gap and labour  
    utilisation composite
c. Job-finding rate
d. Job separation rate


37
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Job vacancies are low, and 
fewer workers are transitioning 
between jobs
The number of vacancies relative to 
unemployed people is less than half of 
its 2019 level, consistent with substantial 
labour market spare capacity (figure 4.6.a). A 
low level of vacancies relative to unemployed 
people indicates that labour demand is 
weak relative to labour supply. However, the 
vacancy-to-unemployment ratio increased 
slightly in the September 2025 quarter, which 
could be a tentative sign that labour demand 
is beginning to lift. [invisible footnote6]
6	
These results are not official statistics. They have been created for research purposes from the Integrated Data Infrastructure is carefully 
managed by Stats NZ. For more information about the IDI please visit www.stats.govt.nz/integrated-data. 
	
The results are based in part on tax data supplied by Inland Revenue to Stats NZ under the Tax Administration Act 1994 for statistical 
purposes. Any discussion of data limitations or weaknesses is in the context of using the IDI for statistical purposes, and is not related to the 
data’s ability to support Inland Revenue’s core operational requirements.
Transitions between jobs are low, 
consistent with weak labour market 
conditions (figure 4.6.b). Transitions of 
employees from one job to another provide 
an alternative measure of labour market 
conditions. Workers are more likely to move 
between employers, for instance to seek 
higher wages, when the labour market is 
tight. Over the first half of 2025, the share 
of newly created jobs filled by workers 
transitioning from another employer was 
only slightly higher than the trough following 
the GFC.
Figure 4.6
Vacancy and transition measures
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, Stats NZ IDI, ANZ, MBIE, RBNZ estimates. 
Note: The vacancy-to-unemployment ratio derives vacancies from the MBIE vacancy index (backdated with ANZ job ads), divided by the 
number of unemployed people. Job transitions is the share of jobs created in a given period that are filled by people transitioning from one 
primary employer to a different primary employer, based on deidentified unit record tax data.6
a. Vacancy-to-unemployment ratio
b. Job transitions
Figure 4.7
QSBO indicators
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: NZIER, RBNZ estimates. 
a. Labour as a limiting factor
b. Difficulty finding labour


38
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Figure 4.8
Wage growth
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Wage growth (labour cost index, ordinary and overtime, private sector) is a wage 
measure comparable to the CPI. It measures the ‘quality controlled’ cost of a basket of roles 
and so is not affected by industry composition shifts or wage increases due to promotion or 
productivity gains. It is therefore most appropriate as a measure of the cost of labour to firms 
(as opposed to a measure of pay received by workers).
Measures from the QSBO show 
that labour availability is not 
constraining firms
The share of firms who say labour is their 
biggest constraint to increasing turnover 
is near historical lows (figure 4.7.a). This is 
the most direct measure of labour market 
capacity pressure from the QSBO. This 
measure remains very low, around similar 
levels to following the GFC. 
On net, firms are continuing to find it easier 
to get the labour they want (figure 4.7.b). 
More firms say that it is getting easier to find 
both skilled and unskilled labour, than say 
it is getting more difficult. This is consistent 
with increasing spare capacity in the labour 
market. In the September 2025 quarter, 
the net share of firms saying it was getting 
easier to find labour reduced, which may be 
consistent with spare capacity in the labour 
market beginning to stabilise. 
Annual wage growth has declined 
to around historical norms
Private sector wage growth has declined 
broadly in line with historical relationships 
to sit around historical norms (figure 4.8). 
Firms’ labour costs are an important summary 
measure of inflationary pressure in the labour 
market. However, wage growth tends to 
move with a lag to labour market capacity 
pressure, and is also affected by other 
factors, such as past and expected inflation. 
Annual wage growth (labour cost index, 
ordinary and overtime, private sector) has 
declined relatively quickly from high levels to 
2.1 percent in the September 2025 quarter. 
Annual wage growth may decline slightly 
further in the near term, consistent with 
continued labour market spare capacity and 
declining consumer price inflation.
We expect labour market spare 
capacity to remain stable for 
the next few quarters, and then 
reduce over time
Labour demand is showing tentative 
signs of stabilisation or improvement. Job 
vacancies have increased in recent months, 
and monthly filled jobs numbers appear to 
be stabilising following a period of declines. 
The increase in hours worked and decrease 
in the job separation rate in the September 
2025 quarter could also be early signs of 
improving labour demand.
We expect labour market spare capacity to 
remain broadly stable over the next couple 
of quarters, before beginning to reduce. 
Our economic projections assume that GDP 
growth is beginning to exceed potential in 
the December 2025 quarter, which will result 
in the output gap becoming less negative 
over time (see chapter 5). We expect 
measures of labour market spare capacity 
to reduce over time, with a lag as the output 
gap closes.


39
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Chapter 
05
Economic 
projections
Mahia. Photo: Daniel Gardner


Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
40
Chapter 5.
Economic projections
This chapter summarises the central economic projections 
that the MPC considered when making their policy assessment. 
The projections were finalised on 20 November 2025.
The economy has significant spare 
capacity, but timely indicators suggest 
that a recovery has begun. Spare capacity 
is assumed to have begun reducing in the 
December 2025 quarter, but will continue to 
put substantial downward pressure on core 
inflation. Lower interest rates are supporting 
economic growth, which will contribute 
to a less negative output gap and lower 
unemployment over the medium term.
Annual CPI inflation has increased in 
2025, accounted for by higher prices for 
tradable goods and services. We project 
annual CPI inflation to decrease to near the 
2 percent target mid-point over the next year. 
Annual food price inflation has begun to 
decline, and annual non-tradables inflation is 
projected to continue to decrease as spare 
capacity reduces inflationary pressure in the 
economy. Price-setting behaviour is assumed 
to continue to adapt to a low-inflation 
environment over the medium term.
Prices for New Zealand’s exports are 
elevated, but dairy prices have begun to 
decrease. We assume that higher export 
prices in early 2025 will contribute to growth 
in business investment in late 2025 and early 
2026 (see chapter 4.1). 
We assume that elevated global 
uncertainty contributed to the decrease 
in business investment in mid-2025. 
We assume this effect will wane from the 
December 2025 quarter.
The New Zealand labour market has 
continued to weaken. The unemployment 
rate increased to 5.3 percent in the 
September 2025 quarter, while the 
employment and participation rates 
decreased. We expect the unemployment 
rate to decrease over the projection in line 
with the recovering output gap. Same-job 
wage growth has decreased to a level 
consistent with headline inflation near the 
target mid-point.
We project the OCR to remain near its 
current level over the next year. We 
assume the OCR is sufficiently stimulatory to 
ensure a recovery in the output gap, while 
allowing annual CPI inflation to converge 
to the 2 percent target mid-point. Our suite 
of indicators suggests that the long-term 
nominal neutral OCR is about 3 percent, 
with a range of uncertainty around this 
value (see box B). However, with short‑term 
inflation expectations and current annual 
CPI inflation above 2 percent, the short-term 
nominal neutral OCR is likely higher than 
3 percent. The current stimulatory stance 
in combination with OCR reductions since 
August 2024 will support an increase in 
demand over time.
These projections represent what we 
believe to be the most likely path for 
the economy, conditional on a range of 
assumptions. However, it is only one of 
many possible paths. Global economic 
developments and the evolution of the 
domestic economy are likely to be different 
to our assumptions.


41
Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Table 5.1 
Key projection assumptions
Economic growth and capacity pressure
Domestic 
capacity 
pressures
•	 The output gap is assumed to increase but remain low in the December 2025 
quarter (-1.6 percent of potential GDP). This is 0.2 percentage points lower than 
assumed in the August Statement.
•	 We assume that elevated export prices in early 2025 and reductions in real interest 
rates contribute to a recovery in the output gap from the December 2025 quarter.
Production
•	 We assume that GDP growth was 0.4 percent in the September 2025 quarter and 
increases to 0.7 percent in the December 2025 quarter. 
•	 Our forecasts for GDP growth in 2025 account for likely residual seasonality in 
the headline production measure. Although the headline measure is seasonally 
adjusted, it currently appears to have a remaining predictable seasonal pattern. 
This likely reflects challenges with seasonal adjustment following the COVID-19 
period and shifts in the industry composition of the economy towards industries with 
strong seasonality. Reported quarterly GDP growth may be overstated in December 
and March quarters and understated in June quarters.
•	 GDP is expected to increase more quickly than potential GDP from the December 
2025 quarter onwards, supported by lower interest rates, less uncertainty, and the 
lagged effect of high export prices. The output gap is assumed to close at the end 
of 2027.
•	 OCR reductions since August 2024 mean that the dampening effect of prior 
restrictive monetary policy is waning over time, supporting a temporary lift in GDP 
growth (see chapter 4.3 in the November 2024 Statement). The current stimulatory 
stance will further support an increase in demand over time.
Consumption
•	 Consumption began to increase in late 2024 in response to lower interest rates 
and has increased 1.5 percent in the year to the June 2025 quarter. We assume 
consumption growth will increase to 2 percent in the year to the June 2026 quarter 
in response to lower interest rates and stabilising real house prices.
•	 House prices are above our suite of sustainable estimates, suggesting that current 
house prices are higher than can be explained by fundamental factors (figure 5.4). 
Our suite of sustainable estimates has decreased since the August Statement, 
reflecting a slightly higher estimate of the neutral interest rate and lower rents. Asset 
price valuation is inherently uncertain, and our estimates of sustainable house prices 
have a wide range of uncertainty. We assume house prices will converge with our 
projection of sustainable house prices over the medium term.
Business 
investment
•	 Business investment contracted 3.8 percent in the year to the June 2025 quarter. 
This was significantly below our August Statement assumption of a 1.0 percent 
contraction. It is likely that elevated uncertainty contributed to lower business 
investment in mid-2025. Business investment is expected to increase over the 
medium term as GDP growth strengthens and the effects of global uncertainty wane.
Residential 
investment
•	 Residential investment has decreased about 22 percent since 2022. Increasing 
new dwelling consents over the past few months suggest home-building activity will 
begin to increase in the first half of 2026.
Government
•	 Government spending is assumed to be consistent with the fiscal forecasts in 
Budget 2025, updated for new GDP data released for the June 2025 quarter.
•	 Real government spending (consumption plus investment, central and local) 
increased 1.8 percent in the year to the June 2025 quarter, higher than the 
2 percent decline assumed in the August Statement. This flows through to a higher-
than-otherwise projection for government spending in the medium term.


Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
42
Export and 
import 
volumes
•	 Export volumes increased 0.7 percent in the year to the June 2025 quarter, broadly 
in line with our August Statement assumption. In the medium term, we assume 
export volumes grow at about the rate of potential GDP.
•	 Import volumes are assumed to evolve in line with other components of GDP over 
the medium term.
Global factors
Global interest 
rates and 
exchange rate
•	 Expectations for global policy interest rates are about 10 basis points higher than 
our August Statement assumption. This is mostly accounted for by higher interest 
rate expectations in Australia following higher-than-expected CPI inflation (see 
chapter 3). All else equal, higher global interest rates put downward pressure on the 
New Zealand dollar, which adds to inflationary pressure in New Zealand.
•	 This projection assumes the New Zealand dollar TWI is about 3 percent lower than the 
August Statement assumption (66 vs 68 in the August Statement). This depreciation 
is broadly consistent with lower New Zealand economic activity, lower export prices, 
and higher foreign interest rates. To the extent that the lower exchange rate can 
be attributed to weaker domestic economic activity and export prices, it does not 
contribute to higher inflationary pressure in New Zealand. To the extent that the lower 
exchange rate is due to higher global interest rates, this does increase inflationary 
pressure in New Zealand. However, this effect is relatively minor in this projection.
Export prices
•	 Goods export prices, particularly dairy, have declined faster than our August 
Statement assumption. We have maintained the same medium-term assumption for 
goods export prices in real foreign currency terms, but we assume they decrease to 
their medium-term level sooner.
•	 Services export prices tend to be set in New Zealand dollar terms while goods 
export prices are generally set in foreign currency terms. Therefore, the lower 
New Zealand dollar means services export prices are assumed to be about 
3 percent lower in foreign currency terms.
•	 Chapter 4.1 discusses the pass-through of commodity prices to economic activity in 
New Zealand. Export prices peaked in the June 2025 quarter, and this is expected 
to have its peak effect on business investment in the December 2025 and March 
2026 quarters.
Import prices
•	 Import prices have continued to decline, slightly faster than our August Statement 
assumption. Revisions to price and value estimates of low-value imported goods 
have led to a lower estimate of import prices in National Accounts data. We have 
maintained our assumption that import prices will continue to converge toward their 
pre-COVID-19 level in real foreign currency terms. Our import price assumption 
continues to be roughly in the middle of our May 2025 Statement tariff-related 
scenarios (see May 2025 Statement, box A).


43
Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Labour market
Employment 
and wages 
•	 The New Zealand labour market continued to weaken in the September 2025 
quarter. The unemployment rate increased to 5.3 percent and the labour force 
participation rate declined.
•	 We assume the unemployment rate will remain around its peak at 5.3 percent in the 
December 2025 quarter before gradually decreasing. 
•	 Annual same-job wage growth (LCI – private sector salary and wage rates, 
ordinary and overtime) decreased to 2.1 percent in the September 2025 quarter. 
Wage growth is projected to remain at about its current level, and is influenced 
by offsetting factors of decreasing unemployment and decreasing inflation in this 
projection.
Migration
•	 Net working-age immigration was revised lower over recent quarters but increased 
slightly in the September 2025 quarter. We assume a gradual increase in net 
working-age immigration over the medium term, to an annual rate of about 30,000 
people, as the labour market recovers.
Inflation 
Headline CPI 
inflation
•	 Annual CPI inflation increased to 3.0 percent in the September 2025 quarter.
•	 Annual CPI inflation is expected to decline to 2.7 percent in the December 2025 
quarter, before decreasing to near the target mid-point in the middle of 2026.
Non-tradables
•	 Annual non-tradables inflation decreased to 3.5 percent in the September 2025 
quarter, in line with the August Statement. We expect non-tradables inflation to 
continue to decline, reflecting the negative output gap and price-setting behaviour 
continuing to adapt to a low-inflation environment. We project annual non-tradables 
inflation will decrease to 2.6 percent in 2026, before stabilising at about 3 percent 
from 2027 as the output gap closes.
Tradables
•	 Annual tradables inflation increased to 2.2 percent in the September 2025 quarter. 
Tradables inflation is expected to remain near this level in the December 2025 quarter 
before gradually decreasing. Higher food prices are the main contributor to tradables 
inflation at present, but food price inflation is expected to ease in the near term.
•	 In the medium term, annual tradables inflation is assumed to decline to around 
0.6 percent. Slowing economic growth in our trading partners is expected to 
contribute to easing tradables inflation over the medium term.


Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
44
Box B: 
Updates to our suite of neutral 
interest rate indicators
7	
For further detail on our suite of neutral rate estimates, see Castaing et al. (2024), Estimates of New Zealand’s Nominal Neutral 
Interest Rate.
8	
The VECM was initially developed by Morley et al. (2023) and adapted for New Zealand by Alanya-Beltran (2025), Estimating 
New Zealand’s neutral rate and its drivers: A VECM approach.
9	
Some adjustments have been made to the specification of the VECM in Alanya-Beltran (2025), to ensure inflation expectations 
are treated in a similar way to the rest of the neutral rate indicator suite. We have also implemented a filtering approach to smooth 
volatility in the VECM estimates, which is consistent with the rest of the indicator suite.
We use a range of modelling approaches 
to estimate the neutral interest rate in 
New Zealand.7 We use the latest research 
and modelling techniques to improve our 
suite of indicators of the neutral OCR. 
We have developed a new Vector Error 
Correction Model (VECM) to estimate 
neutral.8 The VECM assumes the neutral 
rate is represented by the common trend 
between short- and long-term real interest 
rates. This new estimate evolves similarly 
to our existing indicator suite over recent 
decades, declining between 2000 and 
2020, followed by a partial reversal 
(figure B.1). 
The VECM is similar to an existing 
estimate of neutral in our indicator 
suite – the common interest rate trend 
model. However, the VECM defines 
the relationship between short- and 
long-term interest rates more clearly 
and incorporates a broader set of data. 
Therefore, we have replaced the common 
interest rate trend model in the indicator 
suite with the VECM.9 
As well as introducing the VECM, we 
have also updated and re-estimated the 
New Keynesian model in the neutral suite 
to ensure it captures key relationships in 
the New Zealand economy. The updated 
model produces an estimate of neutral 
more in line with the rest of the indicator 
suite since 2020. 
These updates have resulted in a small 
upward revision in our suite’s central 
estimate of the long-term nominal neutral 
interest rate. The mean of our suite of 
indicators sits at 3.0 percent, compared 
to a mean of 2.9 percent at the time of the 
August Statement. However, the range 
of uncertainty around the level of neutral 
interest rates is always high, with even 
the updated narrower range of indicators 
spanning 2.2 to 4.0 percent.
Figure B.1
Long-term nominal neutral OCR suite
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


45
Chapter 5. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Figure 5.3
Unemployment rate
(unemployed people as a share of the labour force,
seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Charts
Figure 5.1
Inflation components
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Dotted lines show the projections from the August Statement. The 
shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI 
inflation over the medium term.
Figure 5.2
Private sector LCI wage inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 5.4
Real house prices and sustainable indicators
(index)
Source: CoreLogic, RBNZ estimates.
Note: See Brunton (2021), Measures for assessing the sustainability of house 
prices in New Zealand. The indicator range may be revised over time due to 
certain inputs being unobservable, such as neutral interest rates. The indicator 
range has been projected in line with our projections for wages and population 
growth. The projection assumes the neutral interest rate remains at its current level.
Figure 5.5
Production GDP
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 5.6
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


46
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
 Chapter 
06
Appendices
Pouakai Tarn. Photo: Matt Brunton


47
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Chapter 6.
Appendices
Appendix 1: Statistical tables
Table 6.1
Key forecast variables
GDP growth 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Annual
Unemployment 
rate
TWI
OCR
2023
Mar
-0.2
1.2
6.7
3.5
71.3
4.5
Jun
0.8
1.1
6.0
3.7
71.0
5.3
Sep
0.1
1.8
5.6
3.9
70.6
5.5
Dec
0.2
0.5
4.7
4.0
70.8
5.5
2024
Mar
0.1
0.6
4.0
4.4
71.6
5.5
Jun
-0.9
0.4
3.3
4.7
71.4
5.5
Sep
-1.1
0.6
2.2
4.9
70.9
5.4
Dec
0.4
0.5
2.2
5.1
69.5
4.6
2025
Mar
0.9
0.9
2.5
5.1
67.8
4.0
Jun
-0.9
0.5
2.7
5.2
69.1
3.4
Sep
0.4
1.0
3.0
5.3
68.4
3.1
Dec
0.7
0.2
2.7
5.3
66.1
2.4
2026
Mar
0.7
0.5
2.3
5.3
66.0
2.2
Jun
0.6
0.5
2.2
5.2
66.0
2.2
Sep
0.7
0.9
2.1
5.1
66.0
2.2
Dec
0.8
0.3
2.2
5.0
66.0
2.3
2027
Mar
0.8
0.5
2.2
4.8
66.0
2.3
Jun
0.8
0.4
2.1
4.7
66.0
2.5
Sep
0.7
0.8
2.0
4.6
66.0
2.6
Dec
0.7
0.3
2.0
4.5
66.0
2.7
2028
Mar
0.7
0.5
2.0
4.5
66.0
2.7
Jun
0.6
0.4
2.0
4.4
66.0
2.8
Sep
0.6
0.8
2.0
4.4
66.0
2.9
Dec
0.6
0.4
2.0
4.4
66.0
2.9


48
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Table 6.2
Measures of inflation and inflation expectations
2024
2025
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Inflation (annual rates)
CPI
4.0
3.3
2.2
2.2
2.5
2.7
3.0
CPI non‑tradables
5.8
5.4
4.9
4.5
4.0
3.7
3.5
CPI tradables
1.6
0.3
-1.6
-1.1
0.3
1.2
2.2
Sectoral factor model
estimate of core inflation
4.2
3.5
3.2
3.0
2.8
2.7
2.7
CPI trimmed mean (30% measure)
4.5
3.8
2.7
2.5
2.2
2.4
2.2
CPI weighted median
4.4
3.5
2.8
2.6
2.2
2.2
2.2
GDP deflator (expenditure)
3.8
3.4
3.4
5.5
4.3
4.3
Inflation expectations 
Survey of Expectations
Tara‑ā‑Pūkenga (SOE)
1 year ahead
3.2
2.7
2.4
2.0
2.1
2.4
2.4
2.4
2 years ahead
2.5
2.3
2.0
2.1
2.1
2.3
2.3
2.3
5 years ahead
2.3
2.3
2.1
2.2
2.1
2.2
2.3
2.2
10 years ahead
2.2
2.2
2.0
2.2
2.1
2.2
2.2
2.2
Inflation expectations 
RBNZ Business Expectations 
Survey Tara‑ā‑Umanga (BES)
1 year ahead
2.2
2.1
2.3
2.4
2.5
2.4
2 years ahead
2.2
2.2
2.5
2.5
2.6
2.4
5 years ahead
2.8
2.8
3.0
3.1
3.2
2.8
10 years ahead
3.1
3.3
3.7
3.9
3.6
3.6
Inflation expectations 
RBNZ Household Expectations 
Survey Tara‑ā‑Whare (HES)
1 year ahead
5.1
5.3
4.1
4.1
4.9
5.6
6.0
5.5
2 years ahead
3.6
3.6
3.1
3.7
3.9
4.7
4.6
4.3
5 years ahead
3.6
3.0
3.4
3.4
3.6
3.7
4.1
3.8


49
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Table 6.3
Measures of labour market conditions	
(seasonally adjusted, changes expressed in annual percent terms, unless specified otherwise)	
2024
2025
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Household Labour Force Survey
Unemployment rate
4.4
4.7
4.9
5.1
5.1
5.2
5.3
Underutilisation rate
11.3
11.9
11.7
12.2
12.4
12.8
12.9
Labour force participation rate
71.5
71.6
71.1
70.9
70.7
70.5
70.3
Employment rate 
(% of working‑age population)
68.3
68.3
67.6
67.3
67.1
66.8
66.6
Employment growth
0.9
0.1
-0.6
-1.2
-0.9
-1.2
-0.6
Average weekly hours worked
33.8
33.3
33.3
33.1
33.0
32.7
33.0
Number unemployed
(thousand people)
134
143
148
155
156
158
160
Number employed 
(million people)
2.90
2.91
2.89
2.88
2.88
2.87
2.87
Labour force (million people)
3.04
3.05
3.04
3.04
3.03
3.03
3.03
Extended labour force
(million people)
3.14
3.16
3.14
3.14
3.14
3.15
3.14
Working‑age population
(million people, age 15+ years)
4.25
4.26
4.27
4.29
4.29
4.30
4.31
Quarterly Employment Survey — QES
Filled jobs growth
3.6
-0.1
-1.4
-0.9
-1.8
-1.1
0.3
Average hourly earnings growth 
(private sector, ordinary time)
4.9
3.9
3.2
4.0
3.8
4.6
4.1
Other data sources
Labour cost index growth, adjusted 
(private sector, ordinary and overtime)
3.8
3.6
3.3
3.0
2.6
2.3
2.1
Labour cost index growth, unadjusted
(private sector, ordinary time)
5.2
4.8
4.5
3.9
3.7
3.5
3.3
Estimated net working‑age 
immigration (thousands, quarterly)
7.9
5.3
-0.2
-0.9
0.5
3.1
3.1
Change in all vacancies index* 
-27.3
-33.4
-31.4
-27.2
-21.7
-7.6
3.5
Note: The all vacancies index is produced by MBIE as part of the monthly Jobs Online report, which shows changes in job vacancies advertised 
by businesses on internet job boards. The unadjusted labour cost index (LCI) is an analytical index that reflects quality change in addition to price 
change (whereas the official LCI measures price changes only). For definitions of underutilisation, the extended labour force, and related concepts, 
see Statistics New Zealand (2016), Introducing underutilisation in the labour market. 
* The all vacancies index is a non‑seasonally adjusted series.


50
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Table 6.4
Composition of real GDP growth
(annual average percent change, seasonally adjusted, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
Final consumption expenditure
Private
4.8
4.5
2.4
0.2
6.2
3.3
0.9
-0.1
2.2
2.4
2.8
Public authority
3.8
3.3
5.5
7.0
8.0
2.6
1.3
0.3
1.0
-0.2
0.5
Total
4.6
4.3
3.1
1.8
6.7
3.2
1.0
0.0
1.9
1.8
2.3
Gross fixed capital formation
Residential
-1.8
-0.1
2.7
2.2
2.6
-2.0
-5.5
-12.5
-2.4
8.4
11.6
Other
9.8
7.0
2.8
-2.3
11.3
5.0
0.2
-3.2
-0.7
4.4
6.5
Total
6.6
5.2
2.8
-1.2
9.1
3.3
-1.1
-5.1
-1.0
5.2
7.5
Final domestic 
expenditure
5.0
4.5
3.0
1.1
7.2
3.2
0.5
-1.2
1.3
2.5
3.4
Stockbuilding*
0.2
-0.2
-0.2
-0.3
0.6
0.3
-1.5
0.2
0.5
0.3
0.0
Gross national 
expenditure
5.6
4.3
2.7
-0.1
8.4
3.7
-0.9
-1.0
1.6
3.0
3.4
Exports of goods 
and services
3.8
3.3
0.2
-17.9
2.5
5.7
8.3
3.3
1.4
3.0
2.5
Imports of goods 
and services
8.0
4.7
1.3
-15.8
16.8
4.3
-1.2
1.4
3.1
4.0
4.1
Expenditure on GDP
4.2
3.9
2.5
0.2
4.6
4.0
1.3
-0.7
1.0
2.7
3.0
GDP (production)
3.4
3.5
2.3
-0.3
4.6
3.5
1.4
-1.1
0.5
2.8
3.1
GDP (production, 
March qtr to March qtr)
3.5
3.5
0.7
4.7
0.5
3.0
1.2
-0.6
0.9
3.0
2.9
* Percentage point contribution to the growth rate of GDP.


51
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Table 6.5
Summary of economic projections
(annual percent change, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
2028
Price measures
CPI 
1.1
1.5
2.5
1.5
6.9
6.7
4.0
2.5
2.3
2.2
2.0
Labour costs
1.9
2.0
2.4
1.6
3.1
4.5
3.8
2.6
2.0
2.0
2.1
Export prices
(in New Zealand dollars) 
3.4
1.3
6.9
-6.0
20.7
1.0
-2.2
10.9
1.6
0.4
2.3
Import prices
(in New Zealand dollars) 
1.6
4.1
2.3
-2.8
18.7
8.0
-4.3
6.7
-0.4
0.4
1.1
Monetary conditions
OCR (year average)
1.8
1.8
1.2
0.3
0.5
3.1
5.5
4.9
2.8
2.3
2.6
TWI (year average)
75.6
73.4
71.7
72.4
74.0
71.2
71.0
69.9
67.4
66.0
66.0
Output
GDP (production, annual 
average % change)
3.4
3.5
2.3
-0.3
4.6
3.5
1.4
-1.1
0.5
2.8
3.1
Potential output (annual 
average % change)
3.2
3.1
2.5
0.0
1.9
3.3
2.6
1.6
1.3
1.9
2.4
Output gap (% of potential 
GDP, year average)
0.4
0.7
0.5
0.1
2.8
2.9
1.7
-1.0
-1.7
-0.9
-0.2
Labour market
Total employment 
(seasonally adjusted)
2.9
1.3
2.4
0.0
2.3
2.9
0.9
-0.9
0.5
2.6
2.4
Unemployment rate (March 
qtr, seasonally adjusted)
4.4
4.2
4.2
4.6
3.3
3.5
4.4
5.1
5.3
4.8
4.5
Trend labour productivity 
0.7
0.8
1.0
1.0
0.8
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.4
0.3
0.4
Key balances
Current account balance 
(% of GDP)
-3.2
-3.9
-2.4
-2.5
-6.5
-8.3
-5.7
-4.3
-3.6
-4.2
-4.5
Terms of trade
(SNA measure, annual 
average % change)
4.5
-2.1
2.1
-0.5
0.4
-5.0
-0.9
3.4
4.8
-1.3
1.1
Household saving rate* 
(% of disposable income)
-1.8
-1.1
1.3
7.5
2.5
-2.2
1.0
2.7
3.4
0.9
-0.5
World economy
Trading‑partner GDP 
(annual average % change)
4.0
3.5
1.7
-0.3
6.3
3.0
3.2
3.0
2.7
2.7
2.7
Trading‑partner CPI 
(TWI‑weighted)
1.9
1.4
2.4
0.8
4.1
4.7
2.2
1.8
2.0
2.0
2.0
* Household saving rate data up to the year to March 2024 have been updated based on national accounts (income and expenditure) 
  published by Stats NZ on 14 November 2025. Other reported forecasts for GDP components are based on June 2025 quarter GDP data.


52
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Appendix 2: Chart pack
Figure 6.1
Composition of CPI inflation
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 6.2
Output gap and output gap indicators
(share of potential)
Source: NZIER, MBIE, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The output gap indicators based on information from labour market surveys 
are shown separately from the other indicators. For each group of indicators, the 
shaded area shows the range of values and the line shows the mean value. The 
output gap estimate in the final quarter is based on our near‑term GDP estimate.
Figure 6.3
Unemployment and underutilisation rates
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 6.4
OCR and nominal neutral OCR indicator suite
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area indicates the range between the maximum and minimum 
values from our suite of long‑run nominal neutral OCR indicators. See Castaing et al. 
(2024), Estimates of New Zealand’s nominal neutral interest rate.
Figure 6.5
GDP and potential GDP
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.6
Measures of core inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for 
annual CPI inflation over the medium term.


53
Chapter 6. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2025
Figure 6.7
Inflation expectations
(annual, years ahead) 
Source: RBNZ Survey of Expectations.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for 
annual CPI inflation over the medium term.
Figure 6.9
House price inflation
(annual) 
Source: REINZ.
Source: Stats NZ, Global Dairy Trade, Bloomberg, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.12
Terms of trade, dairy, and oil price indices
(index = 100 in the September 2008 quarter, quarterly average)
Figure 6.10
Mortgage interest rates
Source: interest.co.nz, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The rates shown for the fixed terms are the average of the advertised 
rates from ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac, shown as weekly data. The floating 
rate represents the monthly yield on floating housing debt from the RBNZ 
Income Statement survey.
Figure 6.8
Private sector wage growth
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 6.11
New Zealand dollar exchange rates
(monthly average) 
Source: NZFMA, RBNZ.
