BANK: RBNZ
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: Monetary Policy Statement November 2024
DATE: 24/11/2027
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rbnz.govt.nz/-/media/project/sites/rbnz/files/publications/monetary-policy-statements/2024/nov-271124gsp/mps_report_nov2024.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Monetary Policy
Statement. 
November 2024
B.33


ii
Policy assessment. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Policy assessment.
OCR 4.25% — OCR lowered further 
as inflation returns to target
The Monetary Policy Committee today agreed to reduce  
the Official Cash Rate by 50 basis points to 4.25 percent.
Annual consumer price inflation has declined 
and is now close to the midpoint of the Monetary 
Policy Committee’s 1 to 3 percent target band. 
Inflation expectations are also close to target 
and core inflation is converging to the midpoint. 
If economic conditions continue to evolve as 
projected, the Committee expects to be able to 
lower the OCR further early next year. 
Economic activity in New Zealand remains 
subdued and output continues to be below its 
potential. With excess productive capacity in 
the economy, inflation pressures have eased. 
Domestic price and wage setting behaviours 
are becoming consistent with inflation remaining 
near the target midpoint. The price of imports 
has fallen, also contributing to lower headline 
inflation. 
Economic growth is expected to recover 
during 2025, as lower interest rates encourage 
investment and other spending. Employment 
growth is expected to remain weak until mid-
2025 and, for some, financial stress will take time 
to ease. 
Global economic growth is expected to remain 
subdued in the near term. Geopolitical conditions 
and policy uncertainty could contribute to 
increased economic and inflation volatility  
over the medium term. 
The Monetary Policy Committee agreed that 
having consumer price inflation close to the 
middle of its target band puts it in the best 
position to respond to any shocks to inflation.
Meitaki, thanks.
Adrian Orr 
Governor 
Figure i.1
Official Cash Rate (OCR)
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


iii
Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Report and supporting notes published at:
www.rbnz.govt.nz/monetary-policy/monetary-policy-statement
Subscribe online: www.rbnz.govt.nz/email-updates
Copyright © 2024 Reserve Bank of New Zealand
This report is published pursuant to section 129
of the Reserve Bank of New Zealand Act 2021. 
ISSN 1770-4829
Thank you to RBNZ staff for photography in this report. 
Cover: Mākara. Photo: Dean Hill
Monetary Policy Framework
The Monetary Policy Committee operates and makes 
decisions under the monetary policy framework that 
comprises the following key components:
•	 the Remit;
•	 the Charter;
•	 the Code of Conduct; and
•	 the monetary policy strategy.
The corresponding documents to these components 
and additional information can be accessed on our 
website under the monetary policy framework.


1
Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
The projections were finalised on 21 November 2024. The Official Cash Rate (OCR) 
projection incorporates an outlook for monetary policy that is consistent with the MPC’s 
monetary policy assessment, which was finalised on 27 November 2024. 
Contents
Policy assessment	
ii
1.	
Summary record of meeting	
2
2.	 Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook	
6
3.	 Global developments and outlook	
18
4.	 Special topics	
25
	
4.1	 Trends in production sectors of the New Zealand economy	
27
	
Box A: Monetary policy sensitivity of different production GDP sectors 	
29
	
4.2	Summary of recent business visits	
30
	
4.3	Real interest rates and their effect on the economy	
34
5.	 Domestic financial conditions	
37
6.	 Economic projections	
42
7.	
Appendices	
48
	
Appendix 1: Statistical tables 	
49
	
Appendix 2: Chart pack 	
54
Monetary Policy Statement.
November 2024


2
Chapter 1. Summary record of meeting. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Wairoa River. Photo: Hamish Fitchett
Summary 
record of 
meeting
Chapter 
01


3
Chapter 1. Summary record of meeting. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Chapter 1. 
Summary record of meeting
Consumer price inflation is sustainably within the Monetary 
Policy Committee’s 1 to 3 percent target range, and measures
of core inflation are converging on the midpoint. 
Restrictive monetary policy and subdued 
economic activity overseas have slowed 
domestic demand. Lower import prices 
have also contributed to lower inflation. 
Expectations of future inflation, the pricing 
intentions of firms, and spare productive 
capacity are consistent with the inflation 
target being sustainably achieved. This 
provides the context and the confidence 
for the Committee to further ease monetary 
policy restraint.
Global economic activity expected 
to remain subdued
Economic growth rates in the US and China 
are expected to slow over the year ahead, 
while the growth outlook for Europe remains 
sluggish. Headline inflation is close to target 
in most advanced countries, but some 
persistence in services inflation remains. 
Central banks are reducing interest rates, 
although the pace of monetary policy easing 
varies across countries due to differences in 
economic conditions. Global sovereign debt 
levels have increased markedly since 2020 
and continue to expand. This creates risks of 
higher global bond yields and risk premia.
Significant spare productive 
capacity expected over the 
next year
Domestic economic activity remains below 
trend, as a result of weakness in demand for 
durable goods consumption and investment. 
This has been reflected in falling activity 
in interest rate sensitive sectors such as 
construction, manufacturing, and retail trade. 
In contrast, some services sectors have 
continued to grow.
Considerable spare productive capacity 
remains in the economy, although this 
is expected to steadily reduce over the 
projection period. Consistent with feedback 
from business visits, high frequency 
indicators suggest that the economy has 
stabilised in recent months. Economic growth 
is expected to recover from the December 
quarter, in part due to lower interest rates, 
but there is uncertainty around the exact 
timing and speed of the recovery. 
The Committee noted that the projections 
incorporate the fiscal assumptions from the 
2024 Budget Economic and Fiscal Update.
Labour market conditions easing
Wage growth is slowing, consistent with 
inflation returning to the target midpoint. 
Employment levels and job vacancies have 
declined, reflecting subdued economic 
activity. Unemployment is expected to 
continue rising in the near term since the 
labour market typically takes longer to 
recover than output. Net immigration to 
New Zealand has reduced significantly from 
high rates over recent history. The rate of 
migrant arrivals has slowed, and departures 
of New Zealanders have increased, partly 
in response to subdued labour market 
conditions relative to Australia.


4
Chapter 1. Summary record of meeting. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Lower OCR passing through
to mortgage rates
Market interest rates have declined in 
response to actual and expected OCR 
reductions. The decline in mortgage rates 
has been less than for wholesale rates, in 
part reflecting changes in the composition 
and cost of bank funding. The average rate 
on outstanding mortgages has now peaked 
at 6.4 percent and is expected to decline 
to 5.8 percent over the next 12 months as 
borrowers refix their mortgage interest rates 
at lower levels in line with a falling OCR. 
No trade-off between meeting 
inflation objectives and financial 
stability
The Committee noted the findings of the 
Bank’s November 2024 Financial Stability 
Report. Some households and businesses 
are experiencing financial stress. While 
non-performing loans remain low compared 
to past recessions, further financial stress 
is likely to emerge even as the economy 
recovers. The banking system remains 
well capitalised and in a strong financial 
position to support customers experiencing 
distress. The Committee agreed that there 
is currently no material trade-off between 
meeting inflation objectives and maintaining 
financial stability.
Inflation is expected to remain 
near the midpoint
Headline consumer price inflation has 
declined to close to the target midpoint, 
measures of core inflation are converging 
on the target midpoint, and inflation 
expectations at all horizons are close 
to the target midpoint. With significant 
spare productive capacity expected in 
the economy over the next 12 months, the 
Committee is confident that remaining 
inflation pressures will abate. Feedback from 
recent surveys and business visits suggest 
domestic price and wage setting behaviours 
are becoming consistent with inflation 
remaining sustainably at target.
There are near-term risks 
to the economic outlook
The Committee discussed two key 
uncertainties to the near-term outlook. 
While domestic price setting behaviour 
is now more in line with the Committee’s 
inflation objective, members discussed 
uncertainty about the persistence of some 
components of inflation. The Committee 
also noted that, while lower interest rates 
are expected to underpin a recovery in 
the domestic economy, the exact speed 
and timing of the recovery is subject to 
uncertainty. 
There is a risk of greater inflation 
volatility over the medium term
Geopolitical risks and climate-related energy 
and food risks pose uncertainty over the 
medium term. There may be higher relative 
price volatility and more unpredictability in 
aggregate inflation. The Committee agreed 
that having consumer price inflation close to 
the middle of its target band puts it in the best 
position to respond to any shocks to inflation. 


5
Chapter 1. Summary record of meeting. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
The Committee agreed 
to lower the OCR
With headline inflation close to the midpoint 
and measures of core inflation converging 
on the midpoint, the Committee has more 
confidence to continue removing monetary 
policy restraint. The Committee agreed 
that a 50 basis point cut is consistent with 
their mandate of maintaining low and stable 
inflation, while seeking to avoid unnecessary 
instability in output, employment, interest 
rates and the exchange rate.
If economic conditions continue to evolve as 
projected, the Committee expects to be able 
to lower the OCR further early next year. 
On Wednesday 27 November the 
Committee reached a consensus to lower 
the Official Cash Rate by 50 basis points 
to 4.25 percent.
Attendees:
Reserve Bank members of MPC: 
Adrian Orr (Chair), Christian Hawkesby, 
Karen Silk, Paul Conway 
External MPC members:
Bob Buckle, Carl Hansen, Prasanna Gai
Treasury Observer: 
Tim Ng
MPC Secretary: 
Chris Bloor


6
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Waimakariri River. Photo: Rebecca Williams
Chapter 
02
Economic 
assessment 
and monetary 
policy outlook


7
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Chapter 2.
Economic assessment and 
monetary policy outlook
Key points
Restrictive interest rates have reduced 
demand in the New Zealand economy, 
and this is contributing to lower inflation. 
Slower growth in government spending, 
falling net immigration, and subdued global 
growth are also dampening demand. There 
is currently spare supply capacity in the 
economy, following a prolonged period 
of excess demand. Reduced pressure on 
available resources and lower imported 
inflation have driven declines in Consumers 
Price Index (CPI) inflation. Annual CPI inflation 
has returned to within the Monetary Policy 
Committee’s (MPC’s) 1 to 3 percent target 
band, at 2.2 percent in the September 2024 
quarter.
Global economic growth remains below 
potential, and inflation is declining in most 
of New Zealand’s major trading partners. 
Most major central banks have been reducing 
policy interest rates, and financial market 
participants expect further reductions over 
the coming year. Economic growth in China 
has continued to slow, while growth in the US 
has remained higher than in other advanced 
economies. In aggregate, GDP growth 
in New Zealand’s major trading partners 
is expected to continue at a similar pace 
through 2025. Low global goods inflation is 
contributing to lower prices for New Zealand’s 
imports. Despite subdued global growth, 
prices for some of New Zealand’s key 
commodity exports, including dairy and meat, 
have increased since the middle of this year.
Retail and wholesale interest rates have 
fallen in New Zealand since the middle of 
this year, easing financial conditions. Since 
the end of June, 1- and 2-year mortgage rates 
have fallen by slightly more than 1 percentage 
point. Actual and expected OCR cuts have 
been the main drivers of lower mortgage 
rates. Lower OCR expectations have also 
contributed to a small depreciation in the 
New Zealand dollar exchange rate since the 
August Statement.
The production measure of gross domestic 
product (GDP) declined by 0.2 percent 
in the June 2024 quarter, and likely 
contracted further in the September 2024 
quarter. Declining GDP is consistent with 
a range of timely indicators of economic 
activity, and we assume that GDP declined 
by a further 0.2 percent in the September 
quarter. We assume that GDP growth 
resumes from the December 2024 quarter, 
as lower interest rates flow through into 
stronger demand. 
Declining economic activity has contributed 
to increasing spare capacity in the 
New Zealand economy. We estimate that 
the output gap — the difference between 
GDP and potential output — has opened 
further to about -1.5 percent of potential. 
Subdued economic activity has contributed 
to weaker labour demand and increasing 
spare capacity in the labour market. The 
unemployment rate rose to 4.8 percent in 
the September 2024 quarter, and other 
measures of spare capacity in the labour 
market have also increased. We estimate that 
the New Zealand economy’s potential growth 
rate has fallen over the past year, reflecting 
slower labour force growth due to declining 
net immigration. 


8
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Annual CPI inflation declined from 
3.3 percent in the June 2024 quarter to 
2.2 percent in the September 2024 quarter, 
returning to the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent 
target band. Annual tradables inflation fell 
sharply to -1.6 percent in the September 
2024 quarter, reflecting falling import prices, 
weak retail spending, and lower fuel prices. 
Non-tradables inflation — which measures 
price changes for goods and services less 
exposed to international competition — 
remains high, but is declining as a result of 
spare capacity in the economy and price- 
and wage-setting behaviour adapting to 
a low-inflation environment. Measures of 
core inflation have continued to decline. 
Business expectations for headline inflation 
at all horizons are now close to the 2 percent 
target mid-point.
Conditional on our economic outlook, we 
project the OCR to continue to decline. As 
inflationary pressures have eased, the MPC 
has reduced the OCR. Price- and wage-
setting behaviour are assumed to adapt to a 
low-inflation environment over time, further 
easing inflationary pressure. Lower interest 
rates are assumed to increase demand 
and output, contributing to a closing in the 
output gap and a recovery in labour market 
conditions over the medium term. Annual 
CPI inflation is projected to remain within 
the target band. Continued spare capacity 
is assumed to lead to further falls in non-
tradables inflation, offsetting an assumed 
rise in annual tradables inflation to around 
1 percent — about its historical average. The 
outlook for the OCR over the medium term is 
similar to the August Statement.


9
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Economic assessment
Economic activity has 
declined further
Economic activity in New Zealand, 
measured by production GDP, declined 
by 0.2 percent in the June 2024 quarter 
(figure 2.1). This decline was foreshadowed 
by weakness in a broad range of timely 
indicators, such as business surveys, 
although GDP fell by slightly less than 
assumed at the time of the August Statement. 
Economic activity in New Zealand has been 
broadly unchanged over the past two years.
Indicators suggest that economic activity 
declined further in the September 
2024 quarter. Although there is some 
variation, on balance, indicators suggest 
that GDP declined in the September 2024 
quarter. Firms in the Quarterly Survey of 
Business Opinion (QSBO) reported slightly 
weaker trading activity in the quarter. The 
Performance of Manufacturing Index and 
Performance of Services Index continued 
to report declining activity. Filled jobs 
and employment also contracted in the 
quarter. In our recent talks with businesses, 
many reported that customer demand had 
weakened further through the middle of this 
year (see chapter 4.2).
We expect the economy 
to expand over 2025
Timely indicators of economic activity have 
been mixed in October. Some indicators 
have improved slightly from earlier months, 
while others have deteriorated slightly. 
Businesses report that they are feeling more 
confident about the outlook for the economy, 
although these confidence measures 
historically have a weak relationship with 
actual economic outcomes.
Economic growth is assumed to resume 
from the December 2024 quarter and 
increase over 2025, as lower interest rates 
support demand. Key mortgage and term 
deposit rates have fallen since the middle 
of the year, reflecting actual and expected 
future OCR cuts. Since the end of June, 
1- and 2-year mortgage rates have fallen 
by slightly more than 1 percentage point  
(see chapter 5). Lower interest rates are 
assumed to support a recovery in demand, 
with GDP growth resuming in the December 
2024 quarter and then increasing into 2025. 
Lower interest rates will take time to fully 
transmit to economic activity, with activity in 
some sectors likely to be more sensitive than 
others (see chapter 4.1). 
Figure 2.1
Production GDP
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: 09/10 $ refers to the deflator used. It is a chain-volume series expressed 
in 2009/10 prices.


10
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Household spending is subdued
Household consumption growth is low, 
reflecting restrictive interest rates, weaker 
asset prices, and declining population 
growth. Annual household consumption 
growth was 0.3 percent in the June 2024 
quarter. Consumption growth is assumed 
to increase over the three-year projection, 
supported by lower interest rates and, to a 
lesser extent, the income tax cuts that took 
effect on 31 July (figure 2.2).
Government spending is slowing
Government consumption is assumed 
to decline over coming quarters. Annual 
government consumption growth fell to 
-0.3 percent in the June 2024 quarter. 
Government consumption was stronger in 
the June 2024 quarter than our assumption 
in the August Statement that was based 
on Budget 2024. We assume that real 
government consumption declines further 
through to mid-2025, although this is partially 
offset by continued growth in government 
investment. While real government spending 
is projected to decline as a share of potential 
output, this decline is slower than assumed 
in the August Statement, reflecting a weaker 
outlook for potential growth (figure 2.3).
Private investment is declining
Business and residential investment 
are declining, but we assume they will 
recover next year. Business investment 
has continued to decline, reflecting weak 
demand and restrictive interest rates. 
Residential investment has also fallen further, 
consistent with restrictive interest rates and 
falling real house prices. We assume that 
residential and business investment recover 
from the beginning of 2025, reflecting recent 
and further decreases in interest rates and 
stronger economic activity.
Net immigration is slowing
Net immigration to New Zealand has 
slowed over the past year (figure 2.4). 
Migrant arrivals have slowed, and departures 
of New Zealanders have increased, partly in 
response to weakening economic and labour 
market conditions — particularly relative to 
Australia. 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.2
Private consumption
(seasonally adjusted)
Figure 2.3
Government consumption and investment
(share of potential, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.4
Net immigration
(annual, share of working-age population)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


11
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Declining net immigration is assumed 
to have broadly offsetting effects on 
inflationary pressure. Slower population 
growth is weighing on consumption growth 
and demand for housing. However, slower 
population growth is also resulting in slower 
growth in labour supply and therefore 
potential output. Our projections assume 
that annual potential growth has slowed from 
around 2.5 percent in late 2023 to around 
1.5 percent at present, largely as a result of 
slowing net immigration. Weak productivity 
growth in New Zealand has also reduced 
potential growth.
Spare capacity in the economy 
has increased
We estimate that the New Zealand 
economy is operating with spare capacity. 
Capacity pressures have continued to 
decline over 2024 as economic activity 
has remained broadly unchanged, and we 
estimate that the output gap is currently 
around -1.5 percent of potential GDP 
(figure 2.5). A range of indicators are 
consistent with increasing spare capacity in 
the economy. These include a historically 
high share of firms citing orders as the factor 
most limiting production in the September 
2024 quarter QSBO and easing across 
measures of labour market pressure. Our 
assessment of the current output gap is 
slightly less negative than assumed in the 
August Statement, consistent with a smaller 
contraction in GDP in the June 2024 quarter 
than previously assumed and our suite of 
indicators of capacity pressure.
The output gap is assumed to begin closing 
over 2025, as GDP growth recovers and 
potential growth remains low. GDP growth 
is assumed to exceed potential growth 
from early 2025 as lower interest rates 
contribute to higher demand, resulting in a 
steady reduction in spare capacity over the 
projection period.
Source: Stats NZ, NZIER, MBIE, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area shows the range of indicators in the suite. The vertical line shows 
the final quarter of published GDP data. 
Figure 2.5
Output gap and indicator suite
(share of potential GDP, seasonally adjusted)


12
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Labour market conditions have 
weakened further
Firms have reduced hiring as a result of weak 
economic conditions. Annual employment 
growth declined from 0.3 percent to 
-0.4 percent in the September 2024 quarter, 
compared to working-age population growth of 
1.8 percent. Job vacancies remain significantly 
below pre-COVID-19 levels.
A wide range of measures of labour market 
pressure have eased substantially over the 
past year (figure 2.6). Most of the measures in 
our labour market indicator suite are weaker 
than their average levels since 2000. The 
unemployment rate increased to 4.8 percent 
in the September 2024 quarter (figure 2.7). 
Businesses are reporting that it is much 
easier to find workers, and job transitions 
have slowed. Recent weakness in economic 
activity is assumed to flow through to further 
weakness in labour market conditions, with the 
unemployment rate projected to increase further 
to a peak of 5.2 percent in the March 2025 
quarter. The unemployment rate is then assumed 
to steadily decline in line with the forecast 
recovery in GDP growth.
Easing labour market conditions and falling 
inflation are contributing to lower growth 
in nominal wages. Annual same-job wage 
growth, as measured by the Labour Cost Index 
(LCI, ordinary and overtime, private sector) was 
3.3 percent in the September 2024 quarter, 
compared to a peak of 4.5 percent in early 
2023. Growth in other broader wage measures 
have also eased. Wage growth is assumed to 
decline further, reflecting a lagged response 
to weaker labour market conditions and recent 
falls in headline inflation. This is consistent 
with feedback from our recent business visits, 
where firms in many industries reported 
smaller wage increases due to squeezed 
profit margins, increased availability of labour, 
and reduced cost-of-living pressures.
Figure 2.6
Labour market indicator suite
Source: Stats NZ, NZIER, MBIE, RBNZ estimates.
Note: See Ball (2024), ‘Assessing and communicating labour market indicators of inflationary pressure’, Analytical Note, Reserve Bank of New Zealand. 
Figure 2.7
Unemployment rate
(unemployed people as a share of the labour force, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


13
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Global growth is below potential, 
and central banks are reducing 
policy rates as inflation falls
Growth in New Zealand’s trading partners 
remains below potential, although there is 
variation between countries (see chapter 3). 
Growth in China has continued to slow, 
reflecting weakness in the property market 
and household consumption. Authorities 
in China are easing monetary policy and 
providing fiscal stimulus to support growth. 
In most advanced economies, restrictive 
interest rates have been reducing demand 
and GDP growth remains below potential. 
However, economic growth in the US has 
remained relatively robust, in part due to 
stronger productivity growth than elsewhere.
We assume trading-partner GDP growth 
continues at a similar pace in 2025. We 
assume that GDP growth in China and the US 
slows over 2025, but that this is mostly offset 
by higher growth in other economies.
Headline inflation in New Zealand’s trading 
partners has continued to ease. Inflation is 
now close to central bank inflation targets in 
many economies. However, services inflation 
generally remains elevated, with recent 
declines in inflation mainly accounted for 
by lower prices for goods. Labour market 
conditions are weakening in most advanced 
economies, with unemployment rates rising 
and wage growth falling. However, in some 
economies, such as Australia, the labour 
market remains tight compared to history. 
Increasing spare capacity is expected to 
contribute to further declines in inflation in 
most economies over the coming year.
Most major central banks are easing 
monetary policy. A range of central banks 
have either continued or begun to reduce 
policy interest rates in recent months. 
Central banks have become more confident 
that inflation will settle near their targets 
as headline inflation has fallen and spare 
capacity has increased. In recent months, 
financial market participants have lowered 
their expectations for the pace of interest rate 
reductions in some economies, particularly 
the US.
Global conditions are dampening 
New Zealand’s imported inflation
World prices for New Zealand’s imports 
have been declining as globally-traded 
goods prices decline. International oil prices 
have declined over 2024. We assume that 
import prices will ease slightly over the 
coming year as global inflationary pressure 
continues to wane. However, uncertainty 
about the path of import prices over the 
medium term is high, and dependent on 
developments in globalisation, trade barriers, 
shipping costs, and technology.
World prices for New Zealand’s exports 
have increased slightly this year. Despite 
subdued global growth, prices for many of 
New Zealand’s exports (including dairy and 
meat) have increased this year, reflecting 
a range of demand and supply factors. We 
assume that New Zealand’s export prices will 
increase by slightly less than global headline 
inflation over the projection period.
The New Zealand dollar exchange rate has 
depreciated slightly on a trade-weighted 
basis since the August Statement. Declining 
domestic interest rates have put downward 
pressure on the New Zealand exchange 
rate, but this is being somewhat offset by 
falling interest rates in New Zealand’s trading 
partners and higher prices for our export 
commodities.


14
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Inflation has returned to within the 
1 to 3 percent target range
Annual CPI inflation declined from 
3.3 percent in the June 2024 quarter to 
2.2 percent in the September 2024 quarter, 
returning to within the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent 
target range (figure 2.8). This was marginally 
below the 2.3 percent expected at the time 
of the August Statement. 
Measures of annual core inflation declined 
further in the September 2024 quarter, 
and the average of these measures has 
also returned to within the target range. 
Core inflation has declined rapidly since 
mid-2023, consistent with slower inflation 
across a broad range of items. Annual core 
inflation is higher than headline inflation, but 
available quarterly core inflation measures 
suggest that the underlying trend in inflation 
is converging towards the 2 percent target 
mid-point.
Survey measures indicate that firms expect 
inflation to remain near the 2 percent target 
mid-point. Firms’ inflation expectations 
are now close to 2 percent across all time 
horizons (figure 2.9).
Annual tradables inflation dropped sharply 
to -1.6 percent in the September 2024 
quarter (figure 2.10). Annual tradables 
inflation is now below pre-COVID-19 average 
levels. Lower fuel prices have contributed 
substantially to lower tradables inflation, 
reflecting both tax changes and lower 
international oil prices. However, there have 
also been broad-based falls in inflation 
across tradables items over the past year, 
reflecting lower import prices and weak 
domestic demand.
Annual tradables inflation is assumed 
to increase to around 1 percent over 
the projection period. Prices for some 
tradables items such as fuel, vegetables, 
and international airfares have fallen sharply 
from high levels over the past year. Annual 
tradables inflation is assumed to increase 
to around pre-COVID-19 average levels as 
these large price falls drop out of the annual 
calculation.
Figure 2.10
Tradables inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.8
Headline and core inflation measures
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ.
Note: The dashed lines represent the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for inflation over 
the medium term. The shaded area shows the range of core inflation measures. The core 
inflation measures include the sectoral factor model, factor model, trimmed mean (30%), 
weighted median, and CPI excluding food and energy.
Figure 2.9
Business inflation expectations
(annual, years ahead)
Source: RBNZ’s Survey of Expectations (Business).
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for inflation over 
the medium term.


15
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Annual non-tradables inflation declined 
from 5.4 percent to 4.9 percent in the 
September 2024 quarter (figure 2.11). This 
was slightly lower than we expected at the 
time of the August Statement. Non-tradables 
inflation remains elevated. However, 
non‑tradables inflation has become less 
broad‑based across components over time, 
as increasing spare capacity and easing cost 
pressures contribute to falling inflation rates 
for some items.
Inflation for insurance and administered 
goods and services remains high. High 
inflation in these groups, which tend to have 
a lower responsiveness to monetary policy, is 
increasingly accounting for high non-tradables 
inflation (figure 2.12). Insurance inflation is 
contributing significantly to non-tradables 
inflation, as premiums rise in response to 
severe damage from storms and floods last 
year. However, the pace of insurance inflation 
eased in the September 2024 quarter and 
we expect this trend to continue. Central and 
local government charges are contributing 
significantly to non-tradables inflation. Local 
authority rates, road user charges, and 
prescription costs have increased significantly 
over the past year. Cheaper early childhood 
education prices following the start of the 
FamilyBoost rebate scheme on 1 July have 
provided a small offset.
Reduced discretionary spending is 
weighing on inflation for some categories. 
Weaker demand is flowing through to 
lower inflation rates or price falls for some 
non-tradable categories. Restaurant and 
takeaway meal price inflation has eased 
significantly over the past year. Domestic 
airfares and accommodation prices are 
around 10 percent lower than a year ago. 
Housing-related inflation is easing. Dwelling 
construction cost inflation has eased to 
below-average rates, as new housing 
demand has continued to weaken. Annual 
rent inflation as measured in the CPI has 
eased slightly, but remains at an elevated 
level. However, rental inflation for new 
tenancies has fallen sharply over recent 
months, which will flow through to lower CPI 
rent inflation over time if sustained.
Figure 2.11
Non-tradables inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 2.12
Non-tradables inflation by 
monetary policy sensitivity
(quarterly, 4-quarter moving average)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Non-tradable sub-groups are ordered by most statistically negative to most 
statistically positive response to an unanticipated OCR increase. ‘Faster response’ groups 
represent the top third of these groups by responsiveness. ‘Medium response’ groups 
represent the middle third by responsiveness, and ‘Slower response’ groups represent the 
lowest third by responsiveness. Based on Patel (forthcoming), ‘Estimating monetary policy 
passthrough to non-tradables inflation’, Analytical Note, Reserve Bank of New Zealand.


16
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Figure 2.13
CPI inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI 
inflation over the medium term.
Annual non-tradables inflation is assumed 
to fall further over the medium term. The 
current spare capacity in the economy is 
expected to flow through to lower cost 
pressures and non-tradables inflation over 
time. Lower inflation for insurance and 
administered items will also contribute to 
lower non-tradables inflation, although this 
is expected to be partly offset by increases 
in household electricity prices. The pace of 
easing in non-tradables inflation will partly 
depend on how quickly wage- and price-
setting behaviour adapts to a low-inflation 
environment (see chapter 4.1 of the August 
Statement).
Annual headline inflation is forecast to 
remain within the 1 to 3 percent target 
range and be close to the mid-point over 
most of the projection period (figure 2.13). 
Annual headline inflation is assumed to 
remain close to 2 percent in the near 
term, consistent with declines in survey 
measures of business pricing intentions. 
Annual headline inflation is expected to 
increase slightly over the second half of 
2025, accounted for by a return of tradables 
inflation to around its historical average, 
before settling close to the 2 percent target 
mid-point over 2026.


17
Chapter 2. Economic assessment and monetary policy outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Monetary policy outlook
Conditional on the central economic outlook, 
we project the OCR to decline further over 
time (figure 2.14). Inflationary pressures are 
assumed to decline over the medium term, as 
a result of spare capacity in the economy and 
wage- and price-setters adapting to a low-
inflation environment. This allows monetary 
policy to become less restrictive over time. 
The outlook for the OCR is similar to the 
August Statement over the medium term. 
Figure 2.14
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


18
Chapter 3. Global developments and outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Fiordland National Park. Photo: Luisa Gaspar
Chapter 
03
Global 
developments
and outlook


19
Chapter 3. Global developments and outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Chapter 3.
Global developments
and outlook
This chapter outlines recent developments as of 
21 November 2024.
The global economy is emerging from a 
period of significant shocks, but uncertainty 
remains. Inflation in developed economies 
has or is returning to levels experienced prior 
to the COVID-19 pandemic and subsequent 
period of economic volatility. Economic 
growth in our trading partner economies is 
variable, but subdued overall. As inflationary 
pressures have eased in these economies, 
monetary policy has been loosening.
Economic growth in most of New Zealand’s 
trading partners is below potential and 
expected to decline slightly over the next 
year. Our expectation for GDP growth in 
Australia is slightly lower than at the time of 
the August Statement but has been offset 
by a slightly improved outlook in most of our 
other trading partners.
Headline inflation is at, or close to, target 
in most advanced economies. Services 
inflation remains elevated, but labour markets 
across advanced economies are continuing 
to weaken gradually. This is assumed to lead 
to a slowdown in services inflation.
Many advanced economy central banks 
have begun or continued to lower their 
policy rates since our August Statement. 
The pace of these cuts has varied across 
central banks, primarily due to differences in 
the strength of both growth and inflation in 
each economy. This is also influencing the 
extent of further reductions in policy rates 
expected by financial market participants. 
Some of the most significant revisions in 
market participants’ expectations for the path 
of policy rates are for the US. Some stronger-
than-expected labour market data and 
expectations of higher inflationary pressure 
after the US election mean the Federal 
Reserve is expected to lower its policy rate 
by less than expected at the time of the 
August Statement.
Long-term sovereign bond yields are 
broadly higher across advanced economies 
in response to heightened uncertainty 
following the US election. Shorter-term 
sovereign bond yields have moved in line 
with recent changes in near-term policy rate 
expectations. 
US equity prices have increased 
significantly since the August Statement. 
Anticipation of lower corporate taxes and 
less regulation under the incoming US 
government has improved US investor 
risk sentiment. Outside the US, investor 
risk sentiment has been less strong and 
international equity markets have not 
increased in value by as much as US 
share price indices. The US dollar has 
strengthened, reflecting both higher 
expected interest rates and increased 
trade uncertainty.


20
Chapter 3. Global developments and outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Figure 3.1
GDP growth compared to OECD 
potential growth estimates 
(annual)
Source: Haver Analytics, OECD.
Note: GDP growth data are for the September 2024 quarter unless otherwise specified.
Global growth remains below 
potential
Global economic growth is expected to 
fall slightly over the next year. Growth 
in New Zealand’s key trading partners is 
expected to decline from 2.9 percent to 
2.8 percent in 2025. Growth in both the 
US and China is expected to slow over the 
coming year. On the other hand, growth in 
other advanced economies is expected to 
increase in 2025. 
Growth in most of our key trading partners 
remains at or below OECD estimates of 
potential. This is consistent with an easing 
in capacity pressures across advanced 
economies (figure 3.1). The US remains an 
outlier, continuing to grow above potential 
at an annual rate of 2.7 percent in the 
September 2024 quarter. 
Economic growth in China 
remains weak
China’s economic growth is slowing down. 
Annual GDP growth in China has slowed from 
an average of 6.6 percent between 2017 
and 2019, to 4.6 percent in the September 
2024 quarter. This has been influenced by 
both structural and cyclical factors and is 
closely linked to the weak property market. 
Since 2021, Chinese property market activity 
has declined materially following regulatory 
tightening on leverage in the sector. This has 
led to broad weakening of the economy and 
declining home prices that have negatively 
affected household consumption as people’s 
wealth has shrunk (figure 3.2). Growth is 
assumed to marginally miss the government’s 
5 percent target for 2024, before falling to a 
4.5 percent annual growth rate in 2025.
Figure 3.2
Spending measures in different 
sectors of the Chinese economy
(index=100 in the December 2020 quarter, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Haver Analytics.


21
Chapter 3. Global developments and outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Weak household demand and strong 
goods supply have kept inflation low in 
China. The slowdown in the property market 
has reduced household consumption, 
contributing to weak consumer price 
inflation. At the same time, strong growth in 
production has led to an increased supply 
of manufactured goods and raw materials, 
reducing producer prices. China’s annual 
headline CPI inflation rate was 0.3 percent 
in October 2024, while annual Producer 
Price Index (PPI) inflation was -2.9 percent 
(figure 3.3).
Chinese authorities have responded 
to the recent weakness in economic 
growth through a range of policy support 
measures. The People’s Bank of China has 
further eased financial conditions by lowering 
its key policy interest rates and reserve ratio 
requirements for banks, as well as providing 
liquidity support for the stock market. 
Fiscal authorities intend to restructure local 
government debt, lowering interest costs. 
This should support the financial positions 
of local governments, which are important 
providers of capital investment. Further 
measures to bolster the housing market have 
included lowering existing mortgage rates 
and support for new lending to the sector.
The economic impact of recent policies is 
unclear. Chinese equity prices increased 
significantly in response to initial policy 
announcements, but have since declined 
as the specific details have fallen short of 
investor expectations. 
China’s slowdown is affecting New Zealand 
via the trade channel. A slowing Chinese 
economy is affecting demand for 
New Zealand exports like wood, dairy and 
tourism. Declining producer prices in China 
are also putting downward pressure on 
New Zealand import prices. Over the medium 
term, slower growth in China is expected 
to remain a headwind for New Zealand’s 
economic growth.
Figure 3.3
Chinese consumer and producer price inflation
(annual)
Source: Haver Analytics.


22
Chapter 3. Global developments and outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Inflation continues to decline 
towards central bank targets
Headline inflation has been falling and 
is now close to target in most advanced 
economies. Much of this recent disinflation 
has been accounted for by goods, including 
volatile components such as petrol 
(figure 3.4). Petrol prices have been lower 
because international oil prices have 
declined over recent months. The slowdown 
in services inflation remains a more gradual 
process.
Brent crude oil prices have fallen by around 
7 percent since the August Statement. The 
anticipated slowdown in economic growth in 
the US and China has weighed on oil prices 
(figure 3.5). Geopolitical tensions between 
Iran and Israel continue to pose a risk to oil 
supply, but markets are not incorporating a 
significant risk premium into prices, given 
Iran’s relatively small share of global oil 
supply and the extent of spare OPEC+ 
production capacity.
Excess demand in labour and housing 
markets have been key reasons for 
persistence in services inflation across 
advanced economies. Annual services 
inflation remains between 4 and 5 percent in 
many advanced economies. As demand for 
labour moderates, wage inflation is expected 
to continue declining, thereby contributing to 
reduced services inflation. In addition, while 
CPI rental inflation remains elevated, growth 
in new or advertised rents appears to be 
waning in many advanced economies. 
Figure 3.4
Advanced economies’ aggregate inflation
(annual)
Source: Haver Analytics.
Note: Advanced economies’ aggregate inflation is calculated by Haver Analytics using CPI 
inflation series weighted by economies’ shares of world GDP based on purchasing power 
parity estimates from the IMF. Economies included in the sample are the US, UK, euro area, 
Japan, Canada, and South Korea.
Figure 3.5
Brent crude oil prices
Source: Bloomberg.


23
Chapter 3. Global developments and outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Most major central banks have
lowered their policy rates
Most advanced economy central banks 
have lowered their policy rates since the 
August Statement. The pace of easing 
across advanced economies has varied and 
is expected to continue to do so. Market 
participants’ pricing of future policy rates imply 
that the European Central Bank and RBNZ are 
expected to lower their policy rates by between 
100 and 150 basis points over the next 12 
months. The majority of that easing is expected 
to occur over the next six months (figure 3.6). 
The Federal Reserve, Bank of England and 
Reserve Bank of Australia are expected to 
reduce policy rates more slowly in the near 
term, with only 40 to 90 basis points of cuts 
expected over the next 12 months. The Bank of 
Canada is expected to lower its policy rate by 
around 65 basis points over the next year, after 
cutting its policy rate more quickly over this year.
Much of this difference can be explained by 
differences in macroeconomic conditions. 
Economies that are expected to reduce their 
policy rates at a faster pace have experienced 
a more significant easing in labour market 
conditions and weaker economic activity since 
the start of 2024. Many of these economies are 
also already near their headline inflation target 
and have lower rates of core inflation (figure 3.7). 
Sovereign bond yields have 
increased, particularly at longer 
terms
Changes in market participants’ expectations 
of policy rates across major economies have 
flowed through to changes in short-term bond 
yields. Stronger-than-expected economic data 
in the US, particularly with respect to the labour 
market, has led the US 2-year Treasury yield 
to increase by around 40 basis points since 
the August Statement. UK 2-year yields have 
moved around 80 basis points higher over the 
same period. This was partly due to their latest 
budget implying more expansionary fiscal policy 
than investors had expected. Australian 2-year 
yields have increased by around 45 basis 
points, as expectations of market participants 
for the beginning of policy rate cuts have been 
pushed further into 2025 due to stronger-than-
expected labour market and inflation data. 
Figure 3.6
Market-implied path of policy rates
Source: Bloomberg.
Figure 3.7
Headline and core inflation
(annual)
Source: Haver Analytics.
Note: Core inflation represents the rate of inflation excluding food and energy prices. 
CPI inflation data are shown for all economies other than the US, which uses personal 
consumption expenditure. Data for Australia and New Zealand are released quarterly, with 
the most recent release from the September 2024 quarter. Data for the other economies 
are released monthly, with the most recent data from October, other than the US which is 
from September.


24
Chapter 3. Global developments and outlook. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Long-term sovereign bond yields have 
increased significantly more than short-
term yields, largely in response to the US 
election. Market participants’ expectations 
of wider fiscal deficits in the US, increased 
economic uncertainty and slightly higher 
inflation expectations have led investors to 
demand a greater premium on longer-term 
assets relative to comparable short-term 
assets (the term premium). Developed 
economy term premia are highly correlated. 
Recent increases in US term premia have 
flowed through to higher 10-year sovereign 
yields globally (figure 3.8). 10-year sovereign 
bond yields in the US, Australia, and the UK 
are around are 60 basis points higher than 
at the time of the August Statement, while 
German and French 10-year yields have 
increased by around 15 basis points, as 
weakness in their domestic conditions offset 
the global trend higher.
US equity prices have increased 
following the US election
Some stronger-than-expected US economic 
data and the US election result have 
contributed to higher US equity prices. The 
S&P 500 has increased 9 percent since the 
August Statement (figure 3.9). Expectations 
of market participants for lower corporate tax 
rates and less regulation have improved the 
outlook for corporate earnings. These factors 
have supported US equity prices, offsetting 
the impact of higher sovereign bond yields. 
However, equity prices outside the US have 
not performed as strongly. This likely reflects 
investors’ concerns that the incoming US 
administration’s policies may reduce global 
growth and trade. 
Increased global trade uncertainty is 
supporting US dollar strength. Since 
the August Statement, the US dollar has 
appreciated 3.6 percent against a broad 
range of currencies. Higher interest rates 
in the US are supporting the US dollar. In 
addition, ongoing uncertainty surrounding 
US foreign and trade policy has led to a 
depreciation in some currencies more 
sensitive to global trade.
Figure 3.8
10-year sovereign yields
Source: Bloomberg.
Figure 3.9
Global equity prices
(index = 100 on 1 January 2023)
Source: Bloomberg.


25
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Aramoana Beach. Photo: Rachael Grant 
Chapter 
04
Special topics


26
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Chapter 4. 
Special topics 
Before the publication of each Statement, RBNZ staff provide 
analyses of some topical issues to the Monetary Policy Committee. 
Topics for the November Statement included:
1.	 Trends in production sectors of the New Zealand economy
2.	 Summary of recent business visits
3.	 Real interest rates and their effect on the economy
Special topics in the past 12 months
Topic
Date/publication
Price-setting behaviour in a low-inflation environment
August 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)
Comparing macroeconomic conditions in economies
at different stages of monetary policy easing
August 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)
Non-tradables inflation in New Zealand
May 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)
Recent trends in New Zealand’s exporting sector
May 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)
The effect of higher shipping costs on inflation and
the OCR
February 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)
The effect of the Government’s proposed policies on 
monetary policy
February 2024 Statement (Chapter 4)
Monetary policy transmission lags
November 2023 Statement (Chapter 4)


27
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Trends in production sectors of the New Zealand 
economy
Summary
•	 The level of production GDP in 
New Zealand has been broadly 
unchanged since 2022. 
•	 Production sectors of the economy that 
are typically more sensitive to monetary 
policy have tended to be weaker over 
the past 2 years. This is consistent with 
restrictive monetary policy reducing 
demand in the New Zealand economy 
over this period.
•	 Sectors that are typically less sensitive to 
monetary policy have performed better 
than those that are more sensitive. For 
example, services more directly related 
to government spending have grown 
moderately over the last 2 years. 
•	 As monetary policy eases, we expect 
that a faster recovery in sectors that 
are more sensitive to monetary policy 
will support economic growth. We will 
continue to monitor timely indicators of 
activity in production sectors to assess 
how much and how quickly lower interest 
rates flow through to demand.
•	 Factors other than monetary policy will 
also influence the production sector 
mix of economic growth. For example, 
international developments, changes in 
net immigration, and fiscal policy settings 
will influence economic activity over 
coming years.
Figure 4.1
Contributions to production GDP 
growth by sectors of the economy
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: ‘Goods-producing’ sectors include construction, utilities, and manufacturing. 
‘Discretionary and wholesale services’ include retail trade, accommodation and food, 
arts and recreational services, wholesale trade, and transport, warehousing and postal 
services. ‘Home ownership and rental services’ include owner-occupier property 
operations, real estate, and rental services. ‘Government services’ include education and 
training, public administration and safety, and healthcare and social assistance services. 
‘Business services’ include financial and insurance services, information, media and 
telecommunications services, and other professional, scientific, or technical services. 
‘Other’ refers to the primary sector, unallocated taxes, the seasonal balancing item, and 
chain-linked residual.
Sectors that are more sensitive to 
monetary policy have accounted 
for most of the weakness in GDP 
since 2022
Economic activity in New Zealand has been 
broadly unchanged over the past 2 years. 
Weak activity has been mainly concentrated 
in sectors of the economy that are typically 
more sensitive to changes in monetary policy 
(see box A). These sensitive sectors include 
goods-producing sectors and discretionary 
and wholesale service — particularly the 
construction, manufacturing, and retail trade 
sectors. Declining activity in these sectors 
has contributed to the weakness in GDP 
(figures 4.1 and 4.2).


28
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
The stronger-performing production 
sectors since 2022 have been those that 
are typically less sensitive to monetary 
policy. Sectors that are heavily influenced by 
government spending — such as health and 
public administration — have continued to 
grow. In addition, more home building over 
the past 2 years has contributed to growth in 
owner-occupier property operations. 
This pattern of performance by production 
sector is consistent with restrictive 
monetary policy reducing demand in the 
New Zealand economy over this period. 
This is different from past recessions in 
New Zealand, which have most often been 
caused by external shocks or droughts.1
1	
 See Reddell and Sleeman (2008), ‘Some perspectives on past recessions’, Bulletin, Reserve Bank of New Zealand.
Lower interest rates are expected 
to support quicker recoveries in 
more monetary policy sensitive 
sectors
We expect activity to recover faster in 
sectors more sensitive to monetary policy 
as interest rates decline. Monetary policy 
has eased, with the MPC reducing the OCR 
from August 2024. While sectors more 
sensitive to monetary policy have been 
weaker over the past 2 years, we expect that 
these sectors will recover more quickly in 
response to lower interest rates. Our central 
projection assumes that economic activity 
recovers from the December 2024 quarter, 
supported by stabilising and then increasing 
activity in more sensitive sectors (see 
chapter 6).
Factors other than monetary policy will 
also influence the production sector 
mix of economic growth. International 
developments, changes in net immigration, 
and fiscal policy settings are some of the key 
factors that could cause deviations from our 
central projections. 
We will continue to monitor timely 
indicators of activity in these sectors to 
assess how lower interest rates pass 
through to demand. The degree to which 
demand and economic growth respond to 
lower interest rates will influence inflation, 
making them important determinants of 
future monetary policy settings.
Figure 4.2
Economic activity in selected sectors
(seasonally adjusted, index = 100 in the September 2022 quarter)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.


29
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Box A:
Sensitivity of different production
GDP sectors to monetary policy 
2	
It is challenging to isolate monetary policy’s impact on the economy because monetary policy is set in response to changes in the inflation 
outlook. Further, OCR changes themselves are outcomes of macroeconomic conditions. We controlled for this in our analysis by estimating 
the effects of monetary policy ‘shocks’. Shocks refer to changes in monetary policy that are independent of other changes to the inflation 
outlook (see chapter 4.1 in the November 2023 Statement).
We estimate the sensitivity of different 
sectors of the economy to changes in 
monetary policy. We analysed the response 
across production sectors of the economy 
to an unanticipated change in the OCR 
over six quarters.2 Our sample consists of 
quarterly sector-level production GDP data 
from 2001 to 2019. We omit the period since 
the COVID-19 pandemic because of the 
extreme volatility observed during this time.
We rank sectors of the economy by their 
sensitivity to monetary policy and sort 
them into three groups: high, medium, 
and low sensitivity categories. This grouping 
was based on how large the estimated 
reaction to the OCR change was. Table A.1 
presents selected sectors of GDP in each 
sensitivity group. 
Table A.1
Selected production GDP sectors by their sensitivity 
to monetary policy (shares of GDP in brackets)
High sensitivity
Medium sensitivity
Low sensitivity
Construction (7%)
Manufacturing (9%)
Retail trade (5%)
Arts and recreation (3%) 
Financial and insurance 
services (6%)
Professional, scientific,  
and technical services (11%)
Owner-occupier property 
operations (8%)
Public 
administration 
services (4%)
Healthcare 
services (7%)
Primary (6%)


30
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Summary of recent business visits
Summary
•	 We regularly meet with a range of 
businesses to improve our industry 
knowledge and understanding of current 
economic conditions and challenges 
that businesses face. Over September 
and October, RBNZ and Treasury staff 
spoke with 85 businesses across 
Whangārei, Auckland, Hamilton, Tauranga, 
Hawkes Bay, Taranaki, Palmerston 
North, Wellington, Nelson, Blenheim, 
Christchurch, and Queenstown.
•	 Most businesses reported that demand 
for their goods and services remained 
weak, but some reported that activity 
had started to recover in October. 
Demand had been notably weaker for 
retail, hospitality and construction sectors 
over 2024. Many businesses reported 
that consumers had become more price 
sensitive, reducing overall spending, 
especially on discretionary items. 
•	 Most businesses expected demand to 
improve. Businesses believed that the 
worst of the economic downturn had likely 
occurred and expected a recovery in 
economic activity in 2025.
•	 Businesses were facing elevated costs 
but were increasingly unable to pass 
these on to consumers due to weak 
demand. Most businesses said cost 
increases had begun to slow down, but 
they expected costs to remain at an 
elevated level. High costs and less ability 
to increase prices have squeezed profit 
margins for many businesses. 
•	 Investment intentions were mixed. 
Businesses with stronger balance sheets 
(higher net worth) were most likely to 
be undertaking or about to start new 
investments. Businesses with weaker 
balance sheets were more likely to 
prioritise managing the current high-cost 
environment. 
•	 Labour market conditions had eased 
considerably. Some businesses reported 
having made redundancies or reducing 
staff hours. Many reported that the 
number of applicants for new roles had 
increased significantly. Easing labour 
market conditions were reported to be 
leading to smaller wage increases than in 
recent years. 
•	 Overall, feedback from businesses 
supports our near-term projections 
for economic activity and inflation. We 
expect GDP to grow in the December 
2024 quarter, increasing further in 2025 
as lower interest rates boost demand. 
Reduced pricing power reported by 
businesses is consistent with waning 
inflationary pressure. 


31
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Demand remained weak but 
businesses expected activity 
to improve 
Businesses across the board reported 
experiencing weak domestic demand over 
the past 12 months. Restrictive interest 
rates and the high cost of living were cited 
as reasons for lower consumer spending 
on discretionary items. Regionally, demand 
in the South Island had been more resilient 
than demand in the North Island. This may 
have reflected the effect of public sector 
employment cuts, more indebted households 
being concentrated in Wellington and 
Auckland, and a stronger tourism recovery 
in Queenstown.
Demand was notably weakest in sectors 
that are more sensitive to high interest 
rates, such as retail, hospitality, and 
construction (see chapter 4.1). Businesses 
reported that consumers had become more 
price sensitive, affecting activity more in the 
retail and hospitality sectors. As the cost 
of living increased, consumers reduced 
discretionary spending and switched to 
cheaper alternatives. Businesses had also 
observed this behaviour from international 
tourists, noting the cost to visit New Zealand 
had increased and this was affecting tourist 
budgets. 
Activity in the construction sector had been 
mixed. Commercial construction had been 
more resilient than residential. However, 
construction firms that rely on local and 
central government projects were struggling 
following reduced spending and delays 
in decisions about government projects. 
Despite weak demand, confidence in the 
outlook for construction had improved 
following interest rate cuts and the 
announcement of the Government’s Fast-
Track Approvals Bill. 
The recovery in the tourism sector was 
reportedly slowing. Businesses in the 
tourism sector reported that the outlook for 
international visitors was flattening below 
pre-COVID-19 levels. An increase in the 
cost of travelling to New Zealand, partly due 
to higher levies and fees, was reported as 
being a contributor to slowing growth. 
Some businesses reported that activity was 
beginning to recover, and most expected 
economic activity to increase in 2025. 
A number of businesses reported that 
demand was weakest around July, with some 
recovery in demand over October. Most 
businesses expected activity to improve 
over 2025 as lower interest rates support 
demand. However, a minority of businesses 
believed it might take longer for demand to 
recover due to the impact a higher cost of 
living has had on households. 


32
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Businesses were facing elevated 
costs and were increasingly 
unable to pass these on to 
consumers
A common theme in business surveys and 
our business visits was that firms’ profit 
margins were being squeezed. Businesses 
reported an increase in the cost of doing 
business, but weak demand had prevented 
businesses from passing higher costs on to 
consumers (figure 4.3). Energy, insurance, 
and council rates were cited as the main non-
labour cost pressures for most businesses. 
Some businesses also reported an increase 
in compliance costs, such as health and 
safety or climate disclosure requirements. 
While the size of cost increases was 
reported as being lower than last year, most 
businesses expected costs to remain at 
these higher levels. This aligns with what 
businesses reported in the September 2024 
Quarterly Survey of Business Opinion (QSBO) 
(figure 4.4). 
International shipping costs remain 
elevated but had eased from their post-
COVID-19 peak. Some businesses exposed 
to international shipping costs expected 
costs to remain high as shipping contracts 
are repriced for next year. Additionally, 
increased berthing costs and weak demand 
for imports had meant global shipping 
carriers were more likely to send ships 
elsewhere, rather than to New Zealand, as 
returns were better offshore.  
Figure 4.4
QSBO economy wide average costs
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: NZIER.
Figure 4.3
QSBO economy wide profitability
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: NZIER.


33
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Near-term investment intentions 
were mixed
Investment intentions were relatively 
strong among businesses with strong 
balance sheets. However, businesses with 
weaker balance sheets were prioritising 
managing the current high-cost environment 
and strengthening their balance sheets, 
such as by paying down debt, rather than 
investing. Some businesses reported they 
would increase investment once they saw an 
improvement in their cashflow. 
In general, businesses reported an 
increase in uncertainty around government 
policy. This was particularly notable in 
the agriculture and construction sectors. 
Some businesses reported holding off 
on investments while they awaited more 
certainty from the Government.
Some businesses, largely in primary 
industries, reported difficulties in accessing 
funding. Funding access was therefore 
limiting their ability to invest and grow their 
business. 
Labour market conditions 
have eased 
All businesses we spoke to reported that 
the labour market had eased. This was 
consistent with recent business surveys 
and official labour market data (figure 4.5). 
Some businesses reported having made 
redundancies or reducing staff hours, and 
many reported that the number of applicants 
for new roles had increased significantly. 
As is usually the case, certain skilled labour, 
such as engineers, tech-related roles, and 
project managers, remained difficult to find.
Businesses reported that easing labour 
market conditions were leading to smaller 
wage and salary increases than in recent 
years. However, while wage increases 
have fallen relative to the past couple of 
years, wage inflation remained slightly 
elevated compared to before the COVID-19 
pandemic. Businesses often reported 3 to 
5 percent wage increases for this year, which 
aligns with official labour data (figure 4.6). 
Businesses expected wage inflation to ease 
next year, partly reflecting lower headline 
inflation. 
Immigration visa processing times and visa 
policy changes were affecting businesses 
that hire from offshore. Businesses reported 
a reduction in efficiency due to delays in 
workers starting. 
Overall, feedback from businesses supports 
our near-term projections for economic 
activity and inflation. We expect GDP 
to grow in the December 2024 quarter, 
increasing further in 2025 as lower interest 
rates boost demand. Reduced pricing power 
reported by businesses is consistent with 
waning inflationary pressure.
Figure 4.6
Distribution of annual labour cost  
index movements 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 4.5
QSBO ease in finding labour
(seasonally adjusted)
Source: NZIER.


34
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Real interest rates and their effect on the economy
Summary
3	
See Austin and Reid (2017), ‘NZSIM: A model of the New Zealand economy for forecasting and policy analysis’, Bulletin, 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand.
•	 Investment and household spending 
are expected to increase as real 
interest rates fall. Real interest rates are 
declining as nominal interest rates drop 
faster than expected inflation, which will 
boost economic activity through greater 
spending and investment. A wide range 
of measures of real interest rates are 
falling. As an example, 1-year mortgage 
rates have fallen from about 7.2 percent 
in May to 6 percent currently. Business 
expectations for inflation in a year’s time 
have fallen from 2.7 percent to 2 percent 
over the same period.
•	 Real interest rates — nominal interest 
rates adjusted for expected inflation 
— are an important determinant of 
economic outcomes. For instance, 
household saving decisions depend on 
both the nominal returns on savings, and 
on expectations for how the purchasing 
power of savings will change. Real interest 
rates, rather than nominal interest rates, 
drive behaviour in macroeconomic 
models like the RBNZ’s main forecasting 
model, NZSIM.3 
•	 Different measures of real interest rates 
produce different estimates for the 
level and change in real interest rates. 
We compare the main real interest rate 
measure used in NZSIM to a range of 
alternatives. The real rate in NZSIM is in 
line with the average of this range, and 
both have declined in recent months. 
However, the range of real rate estimates 
has widened since the beginning of the 
year, so the pace of decline depends on 
the measure.
•	 As real interest rates fall, our projections 
assume that this will support an increase 
in the output gap. As monetary policy 
is assumed to become less restrictive, 
lower real rates support a period of GDP 
growth above potential, as the output gap 
increases to a higher level. Real interest 
rates are close to the neutral interest rate 
in the medium term, supporting a return of 
the output gap to around zero.
3


35
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Real interest rates influence 
economic behaviour
Real interest rates are an important 
determinant of economic outcomes. In 
macroeconomic models like the RBNZ’s main 
forecasting model, NZSIM, real interest rates, 
rather than nominal interest rates, determine 
the effect of monetary policy on economic 
activity and inflation.4 
Households and firms adjust their 
behaviour based on real interest rates and 
their expectations for how they will evolve 
in the future. For example, household saving 
decisions depend on both the nominal 
returns on savings (the nominal interest rate), 
and on expectations for how the purchasing 
power of savings will change (inflation 
expectations). If someone expects prices 
to fall, they may delay purchases even if 
nominal interest rates are low. If someone 
expects a high rate of inflation, they may 
spend more now to avoid higher prices in 
the future, even if the nominal interest rate 
they would receive on their savings is high.
Real interest rates can be 
measured in different ways
There are many ways to measure real 
interest rates, based on different choices 
of nominal interest rates and inflation 
expectations.5 For instance, different nominal 
interest rates such as wholesale interest 
rates (like swap rates), mortgage rates, 
and deposit rates all influence economic 
behaviour. There are also multiple ways to 
measure inflation expectations. These can be 
derived from economic models of behaviour 
or based on surveys of households and firms.
4	
Although nominal interest rates also affect the transmission of monetary policy independently through a number of channels, such as by 
affecting the borrowing capacity of households, macroeconomic models often exclude these channels to reduce complexity.
5	
Real interest rates can also be calculated using actual inflation outcomes, rather than expected inflation. However, for understanding 
behaviour and decision-making (rather than historical outcomes), inflation expectations are more appropriate.
6	
The main real interest rate measure in NZSIM uses a mortgage rate measure as the nominal interest rate. This mortgage rate measure is 
based on the OCR, plus a representative spread between mortgage rates and wholesale rates at popular borrowing terms. The inflation 
expectations measure used in NZSIM is modelled as depending on its previous value and the most recent inflation data, meaning that it 
adapts over time to changes in actual inflation (see chapter 4.1 of the August Statement).
Different measures of real rates can 
produce different estimates for the 
level and change in real interest rates. 
Figure 4.7 shows the main real interest rate 
measure used in NZSIM against the average 
and range of 20 measures of short-term 
real interest rates. These measures are 
calculated using combinations of different 
nominal interest rates and different measures 
of inflation expectations.6
Figure 4.7
Real interest rates 
(standardised, quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area shows the range of real rate measures. The range includes 
combinations of five nominal interest rates (NZSIM’s mortgage rate measure, the OCR, 
1-year mortgage rate, 6-month term deposit rate, and 1-year swap rate) and four measures 
of inflation expectations (NZSIM’s measure, the 1-year measure from the RBNZ Survey 
of Expectations (Business), the 1-year measure from the RBNZ Household Survey of 
Expectations, and short-term inflation expectations from the RBNZ’s neutral interest rate 
suite). Measures have been standardised to make them comparable given differences in 
historical averages and degrees of variability between measures.


36
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
The real rate in NZSIM is in line with the 
average of a range of measures. The NZSIM 
real rate measure has generally tracked 
the average of this range closely over time, 
including over the past year. However, 
the range of estimates has widened since 
the beginning of this year. This reflects 
divergences in both nominal interest 
rate measures and inflation expectations 
measures.
Real interest rates are falling, but the pace 
of decline depends on the measure. The 
average and range of real rate measures, 
along with the NZSIM measure, have begun 
to decline in recent months. This is because 
declines in nominal interest rates have 
outpaced falls in inflation expectations. 
However, some measures of real rates have 
fallen much more quickly than others. It is 
uncertain which of these measures are most 
important for influencing household and firm 
behaviour. This means there is uncertainty 
about the degree to which monetary policy 
is becoming less restrictive. However, this 
analysis shows that the NZSIM measure is 
broadly representative of the range of real 
interest rates that are likely to influence 
behaviour.
Falling real interest rates support 
an increase in the output gap
We assume falling real interest rates 
support an increase in the level of the 
output gap in our projections. Real interest 
rates are assumed to fall into early 2025, 
as nominal interest rates decline faster 
than inflation expectations (figure 4.8). 
Lower real interest rates support demand 
through a range of channels, supporting 
higher household consumption, residential 
investment, and business investment. Real 
interest rates are assumed to remain near the 
neutral interest rate over the medium term, 
which supports the output gap to increase to 
around zero. 
A change in the level of real interest rates 
transmits to a change in the level of the 
output gap, with a lag. In our projections, 
lower real interest rates support an increase 
in the output gap, even though monetary 
policy is becoming less restrictive, rather 
than stimulatory. This is because in economic 
models like NZSIM, the level of real rates 
affects the level of the output gap. In 
New Zealand, changes in interest rates 
typically take 1 to 2 years to have their full 
impact on economic activity and the output 
gap. During this transmission period, a 
reduction in the level of real interest rates 
will temporarily boost GDP growth relative 
to potential as the output gap increases. 
Once transmission to the output gap is 
complete, the lower real rate level will no 
longer be boosting GDP growth, but will still 
be contributing to a higher level of the output 
gap than before the reduction.
Figure 4.8
Neutral and real interest rates
(quarterly average) 
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: The real interest rate is the mortgage rate measure used in NZSIM. The neutral 
interest rate is the average neutral real interest rate from the RBNZ’s neutral interest rate 
suite, plus the trend mortgage rate to OCR spread assumed in NZSIM. The shaded area 
represents the range of estimates from different measures in the neutral interest rate suite. 
Measures from the neutral interest rate suite are projected into the future using their most 
recent value.


37
Chapter 4. Special topics. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Domestic 
financial 
conditions
Chapter 
05
Hooker Valley. Photo: Jamie Antwis 


38
Chapter 5. Domestic financial conditions. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Chapter 5
Domestic financial conditions
Monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation by 
influencing financial conditions in New Zealand. These financial 
conditions include the interest rates at which households and 
businesses save and borrow, the exchange rate, and other 
factors such as credit availability. This chapter outlines recent 
developments in financial conditions in New Zealand as of 
21 November 2024.
7	
Interest rate swap rates are wholesale interest rates often used as a benchmark by financial institutions in setting other interest rates in the 
economy. They can provide a guide to market participants’ expectations for the policy rate over specific horizons.
Overall, domestic financial conditions have 
become less restrictive since the August 
Statement. Wholesale interest rates, such 
as interest rate swaps, have decreased at 
short terms but increased at longer terms 
compared to immediately before the August 
Statement. This steepening of wholesale 
interest rate curves in New Zealand has 
been in line with developments in wholesale 
interest rates across advanced economies. 
Retail interest rates, including mortgage and 
term deposit rates, have moved lower since 
the August Statement, particularly at shorter 
terms. The New Zealand dollar exchange 
rate has moved slightly lower on a trade-
weighted basis since the August Statement.
Market participants expect a 
faster decline in the OCR in the 
near term
Markets are pricing a faster decline in the 
OCR at upcoming decisions than at the time 
of the August Statement. Market participant 
expectations for the OCR can be inferred from 
prices for overnight indexed swap contracts. 
As of 21 November 2024, market participants 
expect 90 basis points of cuts to the OCR 
by February 2025, a faster pace of cuts than 
priced at the time of the August Statement 
(figure 5.1). This is consistent with market 
participants’ expectations that the faster pace 
of OCR cuts will continue in the near term, 
after the OCR was cut 50 basis points at the 
October Monetary Policy Review. 
Beyond August 2025, expectations of 
market participants for the OCR have 
increased. Market pricing indicates 
participants expect an OCR of around 
3.40 percent in November 2025, up from 
3.25 percent at the time of the August 
Statement. 
Shorter-term domestic wholesale interest 
rates have decreased since the August 
Statement, while longer-term rates have 
increased. An interest rate swap involves the 
exchange of fixed and floating interest rate 
payments between two parties over a specified 
period.7 The level of interest rate swaps will 
be approximately equal to market participants’ 
expectations for average short-term market 
interest rates over the term of the swap.
Figure 5.1
Market participants’ expectations for the OCR 
Source: Bloomberg.
Note: The blue line shows market participants’ expectations for the OCR immediately before 
the August Statement. Each data point represents market participants’ expectations of the level 
of the OCR at a given point in the future, as measured by overnight indexed swap pricing.


39
Chapter 5. Domestic financial conditions. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Short-term wholesale rates have 
fallen, but long-term rates have 
increased
The reduction in market participants’ 
expectations for the OCR at upcoming 
meetings has led to lower short-term 
wholesale rates. The 1-year swap rate has 
decreased around 70 basis points since 
the August Statement (figure 5.2). However, 
higher offshore long-term wholesale interest 
rates, particularly in the US (see chapter 3),
have led to an increase in longer-term 
wholesale interest rates in New Zealand. The 
10‑year swap rate has increased by around 
30 basis points since the August Statement. 
The interest rate swap curve has steepened 
because of these moves. 
Similar dynamics have been seen in the 
New Zealand Government Bond (NZGB) 
yield curve. Yields on NZGBs with a maturity 
of 2 years or more have increased since 
the August Statement, consistent with 
market pricing for higher interest rates, both 
domestically and overseas. 
The New Zealand dollar has 
depreciated slightly
The New Zealand dollar exchange rate 
has moved slightly lower on a trade-
weighted basis since the August Statement 
(figure 5.3). US factors have been a key 
driver of foreign exchange markets. The US 
dollar has appreciated significantly against 
other major currencies as markets have 
reacted to the US election result. Some 
New Zealand short-term wholesale rates, 
such as the 2-year swap rate, have declined 
further below the equivalent interest rates in 
the US and Australia. Lower interest rates in 
New Zealand compared to some of our key 
trading partners reflect different expectations 
for growth, inflation and monetary policy (see 
chapter 3). 
Increases in New Zealand’s key export 
commodity prices and improving global risk 
sentiment tend to be correlated with a higher 
New Zealand dollar. Prices of key export 
commodities in New Zealand — particularly 
dairy — have increased since the August 
Statement, supporting the New Zealand dollar. 
Measures of risk sentiment have improved 
over the same period. US equities are 
higher, and the VIX measure of US equity 
volatility has decreased. Bond market 
volatility measures have decreased in recent 
weeks. However, moves in measures of 
risk sentiment may be driven by US-specific 
factors, and may have supported the 
New Zealand dollar by less than usual. 
Overall, the moves in commodity prices and 
risk sentiment since the August Statement 
have partly offset the influence of more 
negative interest rate differentials on the 
New Zealand dollar.
Source: RBNZ.
Figure 5.3
New Zealand dollar trade-weighted index
(nominal)
Figure 5.2
New Zealand interest rate swap rates
(terms in years)
Source: LSEG.


40
Chapter 5. Domestic financial conditions. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Mortgage rates have declined at all terms 
since the August Statement, with shorter-
term rates declining by more than longer-
term rates (figure 5.4). Since the start of 
2024, most new mortgage flows have been 
directed towards terms of 1 year or less, 
with the 6-month term becoming the most 
popular in recent months. Since the August 
Statement, the 6-month mortgage rate has 
fallen by around 50 basis points and the 
1-year rate by around 90 basis points. Over 
the same period, the spread between the 
1-year mortgage rate and the 1-year swap 
rate narrowed slightly (figure 5.5). Lower 
loan and mortgage rates reduce borrowing 
costs, encouraging households and firms to 
spend and invest. At the same time, lower 
returns on savings further discourage saving, 
boosting consumption and investment.
Mortgage and term deposit rates 
have declined 
The average yield on the stock of 
mortgages is expected to decline in coming 
months. This is because most mortgage 
holders who are rolling off fixed rate 
mortgages or who are switching from floating 
to fixed, will move to lower interest rates than 
they have been paying. A lower average 
yield on the stock of mortgages indicates 
that average household mortgage interest 
payments are declining.
Term deposit rates have also declined at all 
terms since the August Statement. These 
declines have followed a similar pattern 
to mortgage rates, with shorter-term rates 
declining by more than longer-term rates. 
The spreads between the 6-month and 
1-year term deposit and equivalent wholesale 
rates have increased since the August 
Statement, putting upward pressure on bank 
funding costs (figure 5.6). Equivalent spreads 
on other types of deposits, such as bonus 
saver and transaction accounts, have also 
increased, but remain at relatively low levels. 
Source: interest.co.nz.
Note: The mortgage rates shown are the average of the latest advertised fixed-term rates 
on offer from ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac for mortgages with a loan-to-value ratio of less 
than 80%.
Figure 5.4
New Zealand mortgage rates
(terms in years)
Figure 5.5
New Zealand 1- and 2-year mortgage rates 
as a spread to equivalent swap rates
Source: interest.co.nz, Bloomberg.


41
Chapter 5. Domestic financial conditions. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Source: interest.co.nz, Bloomberg.
Note: The term deposit rates shown are the average of the latest fixed-term rates on offer 
from ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac. Bank bill rates represent the rates at which banks are 
willing to borrow from, or lend to, one another at terms of up to 6 months.
Figure 5.6
Spread between the 6-month term deposit 
rate and the 6-month bank bill rate
Banks have strong funding 
positions 
Banks remain well funded and have strong 
liquidity buffers. The core funding ratio is 
a measure of banks’ funding stability. This 
has fallen in recent months but, at around 
90 percent, remains elevated compared to 
both the 75 percent regulatory minimum and 
historical levels. Banks will pay down the 
remaining $13 billion of borrowing taken out 
under the Funding for Lending Programme 
by the end of 2025.
Credit growth has remained subdued 
despite financial conditions becoming less 
restrictive. The September Credit Conditions 
Survey shows increases in credit availability, 
particularly for mortgages and consumer 
credit over the past 6 months. Credit 
availability for business and agricultural 
borrowers was broadly unchanged over this 
period. Respondents to the survey expect 
credit demand to improve over the next 6 
months from relatively subdued levels.


42
Chapter 6. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Patuna Chasm. Photo: Rachael Grant
Chapter 
06
Economic 
projections


43
Chapter 6. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Chapter 6.
Economic projections
This chapter summarises the baseline economic projections that 
MPC members considered when making their policy assessment. 
The projections were finalised on 21 November 2024.
Economic activity and the labour market 
have been weak, and we estimate that the 
output gap is negative. Annual headline 
inflation is now close to 2 percent. However, 
the decline in inflation has mostly been 
accounted for by a sharp fall in tradables 
inflation to a negative rate. We assume 
tradables inflation will rise to more normal 
levels over the projection period. Therefore, 
non-tradables inflation needs to decline to be 
consistent with headline inflation being near 
2 percent on a sustainable basis.
We assume that the negative output gap 
puts further downward pressure on non-
tradables inflation over the next year. This 
brings non‑tradables inflation to a level 
consistent with headline inflation near the 
target mid-point as tradables inflation reverts 
to its long-run average. We assume lower 
interest rates support a recovery in the 
output gap across the projection. This implies 
a period of economic growth above the 
potential growth rate.
We project the output gap to remain 
sufficiently negative to keep inflation within 
the 1 to 3 percent target band, and near 
the mid-point over the medium term. We 
assume that price-setting behaviour adapts 
to a low‑inflation environment over the 
medium term, easing inflationary pressure. 
As price-setting behaviour adapts, the 
OCR declines to around the middle of our 
estimated band of neutral rates.
The New Zealand labour market has 
continued to weaken. The unemployment 
rate increased further to 4.8 percent in the 
September 2024 quarter, and employment 
has decreased. Due to usual lags between 
economic activity and the labour market, the 
unemployment rate is expected to continue 
to rise to a peak of 5.2 percent in early 2025 
before gradually recovering.
These projections rely on a set of key 
assumptions about the global and domestic 
factors influencing the economy. These 
include:
•	 the magnitude and persistence of recent 
weakness in economic activity;
•	 the level of potential GDP and the extent 
to which the output gap has declined 
recently;
•	 the pace at which price-setting behaviour 
adapts to a low-inflation environment;
•	 the speed at which labour market and 
wage pressures ease and the effects of 
these factors on household spending and 
core inflation;
•	 the extent to which economic activity 
strengthens in response to lower interest 
rates;
•	 the outlook for net immigration and the 
extent to which it contributes relatively 
more to aggregate demand or labour 
supply;
•	 the extent to which activity, inflation and 
trade policy in our key trading partners 
affect domestic financial conditions, 
demand for New Zealand’s goods and 
services exports, and prices for imports; 
and
•	 the extent to which government 
consumption and investment evolve 
consistent with the fiscal forecasts — 
including final operating allowances — 
in Budget 2024.
There is significant uncertainty about these 
assumptions.


44
Chapter 6. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Table 6.1 
Key projection assumptions
Key factors
Global factors
•	 Market expectations for future policy interest rates in our trade partners have increased across 
the forecast period since the August Statement, due largely to a resilient US economy and 
expectations of expansionary US fiscal policy. All else equal, higher offshore interest rates put 
downward pressure on the New Zealand dollar exchange rate.
•	 However, prices for most of New Zealand’s key export commodities, particularly dairy, have 
increased in recent months. A stronger outlook for export prices has resulted in a stronger 
outlook for New Zealand’s terms of trade. The improved outlook for the terms of trade puts 
upward pressure on the New Zealand dollar exchange rate. 
•	 The stronger terms of trade and higher world interest rates have had broadly offsetting effects 
on the exchange rate in our projection. The New Zealand dollar trade weighted index (TWI) is 
assumed to remain at 69.5 over the projection.
Domestic 
capacity 
pressures
•	 The output gap is less negative across the forecast, owing to a higher starting point (-1.4 percent 
of potential GDP in the December 2024 quarter) and faster easing of monetary policy, relative to 
the August projection.
•	 The output gap is expected to begin to recover in the March 2025 quarter, in response to 
declining real interest rates. The decline in real interest rates supports an increase in the output 
gap via a period of above-potential growth (see chapter 4.3).
•	 The decline in the output gap since mid-2022 has been largely induced by tighter monetary 
policy and less accommodative fiscal policy. Likewise, less restrictive monetary policy is 
expected to result in a recovery in the output gap. Sectors of the economy that are typically 
more sensitive to monetary policy have tended to be weaker over the past 2 years and are 
expected to lead the recovery in economic growth (see chapter 4.1). 
Price-setting 
behaviour
•	 Price-setting behaviour is assumed to adapt to a low-inflation environment over time, meaning 
its contribution to inflationary pressure declines over the projection period. At the August 
Statement, we updated our assumption so that behaviour adapts more quickly to low inflation 
than previously (see chapter 4.1 of the August Statement).
Economic growth
Potential output
•	 We have made two sets of adjustments in our modelling of potential GDP:
	- We have updated our estimates of potential output over the COVID-19 period. These historical 
adjustments reflect updated judgements and assumptions about how productivity and 
potential labour inputs evolved over this period, particularly during and after lockdowns.
	- We now assume potential output is more responsive to changes in population growth. The 
main effect of this is that, over both history and the forecast, potential growth is more sensitive 
to changes in net immigration.
•	 A downward revision to our net immigration projection since the August Statement means 
we now assume labour force growth contributes less to potential growth. This change affects 
both aggregate supply and demand (i.e. lower potential growth is met with lower GDP growth). 
Therefore, the net effect of lower net immigration on inflation pressure is small. However, this 
change has contributed to a lower GDP growth forecast in the medium term.
•	 The supply of goods and services is expected to continue to increase, supported by continued 
population growth through immigration that expands the productive capacity of the economy. 
After recently being negative in annual growth terms, productivity growth is assumed to recover 
towards its pre-COVID-19 average over the medium term.


45
Chapter 6. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Production
•	 We assume that the economy contracted by 0.2 percent in the September 2024 quarter. 
GDP is assumed to resume modest growth in the December 2024 quarter, with a period of 
above‑potential growth beginning in 2025.
•	 We assume that spare capacity has emerged and will diminish gradually through 2025 and 
2026. 
Consumption
•	 Consumption has been growing slightly below its trend growth rate over the past year. 
Consumption growth is assumed to increase as monetary policy is eased.
Residential 
investment
•	 Residential investment has been falling for 2 years as restrictive interest rates have dampened 
housing demand and made development projects less viable.
•	 Dwelling consents have stabilised over the past year and have increased slightly in the 
September 2024 quarter. We assume residential investment will begin to recover in early 2025 
in response to lower mortgage rates and higher house prices.
Business 
investment
•	 Business investment began to decline about a year ago, prior to which it had remained strong 
due to the capacity constrained economy. Business investment is expected to begin to recover 
in the second half of 2025, slightly later than the rest of the economy, with a lagged response to 
the recovering output gap.
Government
•	 Government spending is assumed to be consistent with the fiscal forecasts — including final 
operating allowances — in Budget 2024, adjusted for a higher starting point based on June 
2024 quarter GDP data.
•	 Total government spending continues to decline as a share of potential GDP over the projection 
horizon.
Exports and 
imports
•	 Over the medium term, goods export volumes are assumed to grow at a similar pace to the rest 
of the economy. The continued recovery in tourism exports is expected to cause total export 
growth to be slightly faster than overall economic growth.
•	 Import volumes are assumed to evolve in line with other components of GDP.
•	 Our projections do not include any effects from possible future changes in international trade 
policies.
Inventories
•	 Since early 2023, a significant decrease in inventories has occurred. The drawdown in 
inventories has meant less production activity has taken place for a given level of demand. As 
the economy begins to recover, we expect inventories growth to return to normal levels.
Difference in 
production and 
expenditure 
measures of GDP
•	 In principle, different approaches to GDP measurement should be equal. In practice however, 
divergences can occur due to measurement difficulties. Based on Stats NZ’s current estimates, 
expenditure GDP growth has been stronger than production GDP growth over the past 10 years, 
but the difference was larger than usual in the June 2024 quarter.
•	 The production measure is generally considered to be the better measure to reflect the level 
of and changes in economic activity quarter-to-quarter. This is the measure we use to assess 
aggregate economic growth and the output gap. However, our forecasting framework uses 
the expenditure components to model how output will evolve based on estimated behavioural 
relationships. Therefore, the gap between published production and expenditure measures 
means that most components of expenditure GDP have a stronger starting point level as a share 
of potential GDP in this projection. However, it is the overall output gap — which is determined 
by how these components change over the projection — which affects inflationary pressure. 
Although the growing production-expenditure difference does not affect the outlook for interest 
rates in this projection, it does add to our uncertainty about the current state of the economy.


46
Chapter 6. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Labour market
Employment and 
wages 
•	 The New Zealand labour market has continued to ease. The unemployment rate increased 
further to 4.8 percent in the September 2024 quarter. Employment has decreased.
•	 The labour market tends to lag developments in the broader economy, and employment growth 
is expected to remain subdued over the next year.
•	 Same-job wage growth has eased substantially. With weak labour market conditions and 
headline inflation remaining within the target band, we expect wage growth to remain around its 
pre-COVID-19 average of about 0.5 percent per quarter over the medium term.
•	 The unemployment rate is expected to continue to increase to a peak of 5.2 percent in early 
2025, before declining. The lower unemployment rate projection relative to the August 
Statement is consistent with a less negative output gap projection.
Migration
•	 Net immigration has continued to decline — although remains positive — with elevated 
departures and decreasing arrival numbers. We expect working-age net immigration to continue 
to decrease, declining to a quarterly low of 2,500 in the March 2025 quarter before increasing 
gradually to around 7,500 per quarter by the end of the projection. This forecast accounts for 
differences in the relative strength of  the Australian and New Zealand labour markets. The tight 
Australian labour market is encouraging New Zealand workers to leave for job opportunities in 
Australia. However, as labour market conditions in New Zealand improve from the second half of 
2025, we expect net immigration to gradually return toward its pre-COVID-19 average.
•	 Net immigration is currently assumed to have a minimal effect on inflation pressure in our 
forecast, as the additional supply of workers and demand for goods and services are broadly 
offsetting.
Inflation
Headline
•	 Annual headline CPI inflation decreased to 2.2 percent in the September 2024 quarter, returning 
to the inflation target band.
•	 Annual headline CPI inflation is currently below all core inflation measures. Low tradables 
inflation has contributed significantly to lower headline inflation. In the medium term, a decline in 
non-tradables inflation from its current level is required to sustainably meet the inflation target, 
because tradables inflation is assumed to increase to around its historic average.
Non-tradables
•	 Non-tradables inflation is projected to decline from its elevated level, due to a negative output 
gap and price-setting behaviour adapting to a low-inflation environment. We project annual non-
tradables inflation will reach a level consistent with the inflation target mid-point at the end of 
2025. The non-tradables forecast is slightly higher than in the August Statement because of the 
less negative output gap.
Tradables
•	 Annual tradables inflation has decreased rapidly over the past year, declining to -1.6 percent 
in the September 2024 quarter. Prices for some tradables items such as fuel, vegetables, and 
international airfares in particular have declined from high levels. Annual tradables inflation is 
expected to increase to around pre-COVID-19 average levels as these large price falls drop out 
of the annual calculation.


47
Chapter 6. Economic projections. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Figure 6.3
Unemployment rate
(unemployed people as a share of the labour force,
seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Charts
Figure 6.1
Inflation components
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Dotted lines show the projections from the August Statement. The 
shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI 
inflation over the medium term.
Figure 6.2
Private sector LCI wage inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.4
House price growth
(annual)
Source: CoreLogic, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.5
Production GDP
(quarterly, seasonally adjusted)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 6.6
OCR
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.


48
Chapter 7. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Mount Ruapehu. Photo: Magnus Åstebøl
 Chapter 
07
Appendices


49
Chapter 7. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Chapter 7.
Appendices
Appendix 1: Statistical tables
Table 7.1
Key forecast variables
GDP growth 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Quarterly
CPI inflation 
Annual
Unemployment 
rate
TWI
OCR
2022
Mar
-0.2
1.8
6.9
3.2
72.6
0.9
 
Jun
1.3
1.7
7.3
3.3
72.1
1.6
 
Sep
1.7
2.2
7.2
3.2
70.6
2.7
 
Dec
-0.6
1.4
7.2
3.4
70.8
3.8
2023
Mar
-0.5
1.2
6.7
3.4
71.3
4.5
Jun
0.8
1.1
6.0
3.6
71.0
5.3
Sep
-0.4
1.8
5.6
3.9
70.6
5.5
Dec
0.0
0.5
4.7
4.0
70.8
5.5
2024
Mar
0.1
0.6
4.0
4.4
71.6
5.5
Jun
-0.2
0.4
3.3
4.6
71.4
5.5
Sep
-0.2
0.6
2.2
4.8
70.9
5.4
Dec
0.3
0.4
2.1
5.1
69.9
4.6
2025
Mar
0.6
0.5
2.0
5.2
69.5
4.1
Jun
0.6
0.5
2.1
5.1
69.5
3.8
Sep
0.6
1.0
2.5
5.0
69.5
3.7
Dec
0.6
0.3
2.4
4.8
69.5
3.6
2026
Mar
0.6
0.5
2.3
4.7
69.5
3.4
Jun
0.6
0.5
2.2
4.6
69.5
3.3
Sep
0.6
0.9
2.1
4.5
69.5
3.2
Dec
0.6
0.3
2.1
4.4
69.5
3.2
2027
Mar
0.6
0.4
2.1
4.4
69.5
3.1
Jun
0.6
0.4
2.0
4.3
69.5
3.1
Sep
0.5
0.9
2.0
4.3
69.5
3.1
Dec
0.5
0.3
2.0
4.3
69.5
3.1


50
Chapter 7. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Table 7.2
Measures of inflation, inflation expectations, and asset prices
2023
2024
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Inflation (annual rates)
CPI
6.7
6.0
5.6
4.7
4.0
3.3
2.2
CPI non-tradables
6.8
6.6
6.3
5.9
5.8
5.4
4.9
CPI tradables
6.4
5.2
4.7
3.0
1.6
0.3
-1.6
Sectoral factor model
estimate of core inflation
5.8
5.8
5.3
4.7
4.2
3.6
3.4
CPI trimmed mean (30% measure)
6.1
6.0
5.5
5.0
4.5
3.8
2.7
CPI weighted median
5.6
6.6
5.0
4.4
4.4
3.5
2.8
GDP deflator (expenditure)
5.2
5.6
6.8
3.8
4.1
3.1
Inflation expectations
RBNZ Survey of Expectations
– inflation 1 year ahead
5.1
4.3
4.2
3.6
3.2
2.7
2.4
2.0
RBNZ Survey of Expectations 
– inflation 2 years ahead
3.3
2.8
2.8
2.8
2.5
2.3
2.0
2.1
RBNZ Survey of Expectations 
– inflation 5 years ahead
2.4
2.4
2.3
2.4
2.3
2.3
2.1
2.2
RBNZ Survey of Expectations 
– inflation 10 years ahead
2.2
2.3
2.2
2.3
2.2
2.2
2.0
2.2


51
Chapter 7. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Table 7.3
Measures of labour market conditions	
(seasonally adjusted, changes expressed in annual percent terms, unless specified otherwise)	
2023
2024
Mar
Jun
Sep
Dec
Mar
Jun
Sep
Household Labour Force Survey
Unemployment rate
3.4
3.6
3.9
4.0
4.4
4.6
4.8
Underutilisation rate
9.1
9.9
10.4
10.7
11.2
11.8
11.6
Labour force participation rate
72.1
72.4
72.1
71.9
71.5
71.7
71.2
Employment rate 
(% of working-age population)
69.6
69.8
69.3
69.0
68.4
68.4
67.8
Employment growth
3.1
4.4
3.1
2.8
1.1
0.3
-0.4
Average weekly hours worked
33.5
33.5
33.6
33.6
33.8
33.2
33.3
Number unemployed
(thousand people)
103
110
119
123
135
143
148
Number employed 
(million people)
2.90
2.93
2.94
2.95
2.94
2.94
2.93
Labour force (million people)
3.01
3.04
3.06
3.07
3.07
3.08
3.08
Extended labour force
(million people)
3.09
3.14
3.15
3.16
3.17
3.19
3.17
Working-age population
(million people, age 15 years+)
4.17
4.21
4.24
4.27
4.29
4.30
4.32
Quarterly Employment Survey — QES
Filled jobs growth
2.2
6.5
6.1
4.3
3.5
-0.2
-1.3
Average hourly earnings growth 
(private sector, ordinary time)
8.3
7.7
7.0
6.6
4.8
4.0
3.2
Other data sources
Labour Cost Index growth, adjusted 
(private sector, ordinary and overtime)
4.5
4.3
4.1
3.9
3.8
3.6
3.3
Labour Cost Index growth, unadjusted
(private sector, ordinary time)
6.1
6.1
5.7
5.7
5.2
4.8
4.5
Estimated net working-age 
immigration (thousands, quarterly)
33.2
34.2
23.3
12.1
7.2
6.5
3.4
Change in All Vacancies Index* 
-11.5
-25.2
-8.7
-32.3
-18.0
-30.9
-13.5
Note: The All Vacancies Index is produced by MBIE as part of the monthly Jobs Online report, which shows changes in job vacancies advertised by businesses on 
internet job boards. The unadjusted Labour Cost Index (LCI) is an analytical index that reflects quality change in addition to price change (whereas the official LCI 
measures price changes only). For definitions of underutilisation, the extended labour force, and related concepts, see Stats NZ (2016) ‘Introducing underutilisation 
in the labour market’. 
*The All Vacancies Index is a non-seasonally adjusted series.


52
Chapter 7. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Table 7.4
Composition of real GDP growth
(annual average percent change, seasonally adjusted, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
Final consumption expenditure
Private
6.4
4.8
4.5
2.4
0.2
6.0
2.6
0.6
1.2
2.0
2.4
Public authority
1.9
3.8
3.3
5.8
6.9
8.0
2.0
-0.3
-1.1
-0.9
0.7
Total
5.4
4.6
4.3
3.2
1.8
6.5
2.5
0.4
0.6
1.3
2.0
Gross fixed capital formation
Residential
8.8
-1.8
-0.1
2.7
2.2
3.2
-0.6
-5.1
-3.1
5.2
6.9
Other
0.0
10.0
7.1
2.7
-2.9
12.6
2.9
-1.0
-0.8
1.9
3.9
Total
2.3
6.7
5.2
2.7
-1.7
10.2
2.1
-2.0
-1.3
2.6
4.5
Final domestic 
expenditure
4.6
5.1
4.5
3.0
1.0
7.3
2.4
-0.2
0.2
1.6
2.6
Changes in 
inventories*
0.1
0.2
-0.2
-0.2
-0.3
0.6
-0.1
-1.4
0.7
0.4
0.1
Gross national 
expenditure
4.8
5.6
4.3
2.7
-0.3
8.5
2.6
-1.5
0.8
2.1
2.7
Exports of goods 
and services
2.0
3.8
3.3
0.2
-17.9
2.4
5.6
8.3
1.0
3.1
2.8
Imports of goods 
and services
5.1
7.8
4.8
1.4
-15.7
17.1
4.5
-1.2
1.9
3.3
3.8
Expenditure on GDP
3.9
4.3
3.9
2.5
0.0
4.7
2.7
0.7
0.4
1.9
2.4
GDP (production)
3.8
3.4
3.5
2.4
-0.4
4.6
2.7
0.3
-0.1
2.0
2.4
GDP (production, 
March qtr to March qtr)
3.3
3.5
3.5
0.7
4.5
0.6
2.0
0.5
0.5
2.3
2.4
* Percentage point contribution to the growth rate of GDP.


53
Chapter 7. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Table 7.5
Summary of economic projections
(annual percent change, March years, unless specified otherwise)
Actuals
Projection
March year
2017
2018
2019
2020
2021
2022
2023
2024
2025
2026
2027
Price measures
CPI 
2.2
1.1
1.5
2.5
1.5
6.9
6.7
4.0
2.0
2.3
2.1
Labour costs
1.5
1.9
2.0
2.4
1.6
3.1
4.5
3.8
2.5
2.2
2.1
Export prices
(in New Zealand dollars) 
4.1
3.3
1.2
6.9
-5.9
20.9
1.2
-2.1
6.9
1.6
1.6
Import prices
(in New Zealand dollars) 
1.2
1.7
4.1
2.4
-2.5
18.8
8.1
-3.8
2.5
-1.0
0.2
Monetary conditions
OCR (year average)
2.0
1.8
1.8
1.2
0.3
0.5
3.1
5.5
4.9
3.6
3.2
TWI (year average)
76.5
75.6
73.4
71.7
72.4
74.0
71.2
71.0
70.4
69.5
69.5
Output
GDP (production, annual 
average % change)
3.8
3.4
3.5
2.4
-0.4
4.6
2.7
0.3
-0.1
2.0
2.4
Potential output (annual 
average % change)
3.4
3.2
3.1
2.5
-0.2
1.8
3.1
2.5
1.7
1.5
1.8
Output gap (% of potential 
GDP, year average)
0.1
0.3
0.7
0.6
0.2
3.1
2.7
0.6
-1.2
-0.7
-0.1
Labour market
Total employment 
(seasonally adjusted)
5.9
2.9
1.5
2.6
0.1
2.5
3.1
1.1
-0.5
1.6
2.1
Unemployment rate (March 
qtr, seasonally adjusted)
4.9
4.4
4.2
4.2
4.6
3.2
3.4
4.4
5.2
4.7
4.4
Trend labour productivity 
0.6
0.6
0.6
0.7
0.6
0.3
0.1
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.4
Key balances
Government operating 
balance* (% of GDP, 
year to June)
1.5
1.9
2.4
-7.3
-1.3
-2.6
-2.3
-2.5
-2.8
-1.8
-0.6
Current account balance 
(% of GDP)
-2.6
-3.1
-3.9
-2.4
-2.7
-6.7
-8.6
-6.6
-6.0
-4.6
-4.3
Terms of trade
(SNA measure, annual 
average % change)
2.1
4.5
-2.1
2.0
-1.0
0.4
-5.0
-1.3
3.2
4.2
1.6
Household saving rate** 
(% of disposable income)
-1.8
-2.0
-1.3
1.4
7.6
2.4
-3.0
-1.3
-1.7
-1.3
-0.1
World economy
Trading-partner GDP 
(annual average % change)
3.5
4.0
3.5
1.7
-0.4
6.2
2.9
3.1
2.8
2.8
2.8
Trading-partner CPI 
(TWI-weighted)
1.9
1.8
1.4
2.4
0.8
4.1
4.8
2.2
2.1
2.0
2.1
* Government operating balance is a model-based estimate of OBEGAL divided by nominal GDP in the projection. The estimate is partial because it relies on 
projections for some components from the Budget 2024.
** Household saving rate data up to the year to March 2023 have been updated based on national accounts (income and expenditure) published by Stats NZ on 15 
November 2024. Other reported forecasts for nominal expenditure GDP components are based on June 2024 quarter GDP data.


54
Chapter 7. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Appendix 2: Chart pack
Figure 7.1
Composition of CPI inflation
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 7.2
Output gap and output gap indicators
(share of potential)
Source: NZIER, MBIE, Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The output gap indicators based on information from labour market surveys 
are shown separately from the other indicators. For each group of indicators, the 
shaded area shows the range of values and the line shows the mean value. The 
output gap estimate in the final quarter is based on our near-term GDP estimate.
Figure 7.3
Unemployment and underutilisation rates
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 7.4
OCR and nominal neutral OCR indicator suite
(quarterly average)
Source: RBNZ estimates.
Note: The shaded area indicates the range between the maximum and minimum 
values from our suite of long-run nominal neutral OCR indicators. See Castaing et 
al. (2024), ‘Estimates of New Zealand’s nominal neutral interest rate’, Bulletin, 
Reserve Bank of New Zealand.
Figure 7.5
GDP and potential GDP
(seasonally adjusted) 
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 7.6
Measures of core inflation
(annual)
Source: Stats NZ, RBNZ estimates.
Note: Core inflation measures exclude the GST increase in 2010. The shaded 
area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for annual CPI inflation 
over the medium term.


55
Chapter 7. Appendices. Monetary Policy Statement. November 2024
Figure 7.7
Inflation expectations
(annual, years ahead) 
Source: RBNZ Survey of Expectations (Business).
Note: The shaded area represents the MPC’s 1 to 3 percent target range for 
annual CPI inflation over the medium term.
Figure 7.9
House price inflation
(annual) 
Source: REINZ.
Source: Stats NZ, Global Dairy Trade, LSEG, RBNZ estimates.
Figure 7.12
Terms of trade, dairy and oil price indices
(index=100 in the September 2008 quarter, quarterly average)
Figure 7.10
Mortgage interest rates
Source: interest.co.nz, RBNZ estimates.
Note: The rates shown for the fixed terms are the average of the advertised 
rates from ANZ, ASB, BNZ, and Westpac, shown as weekly data. The floating 
rate represents the monthly yield on floating housing debt from the RBNZ 
Income Statement survey.
Figure 7.8
Private sector wage growth
(annual) 
Source: Stats NZ.
Figure 7.11
New Zealand dollar exchange rates
(quarterly average) 
Source: NZFMA, RBNZ.
