BANK: RIKSBANK
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: Monetary Policy Report July 2021
DATE: 01/06/2021
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.riksbank.se/en-gb/monetary-policy/monetary-policy-report/2021/monetary-policy-report-july-2021/
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Monetary Policy Report, July 2021
The spread of infection of the coronavirus has declined and the economic outlook is brighter. However the pandemic is not yet over, and inflationary pressures are still moderate. By conducting an expansionary monetary policy, the Riksbank contributes to continued good development of the economy and to inflation attaining the target more permanently. The Executive Board has therefore decided to hold the repo rate unchanged at zero per cent and that during the fourth quarter the Riksbank will continue purchasing assets within the envelope of SEK 700 billion.
Email
Share by email - Open in new window
facebook
Share on Facebook - Open in new window
Linkedin
Share on LinkedIn - Open in new window
bluesky
Share on Bluesky - Open in new window
copy url
Share on Twitter - Open in new window
Repo rate
0
%
Applies from 7 July 2021
Repo rate, table
In brief – Monetary policy July 2021
The grip of the pandemic on the global economy has eased during the spring and early summer, and the recovery is well under way. More and more people have been vaccinated against COVID-19, the spread of infection has decreased significantly and restrictions have begun to be phased out. But the pandemic is not over. The recovery is proceeding at a different pace in different parts of the world, and new variants of the virus are creating continued uncertainty.
Outcomes and indicators over recent months confirm that the development of the Swedish economy, with the help of extensive economic policy support measures, is strong. Both in Sweden and abroad, the recovery is proceeding slightly faster than expected and the Riksbank’s forecasts have been revised up somewhat.
Inflation has varied to an unusually large degree during the pandemic. This is partly due to energy prices but also to measurement problems and people’s changed consumption patterns during the pandemic. Inflationary pressures are still deemed moderate and it is expected to take until next year before inflation rises more persistently.
The expansionary monetary policy is a prerequisite for inflation to be close to the target of 2 per cent more persistently. The Riksbank will continue to purchase securities and offer liquidity within all the programmes launched. The Executive Board has now decided that the Riksbank will buy bonds for an aggregate nominal amount of SEK 68.5 billion in the fourth quarter. This means that the pace of purchasing will continue to be tapered off but that the envelope for asset purchases of SEK 700 billion will be fully utilised up until the end of 2021. The Executive Board has also decided to hold the repo rate at zero per cent. The repo rate is expected to remain at zero per cent for the entire forecast period, which extends until the third quarter of 2024.
Documents
Press release 1 July 2021, Zero interest rate and asset purchases for inflation to be more permanently close to 2 per cent
(pdf | 505,6 kB)
Monetary Policy Report July 2021
(pdf | 5,9 MB)
Decision Guidance Document: Annex B to the minutes, The Riksbank’s asset purchases during the fourth quarter of 2021
(pdf | 512,5 kB)
Numerical data: Monetary Policy Report July 2021
(xlsx | 1,7 MB)
Article: Expansionary fiscal policies abroad are contributing to the recovery, article in Monetary Policy Report July 2021
(pdf | 1 MB)
Article: How are higher commodity prices and freight costs affecting inflation in Sweden, article in Monetary Policy Report July 2021
(pdf | 1,3 MB)
Slides from the press conference 1 July 2021
(pdf | 1,5 MB)
Related content
Repo rate, deposit and lending rate
Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting held on 30 June 2021l
The Riksbank’s measures in connection with the corona pandemic
The Riksbank’s extended purchases of securities
Voting by the Executive Board on interest rate decisions
Was this information helpful?
After your answear a textbox appears
Yes
No
Do you want to leave a comment?
Submit
Questions?
Visit our FAQ on kundo.se (opens i new window).
Thanks for your feedback!
Your comment could not be sent, please try again later
Updated 01/07/2021
