BANK: RIKSBANK
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: Monetary Policy Report September 2021
DATE: 01/06/2021
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.riksbank.se/en-gb/monetary-policy/monetary-policy-report/2021/monetary-policy-report-september-2021/
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Monetary Policy Report, September 2021
The Swedish economy has recovered quickly and inflation is expected to become temporarily higher than 2 per cent in the coming year, before falling back again. Monetary policy needs to remain expansionary for inflation to be lastingly close to the target going forward. The Executive Board has therefore decided to hold the repo rate unchanged at zero cent and it is expected to remain at zero for the entire forecast period. The Riksbank will also continue to purchase securities during the fourth quarter, in line with the earlier decisions. The Executive Board’s forecast is that the holdings of securities will be more or less unchanged during 2022.
Email
Share by email - Open in new window
facebook
Share on Facebook - Open in new window
Linkedin
Share on LinkedIn - Open in new window
bluesky
Share on Bluesky - Open in new window
copy url
Share on Twitter - Open in new window
Repo rate
0
%
Applies from 22 September 2021
Repo rate, table
In brief – Monetary policy September 2021
In conjunction with an increasing number of people having been vaccinated, and restrictions around the world being eased, global growth has risen, supported by economic policy. Since the monetary policy meeting in June, outcomes and indicators have continued to confirm that the recovery in Sweden and abroad is strong.
Rapidly rising energy prices, and global demand combined with supply limitations and logistics problems, have led to consumer prices increasing at a fast pace in several areas. In the near term, the Riksbank’s inflation forecast has been revised up, primarily because electricity prices have risen unexpectedly sharply. Swedish inflation, which has been fairly close to the inflation target of 2 per cent in recent months, is assessed to become higher than 2 per cent in the coming year, before falling back again. Underlying inflation, which shows more of a trend, is lower and it will take a couple years more before CPIF inflation is assessed to be more permanently close to 2 per cent.
The expansionary monetary policy is a prerequisite for inflation to also be close to the target in the slightly longer run. The Executive Board has therefore decided to keep the repo rate at zero per cent. It is expected to remain at zero per cent for the entire forecast period, which stretches until the third quarter of 2024. The Riksbank will also continue to purchase securities in 2021 in line with earlier decisions and the Executive Board's forecast is that the holdings will be more or less unchanged in 2022.
Documents
Press release 21 September 2021: Monetary policy decision: Zero interest rate and asset purchases for inflation more lastingly close to 2 per cent
(pdf | 396 kB)
Monetary Policy Report September 2021
(pdf | 5 MB)
Numerical data: Monetary Policy Report September 2021
(xlsx | 1,5 MB)
Decision by the Executive Board, Annex B to the minutes: The Riksbank is terminating the programme for funding to banks to support corporate lending and some other measures implemented as a result of the pandemic (20 September 2021)
(pdf | 175,5 kB)
Decision by the Executive Board, Annex C to the minutes: The Riksbank stops offering three- and six-month loans (20 September 2021)
(pdf | 155,6 kB)
Article: Different methods of measuring housing costs in the consumer price index, article in Monetary Policy Report September 2021
(pdf | 699,9 kB)
Article: Foreign central banks' plans for a gradually less expansionary monetary policy, article in Monetary Policy Report September 2021
(pdf | 707 kB)
Article: New monetary policy strategy in the euro area, article in Monetary Policy Report September 2021
(pdf | 811,4 kB)
Slides from the press conference 21 September 2021
(pdf | 1,8 MB)
Related content
Repo rate, deposit and lending rate
The Riksbank’s measures in connection with the corona pandemic
The Riksbank’s extended purchases of securities
Was this information helpful?
After your answear a textbox appears
Yes
No
Do you want to leave a comment?
Submit
Questions?
Visit our FAQ on kundo.se (opens i new window).
Thanks for your feedback!
Your comment could not be sent, please try again later
Updated 21/09/2021
