BANK: RIKSBANK
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: Monetary Policy Report June 2022
DATE: 01/06/2022
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.riksbank.se/en-gb/monetary-policy/monetary-policy-report/2022/monetary-policy-report-june-2022/
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Monetary Policy Report, June 2022
Inflation has continued to rise rapidly and price increases are spreading through the economy. To ensure that inflation returns to the target and to counteract the high inflation becoming entrenched in price setting and wage formation, the Executive Board has decided to raise the policy rate from 0.25 per cent to 0.75 per cent. The Executive Board's forecast is that the policy rate will be raised further and that it will be close to 2 per cent at the start of next year. The Executive Board has also decided that, in the second half of the year, the Riksbank’s asset holdings shall shrink faster than was decided in April.
Email
Share by email - Open in new window
facebook
Share on Facebook - Open in new window
Linkedin
Share on LinkedIn - Open in new window
bluesky
Share on Bluesky - Open in new window
copy url
Share on Twitter - Open in new window
Policy rate
0.75
%
Applies from 6 July 2022
Policy rate, table
In brief - Monetary policy June 2022
Last year, many economies recovered quickly from the crisis. Increasingly high economic activity has resulted in a strong labour market with high employment and low unemployment. However, the imbalances arising when demand increased faster than supply have been reinforced by Russia’s invasion of Ukraine and new pandemic-related restrictions in China. This has pushed up prices for energy, various input goods and food. The high rate of inflation in Sweden and abroad is being felt by households and is undermining purchasing power. Central banks around the world are now tightening monetary policy to cool down economic activity and bring inflation down.
Just like in other countries, price rises in Sweden have now spread increasingly and prices for goods, food and services have been rising considerably faster than expected since the start of the year. Companies’ costs have increased rapidly and the strong demand has made it possible to pass on these to consumer prices. However, there are also signs of changed price-setting behaviour in that companies have raised prices unusually strongly in relation to how much costs have increased.
Inflation has risen strongly and is expected to remain above 7 per cent for the remainder of the year. The risk has therefore increased that the high inflation will become entrenched in price setting and wage formation. The Riksbank therefore needs to use monetary policy to ensure that inflation returns to target. This makes it clear to price- and wage-setters that the inflation target can continue to be used as a benchmark.
The Executive Board deems that monetary policy needs to be tightened more than was assessed in April and has therefore decided to raise the policy rate from 0.25 to 0.75 per cent. The forecast for the policy rate has been revised upwards and entails that it will be close to 2 per cent at the start of next year. The Executive Board has also decided that, in the second half of the year, the Riksbank’s asset holdings shall shrink faster than was decided in April. With this monetary policy, inflation is expected to fall back next year and be close to 2 per cent from 2024.
Documents
Monetary Policy Report June 2022
(pdf | 5,7 MB)
Press release 30 June 2022: Policy rate increased by 0.5 percentage points to 0.75 per cent
(pdf | 720,7 kB)
Decision by the Executive Board, Annex B to the minutes: The Riksbank's purchases of bonds during the second half of 2022
(pdf | 536,1 kB)
Numerical data: Monetary Policy Report June 2022
(xlsx | 1,9 MB)
Article: Price rises are spreading in the economy, Article in Monetary Policy Report June 2022
(pdf | 1,1 MB)
Article: Labour shortages and higher wage pressures abroad, Article in Monetary Policy Report June 2022
(pdf | 1,1 MB)
Slides from the press conference 30 June 2022
(pdf | 2 MB)
Related content
Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting held on 29 June 2022
(pdf | 831,2 kB)
Policy rate, deposit and lending rate
Voting by the Executive Board on interest rate decisions
Was this information helpful?
After your answear a textbox appears
Yes
No
Do you want to leave a comment?
Submit
Questions?
Visit our FAQ on kundo.se (opens i new window).
Thanks for your feedback!
Your comment could not be sent, please try again later
Updated 30/06/2022
