BANK: RIKSBANK
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: Monetary Policy Report November 2022
DATE: 01/06/2022
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.riksbank.se/en-gb/monetary-policy/monetary-policy-report/2022/monetary-policy-report-november-2022/
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Monetary Policy Report, November 2022
Inflation is still far too high. The high inflation undermines purchasing power for many people and makes it more difficult for households and companies to plan their finances. To bring down inflation and safeguard the inflation target, the Executive Board has decided to raise the policy rate by 0.75 percentage points to 2.5 per cent. The forecast shows that the policy rate will probably be raised further at the beginning of next year and then be just below 3 per cent. It is still difficult to assess how inflation will develop and the Riksbank will adapt monetary policy as necessary to ensure that inflation is brought back to the target within a reasonable time.
Email
Share by email - Open in new window
facebook
Share on Facebook - Open in new window
Linkedin
Share on LinkedIn - Open in new window
bluesky
Share on Bluesky - Open in new window
copy url
Share on Twitter - Open in new window
Policy rate
2.5
%
Applies from 30 November 2022
Policy rate, table
In brief - Monetary policy November 2022
To bring down inflation and safeguard the inflation target, the Executive Board has decided to raise the Riksbank’s policy rate by 0.75 percentage points to 2.5 per cent.
Inflation is still far too high. In October CPIF inflation was 9.3 per cent. This was slightly below the Riksbank's forecast in September, which is entirely due to energy prices being lower than expected. Excluding energy prices, inflation was instead higher than expected. There is still a substantial risk that the current high inflation will become embedded in expectations of households, companies, financial market agents and others. A high rate of inflation over a long time can create serious problems. Monetary policy therefore needs to act to enable inflation to fall back and stabilise around the target of 2 per cent within a reasonable time. The Executive Board thereby assesses that the policy rate needs to be raised more than in its assessment in September.
The Riksbank needs to cool off the economy so that inflation returns to the target. Rising prices and higher interest costs are certainly noticeable for households and companies. However, it would be even more noticeable for the Swedish economy if inflation were to remain at the current high level. By raising the policy rate more now, the Riksbank can reduce the risk that inflation will remain high for a long time. This will also reduce the risk of even greater monetary policy tightening later on. With this monetary policy, inflation is expected to fall back next year and to stabilise close to 2 per cent in 2024.
The forecast shows that the policy rate will probably be raised further at the beginning of next year and then be just below 3 per cent. However, the development of inflation going forward is still difficult to assess and the Riksbank will adapt monetary policy as necessary to ensure that inflation is brought back to the target within a reasonable time.
Documents
Press release 24 November 2022: Policy rate raised by 0.75 percentage points
(pdf | 718,2 kB)
Monetary Policy Report November 2022
(pdf | 5,2 MB)
Numerical data: Monetary Policy Report November 2022
(xlsx | 1,5 MB)
Article: Alternative scenarios for inflation and monetary policy
(pdf | 1,1 MB)
Article: Why has the krona weakened this year?
(pdf | 967,3 kB)
Slides from the press conference 24 November 2022
(pdf | 2,1 MB)
Related content
Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting held on 23 November 2022
(pdf | 824,5 kB)
Voting by the Executive Board on interest rate decisions
(xlsx | 168.4 kB)
Policy rate, deposit and lending rate
Do you want to know more?
What is inflation?
How is inflation measured?
How monetary policy affects inflation
Was this information helpful?
After your answear a textbox appears
Yes
No
Do you want to leave a comment?
Submit
Questions?
Visit our FAQ on kundo.se (opens i new window).
Thanks for your feedback!
Your comment could not be sent, please try again later
Updated 24/11/2022
