BANK: RIKSBANK
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: Monetary Policy Report September 2022
DATE: 01/06/2022
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.riksbank.se/en-gb/monetary-policy/monetary-policy-report/2022/monetary-policy-report-september-2022/
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Monetary Policy Report, September 2022
Inflation is too high. It is undermining households’ purchasing power and making it more difficult for both companies and households to plan their finances. Monetary policy now needs to be tightened further to bring inflation back to the target. The Executive Board has therefore decided to raise the policy rate by 1 percentage point to 1.75 per cent. The forecast for the policy rate is that it will continue to be raised in the coming six months. The development of inflation going forward is still difficult to assess and the Riksbank will adapt monetary policy as necessary to ensure that inflation is brought back to the target.
Email
Share by email - Open in new window
facebook
Share on Facebook - Open in new window
Linkedin
Share on LinkedIn - Open in new window
bluesky
Share on Bluesky - Open in new window
copy url
Share on Twitter - Open in new window
Policy rate
1.75
%
Applies from 21 September 2022
Policy rate, table
In brief - Monetary policy June 2022
Inflation has risen rapidly and is high both in Sweden and abroad. Several factors connected to the pandemic and Russia’s war in Ukraine has contributed to this development. Recently, electricity and gas prices in particular have risen to very high levels in Europe. The rapid price increases undermine households’ purchasing power and make it difficult for both companies and households to plan their finances. To bring down the high rate of price increases, central banks worldwide have raised their policy rates at a rapid pace.
That consumer prices in Sweden have become so high is due not only to effects from abroad but also to good economic activity in Sweden. The combination of substantial international cost increases, effects of high energy prices on other prices and relatively strong Swedish economic activity has meant that CPIF inflation rose to 9.0 per cent in August. This is the highest level since 1991, and higher than in the Riksbanks’ assessement in June. The risk is still large that inflation becomes entrenched and it is extremely important that monetary policy acts to ensure that inflation falls back and stabilises around the target of 2 per cent within a reasonable time perspective.
The Executive Board assesses that monetary policy now needs to act more than was anticipated in June to bring inflation back to the target. The Executive Board has therefore decided to raise the Riksbank’s policy rate by 1 percentage point to 1.75 per cent. The forecast indicates that the policy rate will be raised further over the coming six months. The development of inflation going forward is still uncertain and the Riksbank will adapt monetary policy as necessary to ensure that inflation is brought back to the target within a reasonable time perspective. Rising prices and higher interest costs are being felt by households and companies. However, it would be even more painful for the Swedish economy if inflation were to remain at the current high levels. By raising the policy rate more now, the risk of high inflation in the longer term is reduced and thereby the need for an even greater monetary tightening further ahead.
Documents
Monetary Policy Report September 2022
(pdf | 6,4 MB)
Press release 20 September 2022: Policy rate raised by 1 percentage point
(pdf | 716 kB)
Numerical data: Monetary Policy Report September 2022
(xlsx | 1,5 MB)
Article: What effect can measures to dampen the electricity price have on inflation?
(pdf | 971,2 kB)
Article: The economic-policy framework facilitates a return to the target
(pdf | 605,1 kB)
Article: What indicates that inflation will fall back next year?
(pdf | 1,3 MB)
Article: Higher interest-rate sensitivity in the Swedish economy
(pdf | 1,6 MB)
Slides from the press conference 20 Sept 2022
(pdf | 1,9 MB)
Related content
Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting held on 19 September 2022
(pdf | 821,4 kB)
Economic Commentary: House prices and interest rate expectations
(pdf | 1,4 MB)
Economic Commentary: How has the impact of the policy rate on consumption changed when the debt-to-income ratio has risen
(pdf | 951,8 kB)
Voting by the Executive Board on interest rate decisions
(xlsx | 168.4 kB)
Policy rate, deposit and lending rate
Do you want to know more?
What is inflation?
How is inflation measured?
How monetary policy affects inflation
Was this information helpful?
After your answear a textbox appears
Yes
No
Do you want to leave a comment?
Submit
Questions?
Visit our FAQ on kundo.se (opens i new window).
Thanks for your feedback!
Your comment could not be sent, please try again later
Updated 20/09/2022
