BANK: RIKSBANK
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: Monetary Policy Report April 2022
DATE: 01/06/2022
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.riksbank.se/en-gb/monetary-policy/monetary-policy-report/2022/monetary-policy-report-april-2022/
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Monetary Policy Report, April 2022
Inflation has risen to the highest level since the 1990s and will be high for some time. To counteract the high inflation from becoming entrenched in price and wage-setting, the Executive Board has decided to raise the repo rate from zero to 0.25 per cent. The Board's forecast is that the repo rate will be raised gradually going forward and that it will be somewhat below 2 per cent in three years' time. The Executive Board has also decided to reduce the pace of the Riksbank's asset purchases during the second half of the year, so that the holding starts to decrease, and that the Riksbank will cease purchasing treasury bills as of 28 April. In this way, monetary policy is adapted so that inflation returns to the target.
Email
Share by email - Open in new window
facebook
Share on Facebook - Open in new window
Linkedin
Share on LinkedIn - Open in new window
bluesky
Share on Bluesky - Open in new window
copy url
Share on Twitter - Open in new window
Repo rate
0.25
%
Applies from 4 May 2022
Repo rate, table
In brief - Monetary policy April 2022
The global economy is still affected by the major disruption caused by the pandemic. In addition there is now Russia’s invasion of Ukraine. The war has caused great human suffering and led millions of people to flee. The economic consequences can be seen in new disruptions in global value chains, a worsening of delivery problems and increased uncertainty about access to several important commodities. Higher prices for energy and food are pushing inflation up further in a situation where the rate of price increase is already high in several countries.
CPIF inflation was 6.1 per cent in March, which is the highest level since the beginning of the 1990s. Last year’s upturn in inflation was largely explained by rapid increases in electricity and fuel prices, but since the monetary policy decision in February, inflation has become significantly higher than expected, even disregarding energy prices. Outcomes point to the upturn now being broad.
Monetary policy cannot affect commodity or freight prices. It is therefore unavoidable that the rate of increase in consumer prices of, for example, energy, food and certain other goods, will remain high for some time yet. However, the Riksbank can conduct monetary policy to counteract the higher inflation becoming entrenched in price-setting and wage-formation. The Executive Board has therefore decided to raise the repo rate from 0 per cent to 0.25 per cent. The forecast for the repo rate is that it will be raised a further two to three times this year and will be slightly below 2 per cent at the end of the forecast period. The Executive Board has also decided to reduce the pace of the asset purchases during the second half of the year, so that the holdings begin to decline. With this monetary policy, inflation is expected to fall back next year and be close to 2 per cent from 2024.
Documents
Press release 28 April 2022: Repo rate raised to 0.25 per cent
(pdf | 724,3 kB)
Decision by the Executive Board, Annex B to the minutes: The Riksbank's purchases of treasury bills and purchases of bonds during the second half of 2022
(pdf | 523,3 kB)
Monetary Policy Report April 2022
(pdf | 6,2 MB)
Numerical data: Monetary Policy Report April 2022
(xlsx | 2 MB)
Article: Economic consequences of the war in Ukraine, Article in Monetary Policy Report April 2022
(pdf | 1,1 MB)
Article: Many indications that inflation will be high this year and next year, Article in Monetary Policy Report April 2022
(pdf | 1,2 MB)
Slides from the press conference 28 April 2022
(pdf | 2,1 MB)
Related content
Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting held on 27 April 2022
(pdf | 843,6 kB)
Repo rate, deposit and lending rate
The Riksbank’s purchases of securities
Voting by the Executive Board on interest rate decision
Was this information helpful?
After your answear a textbox appears
Yes
No
Do you want to leave a comment?
Submit
Questions?
Visit our FAQ on kundo.se (opens i new window).
Thanks for your feedback!
Your comment could not be sent, please try again later
Updated 28/04/2022
