BANK: RIKSBANK
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: Monetary Policy Report April 2023
DATE: 01/06/2023
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.riksbank.se/en-gb/monetary-policy/monetary-policy-report/2023/monetary-policy-report-april-2023/
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Monetary Policy Report, April 2023
Inflation is still far too high and underlying inflation has been much higher than expected during the first months of the year. For inflation to fall and stabilise at the target within a reasonable period of time, the Executive Board has decided to raise the Riksbank's policy rate by 0.5 percentage points to 3.5 per cent. The forecast indicates that the policy rate will probably be raised further by 0.25 percentage points in June or September.
Email
Share by email - Open in new window
facebook
Share on Facebook - Open in new window
Linkedin
Share on LinkedIn - Open in new window
bluesky
Share on Bluesky - Open in new window
copy url
Share on Twitter - Open in new window
What is the policy rate?
Policy rate
3.5
%
Applies from 3 May 2023
Policy rate, table
The monetary policy decision including the policy rate
The Executive Board's monetary policy decision from the meeting on 25 April 2023 is summarised in a press release:
Policy rate raised by 0.5 percentage points to 3.5 per cent
Monetary policy decision document April 2023: Decision on policy rate
Read the Monetary Policy Report in full:
Monetary Policy Report, April 2023
In brief - Monetary policy April 2023
Inflation is still far too high and far from the inflation target. The high inflation has a negative effect on the whole economy, but particularly affects households that have small margins. For inflation to fall and stabilise around the target within a reasonable period of time, the Executive Board has decided to raise the policy rate by 0.5 percentage points to 3.5 per cent.
Because of the rapid upturn in inflation, the Riksbank has raised the policy rate unusually rapidly since April 2022, from zero per cent to 3.0 per cent in February 2023. The rate increases have not yet had full impact on economic activity and inflation. But the effects are becoming increasingly clear and CPIF inflation has fallen in recent months, roughly in line with the Riksbank's latest forecast. However, the downturn is due to falling energy prices. CPIF inflation excluding energy has been much higher than in the Riksbank's forecasts during the first months of the year.
It is important for confidence in the inflation target that inflation falls back. Low and stable inflation is a necessary condition for good economic development and real wage increases. Monetary policy is therefore still aimed at bringing inflation to the target within a reasonable period of time. To ensure that this happens, the policy rate needs to be raised further.
The forecast for the policy rate has been revised up and indicates that the policy rate will most likely be increased by a further 0.25 percentage points in June or September. Monetary policy has a tightening effect on the economy and the Executive Board assesses that following the April meeting there will be scope to adjust the policy rate in smaller steps. However, there is still considerable uncertainty and new information and how it is assessed to affect the economic outlook and inflation prospects will be decisive for the conduct of monetary policy.
What is the forecast for the policy rate?
The
press release
and the
Monetary Policy Report
contain the Riksbank's forecast for the policy rate.
Related documents
Documents
Press release 26 April 2023: Policy rate raised by 0.5 percentage points to 3.5 per cent
(pdf | 724,3 kB)
Monetary policy report April 2023
(pdf | 7,2 MB)
Monetary policy decision April 2023: Decision on policy rate
(pdf | 681,6 kB)
Numerical data: Monetary Policy Report April 2023
(xlsx | 1,6 MB)
Article: How quickly will inflation fall?
(pdf | 2,7 MB)
Slides from the press conference 26 April 2023
(pdf | 2,1 MB)
Next monetary policy decision?
The Executive Board holds 5 scheduled monetary policy meetings a year. The next monetary policy meeting will take place on 28 June 2023 and information on the monetary policy decision, including the policy rate, will be communicated the day after, 29 June 2023.
Related content
Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting held on 25 April 2023
(pdf | 933,1 kB)
Economic Commentary: New indicators of resource utilisation
(pdf | 1,5 MB)
Policy rate, deposit and lending rate
Voting by the Executive Board
DO YOU WANT TO KNOW MORE?
What is inflation?
How is inflation measured?
How monetary policy affects inflation
Was this information helpful?
After your answear a textbox appears
Yes
No
Do you want to leave a comment?
Submit
Questions?
Visit our FAQ on kundo.se (opens i new window).
Thanks for your feedback!
Your comment could not be sent, please try again later
Updated 26/04/2023
