BANK: RIKSBANK
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: Monetary Policy Report June 2023
DATE: 01/06/2023
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.riksbank.se/en-gb/monetary-policy/monetary-policy-report/2023/monetary-policy-report-june-2023/
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Monetary Policy Report, June 2023
Inflation is falling but is still far too high. New information, such as service prices rising unexpectedly rapidly and a weaker krona, indicates that inflation is declining more slowly than expected. The Riksbank’s policy rate increases are having an effect, but for inflation to return to the target of 2 per cent within a reasonable period of time, monetary policy needs to be tightened further. The Executive Board has therefore decided to raise the policy rate by 0.25 percentage points to 3.75 per cent. The forecast is for the policy rate to be increased at least one more time this year. The Executive Board has also decided to increase the pace of government bond sales from SEK 3.5 billion to 5 billion per month with effect from September this year.
Email
Share by email - Open in new window
facebook
Share on Facebook - Open in new window
Linkedin
Share on LinkedIn - Open in new window
bluesky
Share on Bluesky - Open in new window
copy url
Share on Twitter - Open in new window
What is the policy rate?
Policy rate
3.75
%
Applies from 5 July 2023
Policy rate, table
The monetary policy decision including the policy rate
The Executive Board's monetary policy decision from the meeting on 28 June 2023 is summarised in a press release:
The Riksbank raises the policy rate by 0.25 percentage points and increases the pace of government bond sales
Monetary policy decision document June 2023:
Decision on the policy rate and government bond sales
Read the Monetary Policy Report in full:
Monetary Policy Report June 2023
In brief - Monetary policy June 2023
Inflation is falling but is still far too high. This affects households with small margins in particular, but has a negative impact on the whole economy. To ensure that inflation continues downwards and stabilises around the target within a reasonable period of time, monetary policy needs to be tightened further. The Executive Board has therefore decided to raise the policy rate by 0.25 percentage points to 3.75 per cent. The Executive Board has also decided to increase the pace of the sales of government bonds from SEK 3.5 to 5 billion per month.
In Sweden, CPIF inflation continued to fall in April and May, to a level somewhat below the Riksbank’s most recent forecast. One important explanation for this development is the surprisingly large falls in energy and food prices. However, stripped of energy prices, inflation is declining more slowly and is marginally higher than expected. This is mainly because service prices are increasing faster than expected, which could reflect continued high demand pressures in parts of the Swedish economy. The weak krona also contributes to keeping inflation up, and there is a risk that the pass-through of the Krona to price increases is greater in the current high-inflation situation.
Demand in the Swedish economy needs to dampen to enable inflation to fall back towards the target within a reasonable period of time. The policy rate is now at a level that is contractionary, which contributes to the expectation that GDP will fall somewhat going forward, at the same time as the labour market cools. CPIF inflation is expected to fall and to be close to the target in 2024.
The forecast is that the policy rate will be raised at least one more time this year and after that will remain at a contractionary level for a relatively long period of time. However, there is still considerable uncertainty, and new information and how it is assessed to affect the economic outlook and inflation prospects will be decisive in determining the design of monetary policy.
What is the forecast for the policy rate?
The
press release
and the
Monetary Policy Report
contain the Riksbank's forecast for the policy rate.
Related documents
Documents
Press release 29 June 2023: The Riksbank raises the policy rate by 0.25 percentage points and increases the pace of government bond sales
(pdf | 720,8 kB)
Monetary policy decision June 2023: Decision on the policy rate and government bond sales
(pdf | 361,1 kB)
Monetary Policy Report June 2023
(pdf | 5,4 MB)
Numerical data: Monetary Policy Report June 2023
(xlsx | 1,8 MB)
Article: Strong labour market in Sweden and abroad
(pdf | 1,1 MB)
Slides from the press conference 29 juni 2023
(pdf | 1,9 MB)
Next monetary policy decision?
The Executive Board holds 5 scheduled monetary policy meetings a year. The next monetary policy meeting will take place on 20 September 2023 and information on the monetary policy decision, including the policy rate, will be communicated the day after, 21 September 2023.
Related content
Minutes of the Monetary Policy Meeting held on 28 June 2023
(pdf | 892,7 kB)
Policy rate, deposit and lending rate
Voting by the Executive Board
DO YOU WANT TO KNOW MORE?
What is inflation?
How is inflation measured?
How monetary policy affects inflation
Was this information helpful?
After your answear a textbox appears
Yes
No
Do you want to leave a comment?
Submit
Questions?
Visit our FAQ on kundo.se (opens i new window).
Thanks for your feedback!
Your comment could not be sent, please try again later
Updated 29/06/2023
