BANK: FED
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: FOMC statement
DATE: 16/03/2022
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/monetary20220316a1.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

For release at 2 p.m. EDT  
 
 
 
 
March 16, 2022 
Indicators of economic activity and employment have continued to strengthen.  
Job gains have been strong in recent months, and the unemployment rate has declined 
substantially.  Inflation remains elevated, reflecting supply and demand imbalances 
related to the pandemic, higher energy prices, and broader price pressures. 
The invasion of Ukraine by Russia is causing tremendous human and economic 
hardship.  The implications for the U.S. economy are highly uncertain, but in the near 
term the invasion and related events are likely to create additional upward pressure on 
inflation and weigh on economic activity.    
The Committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate 
of 2 percent over the longer run.  With appropriate firming in the stance of monetary 
policy, the Committee expects inflation to return to its 2 percent objective and the 
labor market to remain strong.  In support of these goals, the Committee decided to 
raise the target range for the federal funds rate to 1/4 to 1/2 percent and anticipates 
that ongoing increases in the target range will be appropriate.  In addition, the 
Committee expects to begin reducing its holdings of Treasury securities and agency 
debt and agency mortgage-backed securities at a coming meeting. 
In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will 
continue to monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic 
outlook.  The Committee would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy 
as appropriate if risks emerge that could impede the attainment of the Committee’s 
goals.  The Committee’s assessments will take into account a wide range of 
information, including readings on public health, labor market conditions, inflation 
pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. 
(more) 


 
 
  
 
 
 
For release at 2 p.m. EDT 
 
 
 
 
 
March 16, 2022 
-2- 
Voting for the monetary policy action were Jerome H. Powell, Chair; John C. 
Williams, Vice Chair; Michelle W. Bowman; Lael Brainard; Esther L. George; 
Patrick Harker; Loretta J. Mester; and Christopher J. Waller.  Voting against this 
action was James Bullard, who preferred at this meeting to raise the target range for 
the federal funds rate by 0.5 percentage point to 1/2 to 3/4 percent.  Patrick Harker 
voted as an alternate member at this meeting.   
-0- 


 
 
 
 
For release at 2 p.m. EDT 
 
 
 
 
 
March 16, 2022 
 
Decisions Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation 
The Federal Reserve has made the following decisions to implement the monetary policy 
stance announced by the Federal Open Market Committee in its statement on March 16, 
2022: 
• The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted unanimously to raise 
the interest rate paid on reserve balances to 0.4 percent, effective March 17, 2022. 
• As part of its policy decision, the Federal Open Market Committee voted to 
authorize and direct the Open Market Desk at the Federal Reserve Bank of New 
York, until instructed otherwise, to execute transactions in the System Open Market 
Account in accordance with the following domestic policy directive: 
“Effective March 17, 2022, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk 
to: 
o Undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the 
federal funds rate in a target range of 1/4 to 1/2 percent. 
o Conduct overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum 
bid rate of 0.5 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of 
$500 billion; the aggregate operation limit can be temporarily 
increased at the discretion of the Chair. 
o Conduct overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an 
offering rate of 0.3 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of 
$160 billion per day; the per-counterparty limit can be temporarily 
increased at the discretion of the Chair. 
o Roll over at auction all principal payments from the Federal Reserve's 
holdings of Treasury securities and reinvest all principal payments 
from the Federal Reserve's holdings of agency debt and agency 
mortgage-backed securities (MBS) in agency MBS. 
o Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if 
needed for operational reasons. 
o Engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to 
facilitate settlement of the Federal Reserve's agency MBS 
transactions.” 
• In a related action, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted 
unanimously to approve a 1/4 percentage point increase in the primary credit rate to 
0.5 percent, effective March 17, 2022.  In taking this action, the Board approved 
requests to establish that rate submitted by the Boards of Directors of the Federal 
Reserve Banks of Boston, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, St. 
Louis, Minneapolis, Kansas City, and San Francisco. 
(more) 
 


 
 
 
 
For release at 2 p.m. EDT 
 
 
 
 
 
March 16, 2022 
-2- 
 
This information will be updated as appropriate to reflect decisions of the Federal Open 
Market Committee or the Board of Governors regarding details of the Federal Reserve’s 
operational tools and approach used to implement monetary policy. 
More information regarding open market operations and reinvestments may be found on 
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York’s website.
