BANK: FED
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: FOMC statement
DATE: 26/07/2023
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/monetary20230726a1.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

For release at 2:00 p.m. EDT  
 
  
    
 
                         July 26, 2023 
 
 
 
Recent indicators suggest that economic activity has been expanding at a moderate pace.   
Job gains have been robust in recent months, and the unemployment rate has remained low.   
Inflation remains elevated. 
 
The U.S. banking system is sound and resilient.  Tighter credit conditions for households 
and businesses are likely to weigh on economic activity, hiring, and inflation.  The extent of 
these effects remains uncertain.  The Committee remains highly attentive to inflation risks. 
 
The Committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 
2 percent over the longer run.  In support of these goals, the Committee decided to raise the 
target range for the federal funds rate to 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 percent.  The Committee will continue to 
assess additional information and its implications for monetary policy.  In determining the extent 
of additional policy firming that may be appropriate to return inflation to 2 percent over time, the 
Committee will take into account the cumulative tightening of monetary policy, the lags with 
which monetary policy affects economic activity and inflation, and economic and financial 
developments.  In addition, the Committee will continue reducing its holdings of Treasury 
securities and agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities, as described in its previously 
announced plans.  The Committee is strongly committed to returning inflation to its 2 percent 
objective.     
 
In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to 
monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook.  The Committee  
(more) 


 
-2- 
would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that 
could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals.  The Committee’s assessments will take 
into account a wide range of information, including readings on labor market conditions, 
inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. 
 
Voting for the monetary policy action were Jerome H. Powell, Chair; John C. Williams, 
Vice Chair; Michael S. Barr; Michelle W. Bowman; Lisa D. Cook; Austan D. Goolsbee; Patrick 
Harker; Philip N. Jefferson; Neel Kashkari; Lorie K. Logan; and Christopher J. Waller. 
-0- 
For media inquiries, please email media@frb.gov or call 202-452-2955. 
Attachment 


 
For release at 2:00 p.m. EDT  
 
 
 
 
                          July 26, 2023  
 
 
Decisions Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation 
The Federal Reserve has made the following decisions to implement the monetary policy stance 
announced by the Federal Open Market Committee in its statement on July 26, 2023: 
• 
The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted unanimously to raise the 
interest rate paid on reserve balances to 5.4 percent, effective July 27, 2023. 
• 
As part of its policy decision, the Federal Open Market Committee voted to direct the Open 
Market Desk at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to 
execute transactions in the System Open Market Account in accordance with the following 
domestic policy directive:  
"Effective July 27, 2023, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to: 
o Undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate 
in a target range of 5-1/4 to 5-1/2 percent. 
o Conduct standing overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid 
rate of 5.5 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion. 
o Conduct standing overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an 
offering rate of 5.3 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per 
day. 
o Roll over at auction the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve's 
holdings of Treasury securities maturing in each calendar month that exceeds a 
cap of $60 billion per month. Redeem Treasury coupon securities up to this 
monthly cap and Treasury bills to the extent that coupon principal payments are 
less than the monthly cap. 
o Reinvest into agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) the amount of principal 
payments from the Federal Reserve's holdings of agency debt and agency MBS 
received in each calendar month that exceeds a cap of $35 billion per month. 
o Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if needed for 
operational reasons. 
o Engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate 
settlement of the Federal Reserve's agency MBS transactions." 
 
• 
In a related action, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted 
unanimously to approve a 1/4 percentage point increase in the primary credit rate to 5.5 
percent, effective July 27, 2023. In taking this action, the Board approved requests to 
establish that rate submitted by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks of 
Boston, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, Chicago, St. Louis. Minneapolis, Kansas City, 
Dallas, and San Francisco. 
 
(more) 


 
-2- 
This information will be updated as appropriate to reflect decisions of the Federal Open Market 
Committee or the Board of Governors regarding details of the Federal Reserve's operational tools 
and approach used to implement monetary policy. 
More information regarding open market operations and reinvestments may be found on the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York's website.
