BANK: FED
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: FOMC statement
DATE: 18/12/2024
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.federalreserve.gov/monetarypolicy/files/monetary20241218a1.pdf
DOCUMENT TYPE: pdf

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

For release at 2:00 p.m. EST  
 
 
 
 
  
   December 18, 2024 
 
 
 
Recent indicators suggest that economic activity has continued to expand at a solid pace.  
Since earlier in the year, labor market conditions have generally eased, and the unemployment 
rate has moved up but remains low. Inflation has made progress toward the Committee’s 
2 percent objective but remains somewhat elevated. 
 
The Committee seeks to achieve maximum employment and inflation at the rate of 
2 percent over the longer run. The Committee judges that the risks to achieving its employment 
and inflation goals are roughly in balance. The economic outlook is uncertain, and the 
Committee is attentive to the risks to both sides of its dual mandate. 
 
In support of its goals, the Committee decided to lower the target range for the federal 
funds rate by 1/4 percentage point to 4-1/4 to 4-1/2 percent. In considering the extent and timing 
of additional adjustments to the target range for the federal funds rate, the Committee will 
carefully assess incoming data, the evolving outlook, and the balance of risks. The Committee 
will continue reducing its holdings of Treasury securities and agency debt and agency 
mortgage‑backed securities. The Committee is strongly committed to supporting maximum 
employment and returning inflation to its 2 percent objective. 
 
In assessing the appropriate stance of monetary policy, the Committee will continue to 
monitor the implications of incoming information for the economic outlook. The Committee 
would be prepared to adjust the stance of monetary policy as appropriate if risks emerge that 
could impede the attainment of the Committee’s goals. The Committee’s assessments will take  
(more) 


 
 
-2- 
into account a wide range of information, including readings on labor market conditions, 
inflation pressures and inflation expectations, and financial and international developments. 
Voting for the monetary policy action were Jerome H. Powell, Chair; John C. Williams, 
Vice Chair; Thomas I. Barkin; Michael S. Barr; Raphael W. Bostic; Michelle W. Bowman; Lisa 
D. Cook; Mary C. Daly; Philip N. Jefferson; Adriana D. Kugler; and Christopher J. Waller. 
Voting against the action was Beth M. Hammack, who preferred to maintain the target range for 
the federal funds rate at 4-1/2 to 4-3/4 percent. 
-0- 
Attachment 
For media inquiries, please email media@frb.gov or call 202-452-2955. 


For release at 2:00 p.m. EST  
 
 
 
 
                December 18, 2024  
 
Decisions Regarding Monetary Policy Implementation 
The Federal Reserve has made the following decisions to implement the monetary policy stance 
announced by the Federal Open Market Committee in its statement on December 18, 2024: 
• 
The Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted unanimously to lower the 
interest rate paid on reserve balances to 4.4 percent, effective December 19, 2024. 
• 
As part of its policy decision, the Federal Open Market Committee voted to direct the Open 
Market Desk at the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, until instructed otherwise, to 
execute transactions in the System Open Market Account in accordance with the following 
domestic policy directive: 
"Effective December 19, 2024, the Federal Open Market Committee directs the Desk to: 
o Undertake open market operations as necessary to maintain the federal funds rate 
in a target range of 4-1/4 to 4-1/2 percent. 
o Conduct standing overnight repurchase agreement operations with a minimum bid 
rate of 4.5 percent and with an aggregate operation limit of $500 billion. 
o Conduct standing overnight reverse repurchase agreement operations at an 
offering rate of 4.25 percent and with a per-counterparty limit of $160 billion per 
day. Setting this rate at the bottom of the target range for the federal funds rate is 
intended to support effective monetary policy implementation and the smooth 
functioning of short-term funding markets. 
o Roll over at auction the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve's 
holdings of Treasury securities maturing in each calendar month that exceeds a 
cap of $25 billion per month. Redeem Treasury coupon securities up to this 
monthly cap and Treasury bills to the extent that coupon principal payments are 
less than the monthly cap. 
o Reinvest the amount of principal payments from the Federal Reserve's holdings of 
agency debt and agency mortgage-backed securities (MBS) received in each 
calendar month that exceeds a cap of $35 billion per month into Treasury 
securities to roughly match the maturity composition of Treasury securities 
outstanding. 
o Allow modest deviations from stated amounts for reinvestments, if needed for 
operational reasons. 
o Engage in dollar roll and coupon swap transactions as necessary to facilitate 
settlement of the Federal Reserve's agency MBS transactions." 
 
 
 
 
 
(more) 
-2- 


 
• 
In a related action, the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System voted 
unanimously to approve a 1/4 percentage point decrease in the primary credit rate to 4.5 
percent, effective December 19, 2024. In taking this action, the Board approved requests 
to establish that rate submitted by the Boards of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks 
of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago, and San 
Francisco. 
 
This information will be updated as appropriate to reflect decisions of the Federal Open Market 
Committee or the Board of Governors regarding details of the Federal Reserve's operational tools 
and approach used to implement monetary policy. 
More information regarding open market operations and reinvestments may be found on the 
Federal Reserve Bank of New York's website.
