BANK: RIKSBANK
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Ingves Utfragning I Finansutskottet Penningpolitiken Ger Stod At Aterhamtningen Och Inflationen
DATE: 01/06/2021
SPEAKER: Stefan Ingves
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.riksbank.se/en-gb/press-and-published/speeches-and-presentations/2021/ingves-utfragning-i-finansutskottet-penningpolitiken-ger-stod-at-aterhamtningen-och-inflationen/
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Ingves at the Riksdag Committee on Finance: Monetary policy supporting recovery and inflation
The Swedish economy has withstood the second wave of infection relatively well, supported by extensive economic policy measures. This comment was made by Governor Stefan Ingves in his introduction, when he and Deputy Governor Per Jansson took part in the first monetary policy hearing of the year at the Riksdag Committee on Finance.
Date:
16/03/2021 10:00
Speaker:
Governor Stefan Ingves
Place:
Committee on Finance, Sveriges Riksdag
Email
Share by email - Open in new window
facebook
Share on Facebook - Open in new window
Linkedin
Share on LinkedIn - Open in new window
bluesky
Share on Bluesky - Open in new window
copy url
Share on Twitter - Open in new window
Published
16/03/2021
At the same time, Mr Ingves pointed out that the recovery that has now begun is divided. Several service sectors, which employ many young people and people born abroad, are still severely affected. There is considerable uncertainty, and future developments are dependent not least on the progress of the vaccination process. But unlike many other crises, GDP is expected to gradually return to the pre-crisis level. This is partly because of the different nature of this crisis, but also because of the substantial economic policy measures implemented to deal with it.
Mr Ingves pointed out that “the various measures taken by the Riksbank and other central banks have meant that we have avoided the health crisis developing into a financial crisis.” The credit supply has continued to function and interest rates faced by households and companies have been kept at low levels. “Without the measures, the crisis would have been even worse for households and companies, and in particular unemployment would have been higher. But there is still considerable uncertainty, and monetary policy needs to remain expansionary to facilitate the recovery and contribute to inflation rising towards the target,” said Mr Ingves.
Related content
Ingves presentation at the Riksdag Committee on Finance 16 March 2021
(pdf | 858,6 kB)
Follow the hearing on the Riksdag´s website (only in Swedish)
- Open in new window
The Riksbank’s measures in connection with the corona pandemic
Updated 16/03/2021
