BANK: RIKSBANK
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Jansson At The Riksdag Committee On Finance We Are Safeguarding The Inflation Target
DATE: 01/06/2022
SPEAKER: Per Jansson
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.riksbank.se/en-gb/press-and-published/speeches-and-presentations/2022/jansson-at-the-riksdag-committee-on-finance-we-are-safeguarding-the-inflation-target/
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Jansson at the Riksdag Committee on Finance: We are safeguarding the inflation target
The high inflation creates problems. It erodes purchasing power – especially for the least well-off – and makes it difficult for both households and businesses to plan their finances. Therefore, the Riksbank, which has been given the task by the Riksdag of keeping inflation low and stable, must now act to bring inflation down. Low and stable inflation provides a foundation for good economic development. This was the message from Governor Stefan Ingves and Deputy Governor Per Jansson when they took part in a hearing on current monetary policy at the Riksdag Committee on Finance.
Date:
20/10/2022 09:00
Speaker:
Deputy Governor Per Jansson
Email
Share by email - Open in new window
facebook
Share on Facebook - Open in new window
Linkedin
Share on LinkedIn - Open in new window
bluesky
Share on Bluesky - Open in new window
copy url
Share on Twitter - Open in new window
Published
20/10/2022
The inflation target is worth defending
Per Jansson: “We will bring inflation down to the target level - and this is a promise, not a forecast.” However, he emphasized that there are better and worse paths to get there. “The best scenario would be if we can return inflation to the target with relatively cautious rate increases. This is also contained in our forecast, where the policy rate peaks at 2.5 per cent. But a lot also depends on the support for this development in price-setting and wage formation and the formulation of fiscal policy."
The inflation target has contributed to a good economic development in Sweden, he continued and pointed out, among other things, that real wages have increased more than three times faster per year since the inflation target was introduced in 1995, compared with the period 1970-1994. “The inflation target is worth defending, and I hope that we will cooperate to do so.”
Related content
Jansson presentation at the Riksdag Committee on Finance 20 October 2022
(pdf | 1,1 MB)
Follow the hearing on the Riksdag´s website (only in Swedish)
- Open in new window
Updated 21/10/2022
