BANK: RIKSBANK
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Breman At Riksdag Committee On Finance The Geopolitical Uncertainty Makes It More Difficult To Assess Inflation
DATE: 01/06/2022
SPEAKER: Anna Breman
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.riksbank.se/en-gb/press-and-published/speeches-and-presentations/2022/breman-at-riksdag-committee-on-finance-the-geopolitical-uncertainty-makes-it-more-difficult-to-assess-inflation/
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Breman at Riksdag Committee on Finance: The geopolitical uncertainty makes it more difficult to assess inflation
The Riksbank is closely following developments and is prepared to deal with possible effects on the financial markets as a result of Russia's invasion of Ukraine. “We are continually evaluating the consequences for the Swedish economy,” said Governor Stefan Ingves in his introduction on monetary policy, when he and Deputy Governor Anna Breman took part in the first hearing of the year at the Riksdag Committee on Finance.
Date:
03/03/2022 10:00
Speaker:
Deputy Governor Anna Breman
Email
Share by email - Open in new window
facebook
Share on Facebook - Open in new window
Linkedin
Share on LinkedIn - Open in new window
bluesky
Share on Bluesky - Open in new window
copy url
Share on Twitter - Open in new window
Published
03/03/2022
"Back when we presented our assessment of inflation prospects in our latest Monetary Policy Report on 10 February, we said that inflation was uncertain. Recent developments in Ukraine further reinforce that impression,” said Mr Ingves. At the moment, inflation in Sweden is higher than the target, but according to the Riksbank's latest forecast from February, it is expected to fall back over the year. For inflation to be close to the target a little further ahead requires continued support from monetary policy. "But we are continually assessing how the Swedish economy is developing and how sustainable the higher inflation is and we will adjust our monetary policy if necessary," said Mr Ingves.
Ms Breman also stressed the need to follow developments in financial markets and in the Swedish and global economies. The direct effects on the Swedish economy are expected to be small, as Sweden's trade with Ukraine and Russia is limited and Swedish banks have little exposure to these countries. However, the consequences can be more tangible if the war escalates, or causes greater unrest in financial markets. The prices of energy and intermediate goods increased sharply even before Russia's invasion of Ukraine, and many companies may need to raise prices in the light of the fact that energy prices are now rising further. "The war will affect economic and inflation prospects in Sweden, as well as abroad. We need to be prepared to adjust monetary policy if necessary,” said Ms Breman.
Related content
Breman presentation at the Riksdag Committee on Finance 3 March 2022
(pdf | 1,5 MB)
Updated 03/03/2022
