BANK: RIKSBANK
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Ingves At The Riksdag Committee On Finance We Are Safeguarding The Inflation Target
DATE: 01/06/2022
SPEAKER: Stefan Ingves
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.riksbank.se/en-gb/press-and-published/speeches-and-presentations/2022/ingves-at-the-riksdag-committee-on-finance-we-are-safeguarding-the-inflation-target/
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Ingves at the Riksdag Committee on Finance: We are safeguarding the inflation target
The high inflation creates problems. It erodes purchasing power – especially for the least well-off – and makes it difficult for both households and businesses to plan their finances. Therefore, the Riksbank, which has been given the task by the Riksdag of keeping inflation low and stable, must now act to bring inflation down. Low and stable inflation provides a foundation for good economic development. This was the message from Governor Stefan Ingves and Deputy Governor Per Jansson when they took part in a hearing on current monetary policy at the Riksdag Committee on Finance.
Date:
20/10/2022 09:00
Speaker:
Governor Stefan Ingves
Place:
Committee on Finance, Sveriges Riksdag
Email
Share by email - Open in new window
facebook
Share on Facebook - Open in new window
Linkedin
Share on LinkedIn - Open in new window
bluesky
Share on Bluesky - Open in new window
copy url
Share on Twitter - Open in new window
Published
20/10/2022
Inflation is too high – monetary policy has to act
At the end of last year, inflation excluding energy prices was still low. But over the course of the year, inflation has spread widely in the economy. “Today, almost all prices are rising in Sweden, and rising fast,” said Stefan Ingves. To dampen the high inflation, the Riksbank has raised its policy rate three times this year and the Executive Board's forecast is that it will need to be raised further in the next six months.
"Inflation is far too high, and we must therefore use our monetary policy. A higher policy rate slows down economic activity. If we do not act now, it could lead to even more severe and negative effects later on. The inflation-targeting policy is now being put to the test,” said Stefan Ingves.
At the same time, he pointed to the considerable uncertainty in the Riksbank's forecasts and mentioned in this context the high price of electricity, the geopolitical situation and the interaction between fiscal and monetary policy in various parts of the world. "If the conditions change, we need to adjust monetary policy accordingly. We will do what is necessary to bring inflation back to the target.”
Related content
Ingves presentation at the Riksdag Committee on Finance 20 October 2022
(pdf | 2,1 MB)
Follow the hearing on the Riksdag´s website (only in Swedish)
- Open in new window
Updated 21/10/2022
