BANK: RIKSBANK
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Erik Thedeen Committee On Finance Hearing On Monetary Policy2
DATE: 01/06/2024
SPEAKER: Erik Thedéen
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.riksbank.se/en-gb/press-and-published/speeches-and-presentations/2024/erik-thedeen-committee-on-finance-hearing-on-monetary-policy2/
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Erik Thedéen: Committee on Finance hearing on monetary policy
Inflation is back close to the target. The policy rate has been cut three times in five months and is expected to be cut further in the future. Low and stable inflation and lower interest costs are improving households’ finances and making it easier for companies to invest. This is contributing to brighter prospects in the Swedish economy. That was the message from members of the Riksbank’s Executive Board when they took part in this year’s second hearing at the Riksdag Committee on Finance on current monetary policy on Tuesday.
Date:
15/10/2024 09:00
Speaker:
Governor Erik Thedéen
Place:
Förstakammarsalen, Allmänhetens entré, Riksgatan 3 - Stockholm
Email
Share by email - Open in new window
facebook
Share on Facebook - Open in new window
Linkedin
Share on LinkedIn - Open in new window
bluesky
Share on Bluesky - Open in new window
copy url
Share on Twitter - Open in new window
Published
15/10/2024
Governor Erik Thedéen began the hearing by pointing out how the Executive Board has gradually, but rapidly, eased monetary policy as inflation has fallen and shown signs of stabilising close to the target. At the same time, economic activity is weak.
“With inflation close to target and strong confidence in the inflation target, there is scope for monetary policy to provide more support to economic activity. It is important in itself that economic activity strengthens, but it is also a necessary condition for inflation to stabilise close to the target. This is why, at our September meeting, we judged that the policy rate will be cut at a faster pace going forward.”
“The direction is clear, interest rates are about to fall further,” said Mr Thedéen. But he added that there are a number of risks that require continued vigilance, mentioning the situation in the Middle East in addition to the economic recovery in Sweden and abroad.
“Our next monetary policy meeting will be in three weeks, this time in Falun. Ahead of this decision, we will, as usual, make an overall assessment of how recent developments affect the outlook for inflation and economic activity and determine the best pace at which to adjust monetary policy to stabilise inflation at the target and contribute to good economic development in Sweden.”
Related content
Erik Thedéens slides at the Riksdag Committee on Finance 15 October 2024
(pdf | 2,1 MB)
Updated 15/10/2024
