BANK: RIKSBANK
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Anna Breman Visits Karlskrona
DATE: 01/06/2024
SPEAKER: Anna Breman visits Karlskrona
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.riksbank.se/en-gb/press-and-published/speeches-and-presentations/2024/anna-breman-visits-karlskrona/
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Anna Breman visits Karlskrona
First Deputy Governor Anna Breman visited Karlskrona on Friday. At a breakfast seminar at the Chamber of Commerce and Industry of Southern Sweden, she spoke about the economic situation and the Riksbank's emergency preparedness work and special responsibility for payments in the event of crises and war.
Date:
08/03/2024 08:00
Speaker:
Deputy Governor Anna Breman
Place:
the Chamber of Commerce and Industry of Southern Sweden
Email
Share by email - Open in new window
facebook
Share on Facebook - Open in new window
Linkedin
Share on LinkedIn - Open in new window
bluesky
Share on Bluesky - Open in new window
copy url
Share on Twitter - Open in new window
Published
08/03/2024
The most recent outcome for Swedish GDP indicates that developments in 2023 were slightly stronger than expected, and there are tendencies for household consumption to have bottomed out and it may begin to turn upwards. But it is clear that in particular the parts of the Swedish economy most sensitive to interest rates slowed down last year.
“The slowdown in demand in the Swedish economy has contributed to the fall in inflation. While there are risks of setbacks, we believe that the prospects for stabilising inflation at a low level are good. Low and stable inflation allows real wages to grow, strengthening household purchasing power. This will help restore growth and strengthen the labour market in the long run" said Breman.
Swedish exports are continuing to develop relatively well, despite weak international economic activity. In Sweden, both exports and imports are dependent on shipping. For 90% of Swedish imports and exports, transports depend on the sea route, which means that disruptions in this type of trade flow risk having major consequences for our society. Not least the experiences from Ukraine have highlighted the importance of trade flows continuing to function even in times of war to maintain the resilience of society and the economy.
"I am pleased to visit the naval base in connection with my visit to Karlskrona and to have the opportunity to learn more about the work of the Swedish Armed Forces in protecting Swedish waters and our coasts."
The new Sveriges Riksbank Act has given the Riksbank a clearer responsibility in terms of emergency preparedness and an increased responsibility for ensuring that payments function both in peacetime crises and in a state of heightened alert.
”Companies and households are dependent on payments functioning smoothly. For example, cash supply is important from a business contingency perspective and the Riksbank has opened new depots. It is also important to have a good dialogue and collaboration between authorities to strengthen emergency preparedness."
Updated 08/03/2024
