BANK: RIKSBANK
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Aino Bunge Inflation Is In The Process Of Stabilising At The Target But The Way Forward Is Not Entirely Smooth
DATE: 01/06/2024
SPEAKER: Aino Bunge
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.riksbank.se/en-gb/press-and-published/speeches-and-presentations/2024/aino-bunge-inflation-is-in-the-process-of-stabilising-at-the-target-but-the-way-forward-is-not-entirely-smooth/
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Aino Bunge: Inflation is in the process of stabilising at the target, but the way forward is not entirely smooth
"Inflation is stabilising at the target and there may therefore be scope for a rate cut in May or June. But monetary policy must take a learning approach on what could be a crooked path towards a neutral interest rate level. The world is constantly changing and monetary policy will have to adapt if there are new shocks." These comments were made by Deputy Governor Aino Bunge, speaking about the economic situation today at Handelsbanken in Stockholm.
Date:
18/04/2024 08:30
Speaker:
Deputy Governor Aino Bunge
Place:
Handelsbanken
Email
Share by email - Open in new window
facebook
Share on Facebook - Open in new window
Linkedin
Share on LinkedIn - Open in new window
bluesky
Share on Bluesky - Open in new window
copy url
Share on Twitter - Open in new window
Published
18/04/2024
Aino Bunge, deputy governor.
“At our most recent policy rate meeting at the end of March, I noted that we were moving towards an easing of monetary policy and that we can probably cut the policy rate in May or June if the inflation outlook remains favourable. A lot has happened since then, even though it has only been three weeks.”
"The March inflation outcome was clearly lower than expected and price growth rates declined broadly. It is very pleasing and good for the Swedish economy that the previously excessively high inflation has fallen back. But this must be weighted against the risks to inflation going forward.”
Ms Bunge emphasised that although the Riksbank conducts an independent monetary policy, it cannot and should not ignore what is happening abroad.
“Geopolitical risks remain highly present. Although we have not recently seen any major supply disruptions, we are monitoring developments closely. We also see that the US economy is continuing to surprise on the upside and that this may also affect the decline in inflation in Sweden. In this environment, a small currency like the krona becomes particularly vulnerable and a weaker exchange rate is a clear upside risk for Swedish inflation.”
Ms Bunge said that this, together with continued vigilance regarding companies' pricing behaviour, is an example of factors that need to be weighed up in order to assess how tight monetary policy should be.
“We need a learning approach when adjusting monetary policy and assessing how firms and households react to a tightening monetary policy as inflation approaches the target. Prior to our next monetary policy meeting on 7 May, we will have to weigh up how everything that has happened since the last meeting affects the possibilities of achieving sustainably low and stable inflation in Sweden."
Updated 18/04/2024
