BANK: RIKSBANK
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Anna Breman Visited Visby
DATE: 01/06/2024
SPEAKER: Anna Breman visited Visby
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.riksbank.se/en-gb/press-and-published/speeches-and-presentations/2024/anna-breman-visited-visby/
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Anna Breman visited Visby
First Deputy Governor Anna Breman visited Visby on Monday and discussed the Riksbank’s role in the economy, total defence and current monetary policy at a lecture organised by Köpmansgillet i Visby in connection with its 330th anniversary.
Date:
02/12/2024 16:00
Speaker:
First Deputy Governor Anna Breman
Place:
Köpmansgillet in Visby
Email
Share by email - Open in new window
facebook
Share on Facebook - Open in new window
Linkedin
Share on LinkedIn - Open in new window
bluesky
Share on Bluesky - Open in new window
copy url
Share on Twitter - Open in new window
Published
02/12/2024
Anna Breman, First Deputy Governor.
“If the outlook for inflation and economic activity remains the same, I envisage the policy rate being cut further at the next monetary policy meeting in December and during the first half of 2025, in line with what was communicated in September. But we need to be aware that inflation could be either higher or lower going forward. If the outlook for inflation changes, the Riksbank will adjust its monetary policy.”
In Visby, Ms Breman also met with local businesses and entrepreneurs and visited PayEx through an event organised by the Chamber of Commerce of East Sweden. She also met with the newly appointed county governor Charlotte Petri Gornitzka and discussed crisis preparedness issues.
Under the Sveriges Riksbank Act, the Riksbank has a responsibility to ensure that the public is able to make payments both in crisis situations that occur during peacetime and in a situation of heightened alert.
“The general public needs to be able to rely on payments functioning. Uncertainty abroad and experiences from the ongoing war in Ukraine show the importance of having a resilient society where important societal functions are maintained even under severe stress. Here, the Riksbank has a far-reaching responsibility for ensuring that payments work. But I would also like to emphasise the importance of good home preparedness and refer to the brochure sent by MSB to all households in Sweden. This can give you recommendations on how to strengthen your preparedness by having different ways to pay, such as cash, payment cards from different banks and Swish.”
Updated 02/12/2024
