BANK: RIKSBANK
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Anna Seim Difficult To Forecast But The Krona Can Be Understood
DATE: 01/06/2025
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.riksbank.se/en-gb/press-and-published/speeches-and-presentations/2025/anna-seim-difficult-to-forecast-but-the-krona-can-be-understood/
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Anna Seim: Difficult to forecast, but the krona can be understood
Speech
The krona exchange rate has varied greatly over time and is very difficult to predict, but a backward-looking analysis can provide convincing arguments as to why the krona has strengthened or weakened as it has. These were the words of Deputy Governor Anna Seim when she analysed the driving forces behind the exchange rate in a seminar on the development of the krona.
Date:
14/11/2025 08:00
Speaker:
Deputy Governor Anna Seim
Place:
Sveriges Riksbank
Email
Share by email - Open in new window
facebook
Share on Facebook - Open in new window
Linkedin
Share on LinkedIn - Open in new window
bluesky
Share on Bluesky - Open in new window
copy url
Share on Twitter - Open in new window
Published
14/11/2025
Anna Seim, deputy governor.
Analysing the development of the krona is complex because it is affected by several factors. In the short term, the krona exchange rate is driven by financial flows between countries, while classical explanations such as international trade flows only become more important in the longer term. When several factors are combined, explanations emerge as to why the krona has weakened, as well as strengthened, so much over time.
But even if these factors can explain the development of the krona fairly well in hindsight, it is still notoriously difficult to predict.
Anna Seim says that “Financial markets are so complex, and the shocks to them and to the macroeconomy so large and frequent, that predictions about the future rarely materialise.”
The krona exchange rate is important to the Riksbank as it has both direct and indirect effects on inflation and economic activity, and thus affects the conditions for attaining the inflation target. Ms Seim points out that the Riksbank monitors the development of the krona very closely and constantly conducts analytical work to better understand its driving forces.
She notes that the Swedish krona both engages and concerns, but also adds that while the krona can be understood and influenced, it does not determine a country's welfare.
“The research literature clearly shows that what matters for a country's long-term welfare are strong institutions and an environment that creates incentives for education, innovation and development – not the development of the exchange rate.”
Related content
Anna Seim´s speech: Driving forces behind the development of the krona
(pdf | 1,9 MB)
Staff memo: Is it possible to understand exchange rate developments with a new model.docx
(pdf | 1,5 MB)
Staff memo: The development and trend of the real exchange rate
(pdf | 1,7 MB)
Updated 18/11/2025
