BANK: RIKSBANK
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Anna Seim The Riksbank Is One Of The Most Transparent Central Banks
DATE: 01/06/2025
SPEAKER: Anna Seim
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.riksbank.se/en-gb/press-and-published/speeches-and-presentations/2025/anna-seim-the-riksbank-is-one-of-the-most-transparent-central-banks/
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Anna Seim: The Riksbank is one of the most transparent central banks
Presentation
Anna Seim discusses the Riksbank's experience of communicating monetary policy at a conference organised by the US Federal Reserve.
Date:
16/05/2025 17:00
Speaker:
Deputy Governor Anna Seim
Place:
Federal Reserve Board, Washington, D.C., USA
Email
Share by email - Open in new window
facebook
Share on Facebook - Open in new window
Linkedin
Share on LinkedIn - Open in new window
bluesky
Share on Bluesky - Open in new window
copy url
Share on Twitter - Open in new window
Published
16/05/2025
Anna Seim, deputy governor.
Deputy Governor Anna Seim is participating in a panel discussion at the Federal Reserve Board's research conference in honour of Thomas Laubach in Washington D.C. on Friday. The conference is part of the Federal Reserve's review of its monetary policy strategy, tools and communication and aims to provide up-to-date academic, as well as practical, perspectives on a range of monetary policy issues.
“In an international comparison, the Riksbank is ranked as one of the most transparent central banks. One reason for this is that we publish forecasts for our policy rate. The Riksbank has been doing this since 2007, and although there have been challenges, we have generally had a positive experience of communicating our view of monetary policy by means of forecasts for our own policy rate,” says Ms Seim.
“I believe that, together with alternative scenarios, the policy rate forecast is perhaps our most important monetary policy communication tool.”
At the same time, Ms Seim emphasises that the composition and working methods of the monetary policy committees differ a great deal between different central banks, which of course affects how they choose to communicate.
This is the Federal Reserve Board's second research conference in memory of Thomas Laubach. The conference is held in Washington D.C. on 15-16 May 2025.
The conference will be broadcast live via the Federal Reserve website:
Federal Reserve Board - Second Thomas Laubach Research Conference
Related content
Seim pictures, Federal Reserve 2025 May, 2nd Thomas Laubach Research Conference
Updated 16/05/2025
