BANK: RIKSBANK
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Erik Thedeen Signs Of Economic Rebound But Uncertainty Remains High
DATE: 01/06/2025
SPEAKER: Presentation
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.riksbank.se/en-gb/press-and-published/speeches-and-presentations/2025/erik-thedeen-signs-of-economic-rebound-but-uncertainty-remains-high/
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Erik Thedéen: Signs of economic rebound, but uncertainty remains high
Presentation
"We have cut the policy rate by a relatively large amount in a short period of time and it takes time for the cuts to attain full impact. This suggests a degree of patience in monetary policy going forward. I think the various statements about tariffs in recent days are also a good illustration of the need for a certain degree of patience. Having said this, we are ready to act if the outlook for inflation and economic activity so requires." These were the words of Governor Erik Thedéen, speaking today at Lannebo in Stockholm.
Date:
06/02/2025 08:30
Speaker:
Governor Erik Thedéen
Place:
Lannebo
Email
Share by email - Open in new window
facebook
Share on Facebook - Open in new window
Linkedin
Share on LinkedIn - Open in new window
bluesky
Share on Bluesky - Open in new window
copy url
Share on Twitter - Open in new window
Published
06/02/2025
Erik Thedéen, governor.
Mr Thedéen described his reasoning at last week's monetary policy meeting, when the Executive Board decided to cut the policy rate to 2.25 per cent.
"We are more confident about the way inflation is developing. Disregarding the volatile energy prices, inflation has been close to 2 per cent for some time. Most indicators of price pressures also point to inflation remaining in line with the target. But we must not take the lower inflationary pressures for granted. I think that the rising producer prices and higher world food prices call for some vigilance."
Over the year, many households will benefit from rising real wages, the fiscal policy measures that have been decided, and lower interest costs. This creates the conditions for an economic rebound. "We are now seeing early signs of a rebound in economic activity, for example, households have started to consume a little more and turnover in the housing market is increasing. But it remains to be seen whether the rebound is sustainable."
At the same time, Mr Thedéen emphasised that the rebound in Sweden is also dependent on growth prospects among our main trading partners. The weak outcome in the euro area is worrying, and uncertainty regarding import tariffs could have a negative effect on the business climate and thereby willingness to invest.
"The gap between the growth outlook in the United States and that in the euro area, and the speculation about trade barriers, have led to large movements in the fixed income and currency markets. If the conclusion is that the United States is growing faster with increasing inflation risks and rising long-term interest rates as a consequence, this will also affect the conditions for Sweden. But it is too early to say. In this situation, it is wise to keep a cool head before drawing conclusions about the effects on the Swedish economy."
Updated 06/02/2025
