BANK: RIKSBANK
CATEGORY: Speeches
TITLE: Anna Seim In Vastervik Favourable Conditions For Managing The Uncertain Road Ahead
DATE: 01/06/2025
SPEAKER: Presentation
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.riksbank.se/en-gb/press-and-published/speeches-and-presentations/2025/anna-seim-in-vastervik-favourable-conditions-for-managing-the-uncertain-road-ahead/
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Anna Seim in Västervik: Favourable conditions for managing the uncertain road ahead
Presentation
The increased uncertainty abroad is expected to dampen economic activity, while the effects on inflation are more difficult to assess. My assessment is that monetary policy is currently well-balanced and that it is at present wise to await further information to obtain a clearer picture of the outlook for inflation and economic activity. We will change the policy rate if warranted. These comments were made by Deputy Governor Anna Seim at a breakfast meeting with the local business community in Västervik, organised by Handelsbanken.
Date:
21/05/2025 08:00
Speaker:
Deputy Governor Anna Seim
Place:
Handelsbanken, Västervik
Email
Share by email - Open in new window
facebook
Share on Facebook - Open in new window
Linkedin
Share on LinkedIn - Open in new window
bluesky
Share on Bluesky - Open in new window
copy url
Share on Twitter - Open in new window
Published
21/05/2025
Anna Seim, Deputy Governor
At the beginning of the year, we noted that a recovery had begun in the Swedish economy. Household finances are continuing to benefit from rising real wages and from the fact that interest costs are clearly lower today than a year ago. "But the US administration's erratic trade and security policies risk hampering progress going forward.”
Ms Seim sees two main tracks as to how this will affect the Swedish economy. One is that the uncertainty makes households and businesses so cautious that they save more and invest less, which would lead to a drop in demand. Another is supply-side disruptions, where global value chains break down and shortages of inputs and consumption goods occur in different parts of the world. "Whether inflation falls or rises going forward will depend on which of these forces dominates. In addition, behind the scenes there are factors such as effects of increased defence spending, a possible influx of Chinese goods into the European market, and sudden fluctuations in financial flows.”
We do not yet know which tariff threats will actually materialise and there is so far only a limited amount of data on how the economy has evolved since the shift in US trade policy. “In this environment, it is particularly valuable to visit different parts of the country and gain insight into what companies encounter and how they reason.”
Ms Seim stressed that the need to wait for reliable signals should not be interpreted as a reluctance to act. “The neutral interest rate level we are starting from provides us with favourable conditions to navigate the uncertain road ahead. If the outlook for inflation and economic activity shows that this is warranted, we will adjust the policy rate.”
Updated 21/05/2025
