BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: 6 April 2021
DATE: 01/06/2021
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/media-releases/2021/mr-21-04.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Media Release
Statement by Philip Lowe, Governor: Monetary Policy Decision
Number
2021-04
Date
6 April 2021
At its meeting today, the Board decided to maintain the current policy settings, including the targets

 of 10 basis points for the cash rate and the yield on the 3-year Australian Government bond, as

 well as the parameters of the Term Funding Facility and the government bond purchase program.
The rollout of vaccines is supporting the recovery of the global economy, although the recovery is

 uneven. While there are still considerable uncertainties regarding the outlook, the central case has

 improved. Global trade has picked up and commodity prices are mostly higher than at the start of the

 year. Inflation remains low and below central bank targets.
Sovereign bond yields have increased over recent months due to the positive news on vaccines and the

 additional fiscal stimulus in the United States. Inflation expectations have also lifted from near

 record lows to be now closer to central banks' targets. The 3-year government bond yield in

 Australia is at the Board's target of 10 basis points and lending rates for most borrowers are

 at record lows. The Australian dollar remains in the upper end of the range of recent years.
The economic recovery in Australia is well under way and is stronger than had been expected. The

 unemployment rate fell to 5.8 per cent in February and the number of people with a job has

 returned to the pre-pandemic level. GDP increased by a strong 3.1 per cent in the December

 quarter, boosted by a further lift in household consumption as the health situation improved. The

 recovery is expected to continue, with above-trend growth this year and next. Household and business

 balance sheets are in good shape and should continue to support spending.
Nevertheless, wage and price pressures are subdued and are expected to remain so for some years. The

 economy is operating with considerable spare capacity and unemployment is still too high. It will take

 some time to reduce this spare capacity and for the labour market to be tight enough to generate wage

 increases that are consistent with achieving the inflation target. In the short term, CPI inflation is

 expected to rise temporarily because of the reversal of some
COVID-19
-related price reductions. Looking through this, underlying inflation is

 expected to remain below 2 per cent over the next few years.
Housing markets have strengthened further, with prices rising in most markets. Housing credit growth to

 owner-occupiers has picked up, with strong demand from first-home buyers. In contrast, investor credit

 growth remains subdued. Given the environment of rising housing prices and low interest rates, the Bank

 will be monitoring trends in housing borrowing carefully and it is important that lending standards are

 maintained.
The Board remains committed to the 3-year government bond yield target of 10 basis points. Later

 in the year it will consider whether to retain the April 2024 bond as the target bond or to shift to the

 next maturity. The initial $100 billion government bond purchase program is almost complete and the

 second $100 billion program will commence next week. Beyond this, the Bank is prepared to undertake

 further bond purchases if doing so would assist with progress towards the goals of full employment and

 inflation. Authorised deposit-taking institutions have drawn $95 billion under the Term Funding

 Facility and have access to a further $95 billion. Since the start of 2020, the RBA's balance

 sheet has increased by around $215 billion.
These various monetary measures are continuing to help the economy by keeping financing costs very low,

 contributing to a lower exchange rate than otherwise, and supporting the supply of credit and household

 and business balance sheets. Together, monetary and fiscal policy are contributing to the recovery in

 aggregate demand and the pick-up in employment.
The Board is committed to maintaining highly supportive monetary conditions until its goals are

 achieved. The Board will not increase the cash rate until actual inflation is sustainably within the

 2 to 3 per cent target range. For this to occur, wages growth will have to be materially

 higher than it is currently. This will require significant gains in employment and a return to a tight

 labour market. The Board does not expect these conditions to be met until 2024 at the earliest.
Enquiries
Media and Communications
Secretary's Department
Reserve Bank of Australia
SYDNEY
Phone:
+61 2 9551 8111
Email:
rbainfo@rba.gov.au
