BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: 5 October 2021
DATE: 01/06/2021
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/media-releases/2021/mr-21-22.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Media Release
Statement by Philip Lowe, Governor: Monetary Policy Decision
Number
2021-22
Date
5 October 2021
At its meeting today, the Board decided to:
maintain the cash rate target at 10 basis points and the interest rate on Exchange Settlement

 balances at zero per cent
maintain the target of 10 basis points for the April 2024 Australian Government bond
continue to purchase government securities at the rate of $4 billion a week until at least mid

 February 2022.
The Delta outbreak has interrupted the recovery of the Australian economy and GDP is expected to have

 declined materially in the September quarter. The outbreak is affecting many parts of the economy, but

 the impact is uneven, with some areas facing very difficult conditions while others are continuing to

 grow strongly.
This setback to the economic expansion in Australia is expected to be only temporary. As vaccination rates

 increase further and restrictions are eased, the economy is expected to bounce back. Many businesses are

 now planning for the easing of restrictions and confidence has held up reasonably well. There is,

 however, uncertainty about the timing and pace of the bounce-back and it is likely to be slower than that

 earlier in the year. Much will depend on the nature and timing of the easing of restrictions on activity.

 In our central scenario, the economy will be growing again in the December quarter and is expected to be

 back around its pre-Delta path in the second half of next year.
The restrictions on activity have had a significant effect on the labour market. Hours worked – the

 best indicator of labour market conditions at the moment – declined by nearly 4 per cent

 in August. Looking forward, the Bank's business liaison and data on job vacancies suggest that many

 firms are seeking to hire workers ahead of the expected reopening in October and November.
Wage and price pressures remain subdued in Australia. In underlying terms, inflation is running at around

 1¾ per cent and wages, as measured by the Wage Price Index, are increasing at just

 1.7 per cent. While disruptions to global supply chains are affecting the prices of some goods,

 the impact of this on the overall rate of inflation remains limited.
Housing prices are continuing to rise, although turnover in some markets has declined following the virus

 outbreak. Housing credit growth has picked up due to stronger demand for credit by both owner-occupiers

 and investors. The Council of Financial Regulators has been discussing the medium-term risks to

 macroeconomic stability of rapid credit growth at a time of historically low interest rates. In this

 environment, it is important that lending standards are maintained and that loan serviceability buffers

 are appropriate.
The Bank's package of policies – including record low interest rates, the bond purchase program,

 the yield target and the funding provided under the Term Funding Facility – is providing

 substantial and ongoing support to the Australian economy. Borrowing rates are at record lows, sovereign

 bond yields are at very low levels and the exchange rate has depreciated over recent months. The fiscal

 responses by the Australian Government and the state and territory governments have also been providing

 welcome assistance in supporting household and business balance sheets.
The Board is committed to maintaining highly supportive monetary conditions to achieve a return to full

 employment in Australia and inflation consistent with the target. It will not increase the cash rate

 until actual inflation is sustainably within the 2 to 3 per cent target range. The central

 scenario for the economy is that this condition will not be met before 2024. Meeting this condition will

 require the labour market to be tight enough to generate wages growth that is materially higher than it

 is currently.
Enquiries
External Communications
Secretary's Department
Reserve Bank of Australia
SYDNEY
Phone:
+61 2 9551 8111
Email:
rbainfo@rba.gov.au
