BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: 6 July 2021
DATE: 01/06/2021
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/media-releases/2021/mr-21-13.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Media Release
Statement by Philip Lowe, Governor: Monetary Policy Decision
Number
2021-13
Date
6 July 2021
At its meeting today, the Board decided to:
retain the April 2024 bond as the bond for the yield target and retain the target of 10 basis

 points
continue purchasing government bonds after the completion of the current bond purchase program in

 early September. These purchases will be at the rate of $4 billion a week until at least mid

 November
maintain the cash rate target at 10 basis points and the interest rate on Exchange Settlement

 balances of zero per cent.
These measures will provide the continuing monetary support that the economy needs as it transitions

 from the recovery phase to the expansion phase. The Board is committed to achieving the goals of full

 employment and inflation consistent with the target. Today's decisions, together with those taken

 previously, have the economy on a path to achieve those objectives.
The economic recovery in Australia is stronger than earlier expected and is forecast to continue. The

 outlook for investment has improved and household and business balance sheets are generally in good

 shape. National income is also being supported by the high prices for commodity exports. Domestic

 financial conditions are very supportive and the exchange rate has depreciated a little recently. One

 near-term uncertainty is the effect of the recent virus outbreaks and the lockdowns. But the experience

 to date has been that once outbreaks are contained and restrictions are eased, the economy bounces back

 quickly.
The labour market has continued to recover faster than expected. The unemployment rate declined further

 to 5.1 per cent in May and more Australians have jobs than before the pandemic. There has also

 been a welcome decline in underemployment and labour force participation is around record highs. Job

 vacancies are high and more firms are reporting shortages of labour, particularly in areas affected by

 the closure of Australia's international borders.
Despite the strong recovery in jobs and reports of labour shortages, inflation and wage outcomes remain

 subdued. While a pick-up in inflation and wages growth is expected, it is likely to be only gradual and

 modest. In the central scenario, inflation in underlying terms is expected to be

 1½ per cent over 2021 and 2 per cent by mid 2023. In the short term, CPI

 inflation is expected to rise temporarily to about 3½ per cent over the year to the June

 quarter because of the reversal of some
COVID-19
-related price reductions a

 year ago.
Maintaining the target of 10 basis points for the April 2024 bond will continue to keep interest

 rates low at the short end of the yield curve and support low funding costs in Australia. The yield on

 this bond is consistent with the target and the RBA remains prepared to operate in the market to achieve

 the target.
The bond purchase program is playing an important role in supporting the Australian economy. The Bank

 will continue to purchase bonds given that we remain some distance from the inflation and employment

 objectives. However, the Board is responding to the stronger-than-expected economic recovery and the

 improved outlook by adjusting the weekly amount purchased. It will conduct a further review in November,

 allowing the Board to respond to the state of the economy at that time.
The final draw-downs under the Term Funding Facility were made in late June. In total,

 $188 billion has been drawn down under this facility, which has contributed to the Australian

 banking system being highly liquid. Given that the facility is providing low-cost fixed-rate funding for

 3 years, it will continue to support low borrowing costs until mid 2024.
Housing markets have continued to strengthen, with prices rising in all major markets. Housing credit

 growth has picked up, with strong demand from owner-occupiers, including first-home buyers. There has

 also been increased borrowing by investors. Given the environment of rising housing prices and low

 interest rates, the Bank will be monitoring trends in housing borrowing carefully and it is important

 that lending standards are maintained.
The Board remains committed to maintaining highly supportive monetary conditions to support a return to

 full employment in Australia and inflation consistent with the target. It will not increase the cash

 rate until actual inflation is sustainably within the 2 to 3 per cent target range. The

 Bank's central scenario for the economy is that this condition will not be met before 2024. Meeting

 it will require the labour market to be tight enough to generate wages growth that is materially higher

 than it is currently.
Enquiries
External Communications
Secretary's Department
Reserve Bank of Australia
SYDNEY
Phone:
+61 2 9551 8111
Email:
rbainfo@rba.gov.au
