BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: 1 June 2021
DATE: 01/06/2021
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/media-releases/2021/mr-21-09.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Media Release
Statement by Philip Lowe, Governor: Monetary Policy Decision
Number
2021-09
Date
1 June 2021
At its meeting today, the Board decided to maintain the current policy settings, including: the targets

 of 10 basis points for the cash rate and the yield on the 3-year Australian Government bond; the

 parameters of the government bond purchase program; and the rate of zero per cent on Exchange

 Settlement balances.
The global economy is continuing to recover from the pandemic and the outlook is for strong growth this

 year and next. The recovery remains uneven, though, and some countries are yet to contain the virus.

 Global trade in goods has picked up strongly and commodity prices are mostly higher than at the start of

 the year. However, inflation in underlying terms remains low and below central bank targets.
Sovereign bond yields have been steady recently after increasing earlier in the year due to the

 positive news on vaccines and the additional fiscal stimulus in the United States. Medium-term inflation

 expectations have lifted from near record lows to be closer to central banks' targets. The 3-year

 government bond yield in Australia is consistent with the Board's target and lending rates for most

 borrowers are at record lows. The Australian dollar remains in the upper end of the range of recent

 years.
The economic recovery in Australia is stronger than earlier expected and is forecast to continue. The

 Bank's central scenario is for GDP to grow by 4¾ per cent over this year and

 3½ per cent over 2022. This outlook is supported by fiscal measures and very

 accommodative financial conditions. An important ongoing source of uncertainty is the possibility of

 significant outbreaks of the virus, although this should diminish as more of the population is

 vaccinated.
Progress in reducing unemployment has been faster than expected, with the unemployment rate declining

 to 5.5 per cent in April. Job vacancies are at a high level and a further decline in the

 unemployment rate to around 5 per cent is expected by the end of this year. There are reports

 of labour shortages in some parts of the economy.
Despite the strong recovery in the economy and jobs, inflation and wage pressures are subdued. While a

 pick-up in inflation and wages growth is expected, it is likely to be only gradual and modest. In the

 central scenario, inflation in underlying terms is expected to be 1½ per cent in 2021 and

 2 per cent in mid 2023. In the short term, CPI inflation is expected to rise temporarily

 to be above 3 per cent in the June quarter because of the reversal of some
COVID-19
-related price reductions.
Housing markets have strengthened further, with prices rising in all major markets. Housing credit

 growth has picked up, with strong demand from owner-occupiers, especially first-home buyers. There has

 also been increased borrowing by investors. Given the environment of rising housing prices and low

 interest rates, the Bank will be monitoring trends in housing borrowing carefully and it is important

 that lending standards are maintained.
As foreshadowed last month, at its July meeting the Board will consider whether to retain the April

 2024 bond as the target bond for the 3-year yield target or to shift to the next maturity, the November

 2024 bond. The Board is not considering a change to the target of 10 basis points. At the July

 meeting the Board will also consider future bond purchases following the completion of the second

 $100 billion of purchases under the government bond purchase program in September. The Board

 continues to place a high priority on a return to full employment.
The date for final drawings under the Term Funding Facility is 30 June 2021. So far, authorised

 deposit-taking institutions have drawn $134 billion under this facility and a further

 $75 billion is available. The facility is providing low-cost fixed-rate funding for 3 years

 and so will continue to support low borrowing costs until mid 2024.
The Board is committed to maintaining highly supportive monetary conditions to support a return to full

 employment in Australia and inflation consistent with the target. It will not increase the cash rate

 until actual inflation is sustainably within the 2 to 3 per cent target range. For this

 to occur, the labour market will need to be tight enough to generate wages growth that is materially

 higher than it is currently. This is unlikely to be until 2024 at the earliest.
Enquiries
Media and Communications
Secretary's Department
Reserve Bank of Australia
SYDNEY
Phone:
+61 2 9551 8111
Email:
rbainfo@rba.gov.au
