BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: 2 November 2021
DATE: 01/06/2021
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/media-releases/2021/mr-21-24.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Media Release
Statement by Philip Lowe, Governor: Monetary Policy Decision
Number
2021-24
Date
2 November 2021
At its meeting today, the Board decided to:
maintain the cash rate target at 10 basis points and the interest rate on Exchange Settlement

 balances at zero per cent
continue to purchase government securities at the rate of $4 billion a week until at least mid

 February 2022
discontinue the target of 10 basis points for the April 2024 Australian Government bond.
The Australian economy is recovering after the interruption caused by the Delta outbreak. As vaccination

 rates increase even further and restrictions are eased, the economy is expected to bounce back relatively

 quickly. The central forecast is for GDP growth of 3 per cent over 2021 and

 5½ per cent and 2½ per cent over the following two years. One important source of

 uncertainty continues to be the possibility of a further setback on the health front.
The Delta outbreak caused hours worked in Australia to fall sharply, but a bounce-back is now underway.

 The Bank's business liaison and the data on job ads suggest that many firms are now hiring, which

 will boost employment over coming months. The central forecast is for the unemployment rate to trend

 lower over the next couple of years, reaching 4¼ per cent at the end of 2022 and

 4 per cent at the end of 2023.
Inflation has picked up, but in underlying terms is still low, at 2.1 per cent. The headline CPI

 inflation rate is 3 per cent and is being affected by higher petrol prices, higher prices for

 newly constructed homes and the disruptions in global supply chains. A further, but only gradual, pick-up

 in underlying inflation is expected. The central forecast is for underlying inflation of around

 2¼ per cent over 2021 and 2022 and 2½ per cent over 2023. Wages growth is expected to

 pick up gradually as the labour market tightens, with the Wage Price Index forecast to increase by

 2½ per cent over 2022 and 3 per cent over 2023. The main uncertainties relate to the

 persistence of the current disruptions to global supply chains and the behaviour of wages at the lowest

 unemployment rate in decades.
Housing prices are continuing to rise in most markets and housing credit growth has picked up due to

 stronger demand for credit by both owner-occupiers and investors. The Bank welcomes APRA's recent

 decision to increase the interest rate serviceability buffer on home loans. It is important that lending

 standards are maintained at a time of historically low interest rates.
Financial conditions in Australia remain highly accommodative, with most lending rates at record lows.

 Bond yields have increased recently and bond market volatility has also risen significantly. The exchange

 rate has appreciated a little, but remains within the range of the past year.
The decision to discontinue the yield target reflects the improvement in the economy and the

 earlier-than-expected progress towards the inflation target. Given that other market interest rates have

 moved in response to the increased likelihood of higher inflation and lower unemployment, the

 effectiveness of the yield target in holding down the general structure of interest rates in Australia

 has diminished.
The Board is committed to maintaining highly supportive monetary conditions to achieve a return to full

 employment in Australia and inflation consistent with the target. While inflation has picked up, it

 remains low in underlying terms. Inflation pressures are also less than they are in many other countries,

 not least because of the only modest wages growth in Australia.
The Board will not increase the cash rate until actual inflation is sustainably within the 2 to

 3 per cent target range. This will require the labour market to be tight enough to generate

 wages growth that is materially higher than it is currently. This is likely to take some time. The Board

 is prepared to be patient, with the central forecast being for underlying inflation to be no higher than

 2½ per cent at the end of 2023 and for only a gradual increase in wages growth.
The Governor will conduct a webinar, including a question and answer session, at 4.00 pm AEDT today.

 This will be broadcast live on rba.gov.au.
Enquiries
External Communications
Secretary's Department
Reserve Bank of Australia
SYDNEY
Phone:
+61 2 9551 8111
Email:
rbainfo@rba.gov.au
