BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: 3 August 2021
DATE: 01/06/2021
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/media-releases/2021/mr-21-14.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Media Release
Statement by Philip Lowe, Governor: Monetary Policy Decision
Number
2021-14
Date
3 August 2021
At its meeting today, the Board decided to:
maintain the cash rate target at 10 basis points and the interest rate on Exchange Settlement

 balances of zero per cent
maintain the target of 10 basis points for the April 2024 Australian Government bond
continue to purchase government securities at the rate of $5 billion a week until early

 September and then $4 billion a week until at least mid November.
The economic recovery in Australia has been stronger than was earlier expected. The recent outbreaks of

 the virus are, however, interrupting the recovery and GDP is expected to decline in the September

 quarter. The experience to date has been that once virus outbreaks are contained, the economy bounces

 back quickly. Prior to the current virus outbreaks, the Australian economy had considerable momentum and

 it is still expected to grow strongly again next year. The economy is benefiting from significant

 additional policy support and the vaccination program will also assist with the recovery.
The economic outlook for the coming months is uncertain and depends upon the evolution of the health

 situation and the containment measures. Beyond that, the Bank's central scenario is for the economy

 to grow by a little over 4 per cent over 2022 and by around 2½ per cent over 2023. This

 scenario is based on a significant share of the population being vaccinated by the end of this year and a

 gradual opening up of the international border from the middle of 2022. The Board also considered a range

 of other scenarios, with the main source of uncertainty being the health situation.
The labour market has recovered faster than expected, with the unemployment rate declining further to

 4.9 per cent in June. Job vacancies have remained at a high level and there are reports of

 labour shortages in parts of the economy. Some increase in the unemployment rate is expected in the near

 term due to the current lockdowns, but most of the adjustment in the labour market is likely to take

 place through a reduction in hours worked and in participation. In the central scenario, the unemployment

 rate continues to trend lower next year, to be around 4¼ per cent at the end of 2022 and

 4 per cent at the end of 2023.
The CPI inflation rate spiked to 3.8 per cent for the year to the June quarter, largely

 reflecting the unwinding of some earlier
COVID-19
-related price declines. In

 underlying terms, inflation remains low, at around 1¾ per cent.
Looking forward, a pick-up in both wages growth and underlying inflation is expected, but this pick-up is

 likely to be only gradual. In the Bank's central scenario, it takes some years for the stronger

 economy to feed through into wage and price increases that are consistent with the inflation target. In

 underlying terms, inflation is expected to be 1¾ per cent over 2022 and 2¼ per cent over 2023.

 One source of uncertainty is the behaviour of wages and prices at the low levels of forecast

 unemployment, including because it is some decades since Australia has sustained an unemployment rate

 around 4 per cent.
Housing markets have continued to strengthen, with prices rising in all major markets. Housing credit

 growth has picked up, with strong demand from owner-occupiers, including first-home buyers. There has

 also been increased borrowing by investors. Given the environment of rising housing prices and low

 interest rates, the Bank is monitoring trends in housing borrowing carefully and it is important that

 lending standards are maintained.
Domestic financial conditions remain very accommodative, sovereign bond yields have declined and the

 exchange rate has depreciated to around its lowest level this year, despite elevated levels of commodity

 prices. The recent fiscal responses by the Australian Government and the state and territory governments

 are also providing welcome support to the economy at a time of significant short-term disruption.
The Board remains committed to maintaining highly accommodative monetary conditions to support a return to

 full employment in Australia and inflation consistent with the target. Together, the low level of the

 cash rate, the bond purchase program, the yield target and the ongoing funding that has been provided

 under the Term Funding Facility are providing substantial support to the Australian economy in the face

 of lockdowns in parts of the country and the expected resumption of the economic expansion.
The Board will maintain its flexible approach to the rate of bond purchases. The program will continue to

 be reviewed in light of economic conditions and the health situation, and their implications for the

 expected progress towards full employment and the inflation target. The Board will not increase the cash

 rate until actual inflation is sustainably within the 2 to 3 per cent target range. The

 central scenario for the economy is that this condition will not be met before 2024. Meeting this

 condition will require the labour market to be tight enough to generate wages growth that is materially

 higher than it is currently.
Enquiries
External Communications
Secretary's Department
Reserve Bank of Australia
SYDNEY
Phone:
+61 2 9551 8111
Email:
rbainfo@rba.gov.au
