BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: 1 February 2022
DATE: 01/06/2022
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/media-releases/2022/mr-22-02.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Media Release
Statement by Philip Lowe, Governor: Monetary Policy Decision
Number
2022-02
Date
1 February 2022
At its meeting today, the Board decided to maintain the cash rate target at 10 basis points and the

 interest rate on Exchange Settlement balances at zero per cent. It also decided to cease further

 purchases under the bond purchase program, with the final purchases to take place on 10 February.
The Omicron outbreak has affected the economy, but it has not derailed the economic recovery. The

 Australian economy remains resilient and spending is expected to pick up as case numbers trend lower. The

 RBA's central forecast is for GDP growth of around 4¼ per cent over 2022 and

 2 per cent over 2023. This outlook is supported by household and business balance sheets that

 are in generally good shape, an upswing in business investment, a large pipeline of construction work and

 supportive macroeconomic policy settings. The main source of uncertainty continues to be the pandemic.
The labour market has recovered strongly, with the unemployment rate declining to 4.2 per cent

 in December. Hours worked are estimated to have declined significantly in January due to the Omicron

 outbreak, but high numbers of job vacancies suggest further gains in employment over the months ahead.

 The RBA's central forecast is for the unemployment rate to fall to below 4 per cent later

 in the year and to be around 3¾ per cent at the end of 2023.
Wages growth has picked up but, at the aggregate level, has only returned to the relatively low rates

 prevailing before the pandemic. A further pick-up in wages growth is expected as the labour market

 tightens. This pick-up is still expected to be only gradual, although there is uncertainty about the

 behaviour of wages at historically low levels of unemployment.
Inflation has picked up more quickly than the RBA had expected, but remains lower than in many other

 countries. The headline CPI inflation rate is 3.5 per cent and is being affected by higher

 petrol prices, higher prices for newly constructed homes and the disruptions to global supply chains. In

 underlying terms, inflation is 2.6 per cent. The central forecast is for underlying inflation

 to increase further in coming quarters to around 3¼ per cent, before declining to around

 2¾ per cent over 2023 as the supply-side problems are resolved and consumption patterns

 normalise. One source of uncertainty is the persistence of the disruptions to supply chains and

 distribution networks and their ongoing effects on prices. It is also uncertain how consumption patterns

 will evolve and how this will affect the balance of supply and demand, and hence prices.
Financial conditions in Australia remain highly accommodative. Together, the RBA's bond purchase

 program, the funding provided under the Term Funding Facility and the low level of interest rates are

 providing important support to the Australian economy as it recovers from the effects of the pandemic.

 The Australian dollar exchange rate is around its lows of the past year or so. Housing prices have risen

 strongly, although the rate of increase has eased in some cities. With interest rates at historically low

 levels, it is important that lending standards are maintained and that borrowers have adequate buffers.
The decision to end purchases under the bond purchase program follows a review of the actions of other

 central banks, the functioning of Australia's bond market and the progress towards the goals of full

 employment and inflation consistent with the target. Many other central banks have ended, or will soon end,

 their bond purchase programs. More importantly, faster-than-expected progress has been made towards the

 RBA's goals and further progress is likely. In these circumstances, the Board judged that now was the

 right time to end the bond purchase program. Since the start of the pandemic, the RBA's balance sheet

 has more than tripled to around $640 billion, with this expansion providing continuing support to

 the economy. The Board will consider the issue of the reinvestment of the proceeds of future bond

 maturities at its meeting in May.
The Board is committed to maintaining highly supportive monetary conditions to achieve its objectives of a

 return to full employment in Australia and inflation consistent with the target. Ceasing purchases under

 the bond purchase program does not imply a near-term increase in interest rates. As the Board has stated

 previously, it will not increase the cash rate until actual inflation is sustainably within the 2 to

 3 per cent target range. While inflation has picked up, it is too early to conclude that it is

 sustainably within the target band. There are uncertainties about how persistent the pick-up in inflation

 will be as supply-side problems are resolved. Wages growth also remains modest and it is likely to be

 some time yet before aggregate wages growth is at a rate consistent with inflation being sustainably at

 target. The Board is prepared to be patient as it monitors how the various factors affecting inflation in

 Australia evolve.
Enquiries
External Communications
Secretary's Department
Reserve Bank of Australia
SYDNEY
Phone:
+61 2 9551 8111
Email:
rbainfo@rba.gov.au
