BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: 6 December 2022
DATE: 01/06/2022
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/media-releases/2022/mr-22-41.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Media Release
Statement by Philip Lowe, Governor: Monetary Policy Decision
Number
2022-41
Date
6 December 2022
At its meeting today, the Board decided to increase the cash rate target by 25 basis points to

 3.10 per cent. It also increased the interest rate on Exchange Settlement balances by

 25 basis points to 3.00 per cent.
Inflation in Australia is too high, at 6.9 per cent over the year to October. Global factors

 explain much of this high inflation, but strong domestic demand relative to the ability of the economy to

 meet that demand is also playing a role. Returning inflation to target requires a more sustainable

 balance between demand and supply.
A further increase in inflation is expected over the months ahead, with inflation forecast to peak at

 around 8 per cent over the year to the December quarter. Inflation is then expected to decline

 next year due to the ongoing resolution of global supply-side problems, recent declines in some commodity

 prices and slower growth in demand. Medium-term inflation expectations remain well anchored, and it is

 important that this remains the case. The Bank’s central forecast is for CPI inflation to decline

 over the next couple of years to be a little above 3 per cent over 2024.
The Australian economy is continuing to grow solidly. Economic growth is expected to moderate over the

 year ahead as the global economy slows, the bounce-back in spending on services runs its course, and

 growth in household consumption slows due to tighter financial conditions. The Bank’s central

 forecast is for growth of around 1½ per cent in 2023 and 2024.
The labour market remains very tight, with many firms having difficulty hiring workers. The unemployment

 rate declined to 3.4 per cent in October, the lowest rate since 1974. Job vacancies and job ads

 are both at very high levels, although they have declined a little recently. Employment growth has also

 slowed as spare capacity in the labour market is absorbed. Wages growth is continuing to pick up from the

 low rates of recent years and a further pick-up is expected due to the tight labour market and higher

 inflation. Given the importance of avoiding a prices-wages spiral, the Board will continue to pay close

 attention to both the evolution of labour costs and the price-setting behaviour of firms in the period

 ahead.
There has been a substantial cumulative increase in interest rates since May. This has been necessary to

 ensure that the current period of high inflation is only temporary. High inflation damages our economy

 and makes life more difficult for people. The Board’s priority is to re-establish low inflation and

 return inflation to the
2–3
per cent range over time.
The Board recognises that monetary policy operates with a lag and that the full effect of the increase in

 interest rates is yet to be felt in mortgage payments. Household spending is expected to slow over the

 period ahead although the timing and extent of this slowdown is uncertain. Another source of uncertainty

 is the outlook for the global economy, which has deteriorated. The Board is seeking to keep the economy

 on an even keel as it returns inflation to target, but these uncertainties mean that there are a range of

 potential scenarios. The path to achieving the needed decline in inflation and achieving a soft landing

 for the economy remains a narrow one.
The Board expects to increase interest rates further over the period ahead, but it is not on a pre-set

 course. It is closely monitoring the global economy, household spending and wage and price-setting

 behaviour. The size and timing of future interest rate increases will continue to be determined by the

 incoming data and the Board’s assessment of the outlook for inflation and the labour market. The

 Board remains resolute in its determination to return inflation to target and will do what is necessary

 to achieve that.
Enquiries
External Communications
Secretary's Department
Reserve Bank of Australia
SYDNEY
Phone:
+61 2 9551 8111
Email:
rbainfo@rba.gov.au
