BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: 1 March 2022
DATE: 01/06/2022
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/media-releases/2022/mr-22-05.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Media Release
Statement by Philip Lowe, Governor: Monetary Policy Decision
Number
2022-05
Date
1 March 2022
At its meeting today, the Board decided to maintain the cash rate target at 10 basis points and the

 interest rate on Exchange Settlement balances at zero per cent.
The global economy is continuing to recover from the pandemic. However, the war in Ukraine is a major new

 source of uncertainty. Inflation in parts of the world has increased sharply due to large increases in

 energy prices and disruptions to supply chains at a time of strong demand. The prices of many commodities

 have increased further due to the war in Ukraine. Bond yields have risen over the past month and

 expectations of future policy interest rates have increased.
The Australian economy remains resilient and spending is picking up following the Omicron setback.

 Household and business balance sheets are in generally good shape, an upswing in business investment is

 underway and there is a large pipeline of construction work to be completed. Macroeconomic policy

 settings remain supportive of growth.
The resilience of the economy is evident in the labour market, with the unemployment rate at a 14-year low

 of 4.2 per cent. Underemployment is also around its lowest level since 2008. Hours worked

 declined significantly in January due to the Omicron outbreak, but the decline in infection rates and

 high numbers of job vacancies point to a strong bounce-back over the months ahead. The RBA's central

 forecast is for the unemployment rate to fall to below 4 per cent later in the year and to

 remain below 4 per cent next year.
Wages growth has picked up but, at the aggregate level, is only around the relatively low rates prevailing

 before the pandemic. A further pick-up in wages growth and broader measures of labour costs is expected

 as the labour market tightens. This pick-up is still expected to be only gradual, although there is

 uncertainty about the behaviour of labour costs at historically low levels of unemployment.
Inflation has picked up more quickly than the RBA had expected, but remains lower than in many other

 countries. The central forecast is for underlying inflation to increase further in coming quarters to

 around 3¼ per cent, before declining to around 2¾ per cent over 2023 as the

 supply-side problems are resolved and consumption patterns normalise. The CPI inflation rate will spike

 higher than this due to the higher petrol prices resulting from global developments. How long it takes to

 resolve the disruptions to supply chains is an important source of uncertainty regarding the inflation

 outlook, as are developments in global energy markets.
Financial conditions in Australia continue to be highly accommodative. Interest rates remain at a very low

 level, although some fixed rates have risen recently. The Australian dollar exchange rate is around its

 lows of the past year or so. Housing prices have risen strongly, although the rate of increase has eased

 in some cities. With interest rates at historically low levels, it is important that lending standards

 are maintained and that borrowers have adequate buffers.
The Board is committed to maintaining highly supportive monetary conditions to achieve its objectives of a

 return to full employment in Australia and inflation consistent with the target. The Board will not

 increase the cash rate until actual inflation is sustainably within the 2 to 3 per cent

 target range. While inflation has picked up, it is too early to conclude that it is sustainably within

 the target range. There are uncertainties about how persistent the pick-up in inflation will be given

 recent developments in global energy markets and ongoing supply-side problems. At the same time, wages

 growth remains modest and it is likely to be some time yet before growth in labour costs is at a rate

 consistent with inflation being sustainably at target. The Board is prepared to be patient as it monitors

 how the various factors affecting inflation in Australia evolve.
Enquiries
External Communications
Secretary's Department
Reserve Bank of Australia
SYDNEY
Phone:
+61 2 9551 8111
Email:
rbainfo@rba.gov.au
