BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: 7 June 2022
DATE: 01/06/2022
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/media-releases/2022/mr-22-14.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Media Release
Statement by Philip Lowe, Governor: Monetary Policy Decision
Number
2022-14
Date
7 June 2022
At its meeting today, the Board decided to increase the cash rate target by 50 basis points to

 85 basis points. It also increased the interest rate on Exchange Settlement balances by

 50 basis points to 75 basis points.
Inflation in Australia has increased significantly. While inflation is lower than in most other advanced

 economies, it is higher than earlier expected. Global factors, including COVID-related disruptions to

 supply chains and the war in Ukraine, account for much of this increase in inflation. But domestic

 factors are playing a role too, with capacity constraints in some sectors and the tight labour market

 contributing to the upward pressure on prices. The floods earlier this year have also affected some

 prices.
Inflation is expected to increase further, but then decline back towards the 2–3 per cent range

 next year. Higher prices for electricity and gas and recent increases in petrol prices mean that, in the

 near term, inflation is likely to be higher than was expected a month ago. As the global supply-side

 problems are resolved and commodity prices stabilise, even if at a high level, inflation is expected to

 moderate. Today's increase in interest rates will assist with the return of inflation to target over

 time.
The Australian economy is resilient, growing by 0.8 per cent in the March quarter and

 3.3 per cent over the year. Household and business balance sheets are generally in good shape,

 an upswing in business investment is underway and there is a large pipeline of construction work to be

 completed. Macroeconomic policy settings are supportive of growth and national income is being boosted by

 higher commodity prices. The terms of trade are at a record high.
The labour market is also strong. Employment has grown significantly and the unemployment rate is

 3.9 per cent, which is the lowest rate in almost 50 years. Job vacancies and job ads are

 at high levels and a further decline in unemployment and underemployment is expected. The Bank's

 business liaison program continues to point to a lift in wages growth from the low rates of recent years

 as firms compete for staff in a tight labour market.
One source of uncertainty about the economic outlook is how household spending evolves, given the

 increasing pressure on Australian households' budgets from higher inflation. Interest rates are also

 increasing. Housing prices have declined in some markets over recent months but remain more than

 25 per cent higher than prior to the pandemic, supporting household wealth and spending. The

 household saving rate also remains higher than it was before the pandemic and many households have built

 up large financial buffers. While the central scenario is for strong household consumption growth this

 year, the Board will be paying close attention to these various influences on consumption as it assesses

 the appropriate setting of monetary policy.
The Board will also be paying close attention to the global outlook, which remains clouded by the war in

 Ukraine and its effect on the prices for energy and agricultural commodities. Real household incomes are

 under pressure in many economies and financial conditions are tightening, as central banks withdraw

 monetary policy support in response to broad-based inflation. There are also ongoing uncertainties

 related to COVID, especially in China.
Today's increase in interest rates by the Board is a further step in the withdrawal of the

 extraordinary monetary support that was put in place to help the Australian economy during the pandemic.

 The resilience of the economy and the higher inflation mean that this extraordinary support is no longer

 needed. Given the current inflation pressures in the economy, and the still very low level of interest

 rates, the Board decided to move by 50 basis points today. The Board expects to take further steps

 in the process of normalising monetary conditions in Australia over the months ahead. The size and timing

 of future interest rate increases will be guided by the incoming data and the Board's assessment of

 the outlook for inflation and the labour market. The Board is committed to doing what is necessary to

 ensure that inflation in Australia returns to target over time.
Enquiries
External Communications
Secretary's Department
Reserve Bank of Australia
SYDNEY
Phone:
+61 2 9551 8111
Email:
rbainfo@rba.gov.au
