BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: 4 July 2023
DATE: 01/06/2023
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/media-releases/2023/mr-23-16.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Media Release
Statement by Philip Lowe, Governor: Monetary Policy Decision
Number
2023-16
Date
4 July 2023
At its meeting today, the Board decided to leave the cash rate target unchanged at 4.10 per cent

 and the interest rate paid on Exchange Settlement balances unchanged at 4.00 per cent.
Interest rates have been increased by 4 percentage points since May last year. The higher interest

 rates are working to establish a more sustainable balance between supply and demand in the economy and

 will continue to do so. In light of this and the uncertainty surrounding the economic outlook, the Board

 decided to hold interest rates steady this month. This will provide some time to assess the impact of the

 increase in interest rates to date and the economic outlook.
Inflation in Australia has passed its peak and the monthly CPI indicator for May showed a further decline.

 But inflation is still too high and will remain so for some time yet. High inflation makes life difficult

 for everyone and damages the functioning of the economy. It erodes the value of savings, hurts household

 budgets, makes it harder for businesses to plan and invest, and worsens income inequality. And if high

 inflation were to become entrenched in people’s expectations, it would be very costly to reduce

 later, involving even higher interest rates and a larger rise in unemployment. For these reasons, the

 Board’s priority is to return inflation to target within a reasonable timeframe.
Growth in the Australian economy has slowed and conditions in the labour market have eased, although they

 remain very tight. Firms report that labour shortages have lessened, yet job vacancies and advertisements

 are still at very high levels. Labour force participation is at a record high and the unemployment rate

 remains close to a 50-year low. Wages growth has picked up in response to the tight labour market and

 high inflation. At the aggregate level, wages growth is still consistent with the inflation target,

 provided that productivity growth picks up.
The Board remains alert to the risk that expectations of ongoing high inflation will contribute to larger

 increases in both prices and wages, especially given the limited spare capacity in the economy and the

 still very low rate of unemployment. Accordingly, it will continue to pay close attention to both the

 evolution of labour costs and the price-setting behaviour of firms.
The Board is still expecting the economy to grow as inflation returns to the
2–3
per cent target range, but the path to achieving this

 balance is a narrow one. A significant source of uncertainty continues to be the outlook for household

 consumption. The combination of higher interest rates and cost-of-living pressures is leading to a

 substantial slowing in household spending. While housing prices are rising again and some households have

 substantial savings buffers, others are experiencing a painful squeeze on their finances. There are also

 uncertainties regarding the global economy, which is expected to grow at a below-average rate over the

 next couple of years.
Some further tightening of monetary policy may be required to ensure that inflation returns to target in a

 reasonable timeframe, but that will depend upon how the economy and inflation evolve. The decision to

 hold interest rates steady this month provides the Board with more time to assess the state of the

 economy and the economic outlook and associated risks. In making its decisions, the Board will continue

 to pay close attention to developments in the global economy, trends in household spending, and the

 forecasts for inflation and the labour market. The Board remains resolute in its determination to return

 inflation to target and will do what is necessary to achieve that.
Enquiries
External Communications
Secretary's Department
Reserve Bank of Australia
SYDNEY
Phone:
+61 2 9551 8111
Email:
rbainfo@rba.gov.au
