BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: 7 November 2023
DATE: 01/06/2023
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/media-releases/2023/mr-23-30.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Media Release
Statement by Michele Bullock, Governor: Monetary Policy Decision
Number
2023-30
Date
7 November 2023
At its meeting today, the Board decided to raise the cash rate target by 25 basis points to

 4.35 per cent. It also increased the interest rate paid on Exchange Settlement balances by

 25 basis points to 4.25 per cent.
Inflation in Australia has passed its peak but is still too high and is proving more persistent than

 expected a few months ago. The latest reading on CPI inflation indicates that while goods price inflation

 has eased further, the prices of many services are continuing to rise briskly. While the central forecast

 is for CPI inflation to continue to decline, progress looks to be slower than earlier expected. CPI

 inflation is now expected to be around 3½ per cent by the end of 2024 and at the top of the

 target range of 2 to 3 per cent by the end of 2025. The Board judged an increase in

 interest rates was warranted today to be more assured that inflation would return to target in a

 reasonable timeframe.
The Board had held interest rates steady since June following an increase of 4 percentage points

 since May last year. It had judged that higher interest rates were working to establish a more

 sustainable balance between supply and demand in the economy. Furthermore, it had noted that the impact

 of the more recent rate rises would continue to flow through the economy. It had therefore decided that

 it was appropriate to hold rates steady to provide time to assess the impact of the increase in interest

 rates so far. In particular, the Board had indicated that it would be paying close attention to

 developments in the global economy, trends in household spending, and the outlook for inflation and the

 labour market.
Since its August meeting, the Board has received updated information on inflation, the labour market,

 economic activity and the revised set of forecasts. The weight of this information suggests that the risk

 of inflation remaining higher for longer has increased. While the economy is experiencing a period of

 below-trend growth, it has been stronger than expected over the first half of the year. Underlying

 inflation was higher than expected at the time of the August forecasts, including across a broad range of

 services. Conditions in the labour market have eased but they remain tight. Housing prices are continuing

 to rise across the country.
At the same time, high inflation is weighing on people’s real incomes and household consumption

 growth is weak, as is dwelling investment. Given that the economy is forecast to grow below trend,

 employment is expected to grow slower than the labour force and the unemployment rate is expected to rise

 gradually to around 4¼ per cent. This is a more moderate increase than previously forecast.

 Wages growth has picked up over the past year but is still consistent with the inflation target, provided

 that productivity growth picks up.
Returning inflation to target within a reasonable timeframe remains the Board’s priority. High

 inflation makes life difficult for everyone and damages the functioning of the economy. It erodes the

 value of savings, hurts household budgets, makes it harder for businesses to plan and invest, and worsens

 income inequality. And if high inflation were to become entrenched in people’s expectations, it

 would be much more costly to reduce later, involving even higher interest rates and a larger rise in

 unemployment. To date, medium-term inflation expectations have been consistent with the inflation target

 and it is important that this remains the case.
There are still significant uncertainties around the outlook. Services price inflation has been

 surprisingly persistent overseas and the same could occur in Australia. There are uncertainties regarding

 the lags in the effect of monetary policy and how firms’ pricing decisions and wages will respond to

 the slower growth in the economy at a time when the labour market remains tight. The outlook for

 household consumption also remains uncertain, with many households experiencing a painful squeeze on

 their finances, while some are benefiting from rising housing prices, substantial savings buffers and

 higher interest income. And globally, there remains a high level of uncertainty around the outlook for

 the Chinese economy and the implications of the conflicts abroad.
Whether further tightening of monetary policy is required to ensure that inflation returns to target in a

 reasonable timeframe will depend upon the data and the evolving assessment of risks. In making its

 decisions, the Board will continue to pay close attention to developments in the global economy, trends

 in domestic demand, and the outlook for inflation and the labour market. The Board remains resolute in

 its determination to return inflation to target and will do what is necessary to achieve that outcome.
Enquiries
External Communications
Secretary's Department
Reserve Bank of Australia
SYDNEY
Phone:
+61 2 9551 8111
Email:
rbainfo@rba.gov.au
