BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: 6 June 2023
DATE: 01/06/2023
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/media-releases/2023/mr-23-13.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Media Release
Statement by Philip Lowe, Governor: Monetary Policy Decision
Number
2023-13
Date
6 June 2023
At its meeting today, the Board decided to increase the cash rate target by 25 basis points to

 4.10 per cent. It also increased the interest rate paid on Exchange Settlement balances by

 25 basis points to 4.00 per cent.
Inflation in Australia has passed its peak, but at 7 per cent is still too high and it will be

 some time yet before it is back in the target range. This further increase in interest rates is to

 provide greater confidence that inflation will return to target within a reasonable timeframe.
High inflation makes life difficult for people and damages the functioning of the economy. It erodes the

 value of savings, hurts family budgets, makes it harder for businesses to plan and invest, and worsens

 income inequality. And if high inflation were to become entrenched in people’s expectations, it

 would be very costly to reduce later, involving even higher interest rates and a larger rise in

 unemployment. Recent data indicate that the upside risks to the inflation outlook have increased and the

 Board has responded to this. While goods price inflation is slowing, services price inflation is still

 very high and is proving to be very persistent overseas. Unit labour costs are also rising briskly, with

 productivity growth remaining subdued.
Growth in the Australian economy has slowed and conditions in the labour market have eased, although they

 remain very tight. The unemployment rate increased slightly to 3.7 per cent in April and

 employment growth has moderated. Firms report that labour shortages have eased, although job vacancies

 and advertisements are still at very high levels.
Wages growth has picked up in response to the tight labour market and high inflation. Growth in public

 sector wages is expected to pick up further and the annual increase in award wages was higher than it was

 last year. At the aggregate level, wages growth is still consistent with the inflation target, provided

 that productivity growth picks up.
The Board remains alert to the risk that expectations of ongoing high inflation contribute to larger

 increases in both prices and wages, especially given the limited spare capacity in the economy and the

 still very low rate of unemployment. Accordingly, it will continue to pay close attention to both the

 evolution of labour costs and the price-setting behaviour of firms.
The Board is still seeking to keep the economy on an even keel as inflation returns to the
2–3
per cent target range, but the path to achieving a soft

 landing remains a narrow one. A significant source of uncertainty continues to be the outlook for

 household consumption. The combination of higher interest rates and cost-of-living pressures is leading

 to a substantial slowing in household spending. Housing prices are rising again and some households have

 substantial savings buffers, although others are experiencing a painful squeeze on their finances. There

 are also uncertainties regarding the global economy, which is expected to grow at a below-average rate

 over the next couple of years.
Some further tightening of monetary policy may be required to ensure that inflation returns to target in a

 reasonable timeframe, but that will depend upon how the economy and inflation evolve. The Board will

 continue to pay close attention to developments in the global economy, trends in household spending, and

 the outlook for inflation and the labour market. The Board remains resolute in its determination to

 return inflation to target and will do what is necessary to achieve that.
Enquiries
External Communications
Secretary's Department
Reserve Bank of Australia
SYDNEY
Phone:
+61 2 9551 8111
Email:
rbainfo@rba.gov.au
