BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: 5 September 2023
DATE: 01/06/2023
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/media-releases/2023/mr-23-23.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Media Release
Statement by Philip Lowe, Governor: Monetary Policy Decision
Number
2023-23
Date
5 September 2023
At its meeting today, the Board decided to leave the cash rate target unchanged at 4.10 per cent

 and the interest rate paid on Exchange Settlement balances unchanged at 4.00 per cent.
Interest rates have been increased by 4 percentage points since May last year. The higher interest

 rates are working to establish a more sustainable balance between supply and demand in the economy and

 will continue to do so. In light of this and the uncertainty surrounding the economic outlook, the Board

 again decided to hold interest rates steady this month. This will provide further time to assess the

 impact of the increase in interest rates to date and the economic outlook.
Inflation in Australia has passed its peak and the monthly CPI indicator for July showed a further

 decline. But inflation is still too high and will remain so for some time yet. While goods price

 inflation has eased, the prices of many services are rising briskly. Rent inflation is also elevated. The

 central forecast is for CPI inflation to continue to decline and to be back within the
2–3 per cent
target range in late 2025.
The Australian economy is experiencing a period of below-trend growth and this is expected to continue for

 a while. High inflation is weighing on people’s real incomes and household consumption growth is

 weak, as is dwelling investment. Notwithstanding this, conditions in the labour market remain tight,

 although they have eased a little. Given that the economy and employment are forecast to grow below

 trend, the unemployment rate is expected to rise gradually to around 4½ per cent late next

 year. Wages growth has picked up over the past year but is still consistent with the inflation target,

 provided that productivity growth picks up.
Returning inflation to target within a reasonable timeframe remains the Board’s priority. High

 inflation makes life difficult for everyone and damages the functioning of the economy. It erodes the

 value of savings, hurts household budgets, makes it harder for businesses to plan and invest, and worsens

 income inequality. And if high inflation were to become entrenched in people’s expectations, it

 would be very costly to reduce later, involving even higher interest rates and a larger rise in

 unemployment. To date, medium-term inflation expectations have been consistent with the inflation target

 and it is important that this remains the case.
The recent data are consistent with inflation returning to the
2–3
per cent target range over the forecast horizon and with

 output and employment continuing to grow. Inflation is coming down, the labour market remains strong and

 the economy is operating at a high level of capacity utilisation, although growth has slowed.
There are significant uncertainties around the outlook. Services price inflation has been surprisingly

 persistent overseas and the same could occur in Australia. There are also uncertainties regarding the

 lags in the effect of monetary policy and how firms’ pricing decisions and wages respond to the

 slower growth in the economy at a time when the labour market remains tight. The outlook for household

 consumption also remains uncertain, with many households experiencing a painful squeeze on their

 finances, while some are benefiting from rising housing prices, substantial savings buffers and higher

 interest income. And globally, there is increased uncertainty around the outlook for the Chinese economy

 due to ongoing stresses in the property market.
Some further tightening of monetary policy may be required to ensure that inflation returns to target in a

 reasonable timeframe, but that will continue to depend upon the data and the evolving assessment of

 risks. In making its decisions, the Board will continue to pay close attention to developments in the

 global economy, trends in household spending, and the outlook for inflation and the labour market. The

 Board remains resolute in its determination to return inflation to target and will do what is necessary

 to achieve that.
Enquiries
External Communications
Secretary's Department
Reserve Bank of Australia
SYDNEY
Phone:
+61 2 9551 8111
Email:
rbainfo@rba.gov.au
