BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: 7 March 2023
DATE: 01/06/2023
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/media-releases/2023/mr-23-07.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Media Release
Statement by Philip Lowe, Governor: Monetary Policy Decision
Number
2023-07
Date
7 March 2023
At its meeting today, the Board decided to increase the cash rate target by 25 basis points to

 3.60 per cent. It also increased the interest rate on Exchange Settlement balances by

 25 basis points to 3.50 per cent.
Global inflation remains very high. In headline terms it is moderating, although services price inflation

 remains elevated in many economies. It will be some time before inflation is back to target rates. The

 outlook for the global economy remains subdued, with below average growth expected this year and next.
The monthly CPI indicator suggests that inflation has peaked in Australia. Goods price inflation is

 expected to moderate over the months ahead due to both global developments and softer demand in

 Australia. Services price inflation remains high, with strong demand for some services over the summer.

 Rents are increasing at the fastest rate in some years, with vacancy rates low in many parts of the

 country. The central forecast is for inflation to decline this year and next, to be around

 3 per cent in mid-2025. Medium-term inflation expectations remain well anchored, and it is

 important that this remains the case.
Growth in the Australian economy has slowed, with GDP increasing by 0.5 per cent in the December

 quarter and 2.7 per cent over the year. Growth over the next couple of years is expected to be

 below trend. Household consumption growth has slowed due to the tighter financial conditions and the

 outlook for housing construction has softened. In contrast, the outlook for business investment remains

 positive, with many businesses operating at a very high level of capacity utilisation.
The labour market remains very tight, although conditions have eased a little. The unemployment rate

 remains at close to a 50-year low. Employment fell in January, but this partly reflects changing seasonal

 patterns in labour hiring. Many firms continue to experience difficulty hiring workers, although some

 report a recent easing in labour shortages. As economic growth slows, unemployment is expected to

 increase.
Wages growth is continuing to pick up in response to the tight labour market and higher inflation. At the

 aggregate level, wages growth is still consistent with the inflation target and recent data suggest a

 lower risk of a cycle in which prices and wages chase one another. The Board, however, remains alert to

 the risk of a prices-wages spiral, given the limited spare capacity in the economy and the historically

 low rate of unemployment. Accordingly, it will continue to pay close attention to both the evolution of

 labour costs and the price-setting behaviour of firms.
The Board recognises that monetary policy operates with a lag and that the full effect of the cumulative

 increase in interest rates is yet to be felt in mortgage payments. There is uncertainty around the timing

 and extent of the slowdown in household spending. Some households have substantial savings buffers, but

 others are experiencing a painful squeeze on their budgets due to higher interest rates and the increase

 in the cost of living. Household balance sheets are also being affected by the decline in housing prices.

 Another source of uncertainty is how the global economy responds to the large and rapid increase in

 interest rates around the world. These uncertainties mean that there are a range of potential scenarios

 for the Australian economy.
The Board’s priority is to return inflation to target. High inflation makes life difficult for people

 and damages the functioning of the economy. And if high inflation were to become entrenched in

 people’s expectations, it would be very costly to reduce later, involving even higher interest rates

 and a larger rise in unemployment. The Board is seeking to return inflation to the
2–3
per cent target range while keeping the economy on an even

 keel, but the path to achieving a soft landing remains a narrow one.
The Board expects that further tightening of monetary policy will be needed to ensure that inflation

 returns to target and that this period of high inflation is only temporary. In assessing when and how

 much further interest rates need to increase, the Board will be paying close attention to developments in

 the global economy, trends in household spending and the outlook for inflation and the labour market. The

 Board remains resolute in its determination to return inflation to target and will do what is necessary

 to achieve that.
Enquiries
External Communications
Secretary's Department
Reserve Bank of Australia
SYDNEY
Phone:
+61 2 9551 8111
Email:
rbainfo@rba.gov.au
