BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: 19 March 2024
DATE: 01/06/2024
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/media-releases/2024/mr-24-05.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

More on the March 2024 monetary policy decision
Media Release
Statement by the Reserve Bank Board: Monetary Policy Decision
Number
2024-05
Date
19 March 2024
At its meeting today, the Board decided to leave the cash rate target unchanged at 4.35 per cent

 and the interest rate paid on Exchange Settlement balances unchanged at 4.25 per cent.
Inflation continues to moderate but remains high.
Recent information suggests that inflation continues to moderate, in line with the RBA’s latest

 forecasts. The headline monthly CPI indicator was steady at 3.4 per cent over the year to

 January, with momentum easing over recent months, driven by moderating goods inflation. Services

 inflation remains elevated, and is moderating at a more gradual pace. The data are consistent with

 continuing excess demand in the economy and strong domestic cost pressures, both for labour and

 non-labour inputs.
Higher interest rates are working to establish a more sustainable balance between aggregate demand and

 supply in the economy. Accordingly, conditions in the labour market continue to ease gradually, although

 they remain tighter than is consistent with sustained full employment and inflation at target. Wages

 growth picked up a little further in the December quarter, but appears to have peaked with indications it

 will moderate over the year ahead. Nevertheless, this level of wages growth remains consistent with the

 inflation target only on the assumption that productivity growth increases to around its long-run

 average. Inflation is still weighing on people’s real incomes and household consumption growth is

 weak, as is dwelling investment.
The outlook remains highly uncertain.
While there are encouraging signs that inflation is moderating, the economic outlook remains uncertain.

 The December quarter national accounts data confirmed growth has slowed. Household consumption growth

 remains particularly weak amid high inflation and the rise in interest rates. After recent declines, real

 incomes have stabilised and are expected to grow from here, which is expected to support growth in

 consumption later in the year.
Meanwhile, growth in unit labour costs remains very high. It has begun to moderate slightly as measured

 productivity growth has picked up in the past two quarters but whether this trend will be sustained is

 uncertain.
The central forecasts are for inflation to return to the target range of
2–3
per cent in 2025, and to the midpoint in 2026. Services

 price inflation is expected to decline gradually as demand moderates and growth in labour and non-labour

 costs eases. Employment is expected to continue to grow moderately, and the unemployment rate and the

 broader underutilisation rate are expected to increase a bit further.
While there have been favourable signs on goods price inflation abroad, services price inflation has remained

 persistent and the same could occur in Australia. There also remains a high level of uncertainty around

 the outlook for the Chinese economy and the implications of the conflicts in Ukraine and the Middle East.

 Domestically, there are uncertainties regarding the lags in the effect of monetary policy and how

 firms’ pricing decisions and wages will respond to the slower growth in the economy at a time of

 excess demand, and while the labour market remains tight. The outlook for household consumption also

 remains uncertain.
Returning inflation to target is the priority.
Returning inflation to target within a reasonable timeframe remains the Board’s highest priority.

 This is consistent with the RBA’s mandate for price stability and full employment. The Board needs

 to be confident that inflation is moving sustainably towards the target range. To date, medium-term

 inflation expectations have been consistent with the inflation target and it is important that this

 remains the case.
While recent data indicate that inflation is easing, it remains high. The Board expects that it will be

 some time yet before inflation is sustainably in the target range. The path of interest rates that will

 best ensure that inflation returns to target in a reasonable timeframe remains uncertain and the Board is

 not ruling anything in or out. The Board will rely upon the data and the evolving assessment of risks.

 The Board will continue to pay close attention to developments in the global economy, trends in domestic

 demand, and the outlook for inflation and the labour market. The Board remains resolute in its

 determination to return inflation to target.
Enquiries
Communications Department
Reserve Bank of Australia
SYDNEY
Phone:
+61 2 9551 8111
Email:
rbainfo@rba.gov.au
