BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: 24 September 2024
DATE: 01/06/2024
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/media-releases/2024/mr-24-18.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

More on the September 2024 monetary policy decision
Media Release
Statement by the Reserve Bank Board: Monetary Policy Decision
Number
2024-18
Date
24 September 2024
At its meeting today, the Board decided to leave the cash rate target unchanged at 4.35 per cent

 and the interest rate paid on Exchange Settlement balances unchanged at 4.25 per cent.
Inflation remains above target and is proving persistent.
Inflation has fallen substantially since the peak in 2022, as higher interest rates have been working to

 bring aggregate demand and supply closer towards balance. But inflation is still some way above the

 midpoint of the
2–3
per cent target range. In underlying

 terms, as represented by the trimmed mean, inflation was 3.9 per cent over the year to the June

 quarter, broadly as forecast in the May Statement on Monetary Policy (SMP). Headline inflation declined

 in July, as measured by the monthly CPI indicator. Headline inflation is expected to fall further

 temporarily, as a result of federal and state cost of living relief. However, our current forecasts do

 not see inflation returning sustainably to target until 2026. In year-ended terms, underlying inflation

 has been above the midpoint of the target for 11 consecutive quarters and has fallen very little

 over the past year.
The outlook remains highly uncertain.
The central forecasts published in August were for underlying inflation to return to the target range of
2–3
per cent late in 2025 and approach the midpoint in 2026.

 This reflected a judgement that the economy’s capacity to meet demand was somewhat weaker than

 previously thought, evidenced by the persistence of inflation and ongoing strength in the labour market.
Since then, GDP data for the June quarter have confirmed that growth has been weak. Earlier declines in

 real disposable incomes and the ongoing effect of restrictive financial conditions continue to weigh on

 consumption, particularly discretionary consumption. However, growth in aggregate consumer demand, which

 includes spending by temporary residents such as students and tourists, remained more resilient.
Wage pressures have eased somewhat but labour productivity is still only at 2016 levels, despite the

 pickup over the past year.
Broader indicators suggest that labour market conditions remain tight, despite some signs of gradual

 easing. Over the three months to August, employment grew on average by 0.3 per cent per month.

 The unemployment rate remained at 4.2 per cent in August, up from the trough of

 3.5 per cent in mid-2023. But the participation rate remains at record highs, vacancies remain

 elevated and average hours worked have stabilised.
Taken together, the latest data do not change the Board’s assessment at the August meeting that

 policy is currently restrictive and working broadly as anticipated. But there are uncertainties. The

 central projection is for household consumption growth to pick up in the second half of the year as the

 headwinds to income growth recede – but there is a risk that this pickup is slower than expected,

 resulting in continued subdued output growth and a sharper deterioration in the labour market. More

 broadly, there are uncertainties regarding the lags in the effects of monetary policy and how firms’

 pricing decisions and wages will respond to the slower growth in the economy at a time of excess demand,

 and while conditions in the labour market remain tight.
There also remains a high level of uncertainty about the outlook abroad. Some central banks have eased

 policy, although they note that they are removing only some restrictiveness and remain alert to risks on

 both sides, namely weaker labour markets and stronger inflation. The outlook for the Chinese economy has

 softened and this has been reflected in commodity prices. Geopolitical uncertainties remain pronounced.
Returning inflation to target is the priority.
Sustainably returning inflation to target within a reasonable timeframe remains the Board’s highest

 priority. This is consistent with the RBA’s mandate for price stability and full employment. To

 date, longer term inflation expectations have been consistent with the inflation target and it is

 important that this remain the case.
While headline inflation will decline for a time, underlying inflation is more indicative of inflation

 momentum, and it remains too high. The most recent projections in the August SMP show that it will be

 some time yet before inflation is sustainably in the target range. Data since then have reinforced the

 need to remain vigilant to upside risks to inflation and the Board is not ruling anything in or out.

 Policy will need to be sufficiently restrictive until the Board is confident that inflation is moving

 sustainably towards the target range.
The Board will continue to rely upon the data and the evolving assessment of risks to guide its decisions.

 In doing so, it will pay close attention to developments in the global economy and financial markets,

 trends in domestic demand, and the outlook for inflation and the labour market. The Board remains

 resolute in its determination to return inflation to target and will do what is necessary to achieve that

 outcome.
Enquiries
Communications Department
Reserve Bank of Australia
SYDNEY
Phone:
+61 2 9551 8111
Email:
rbainfo@rba.gov.au
