BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: 18 June 2024
DATE: 01/06/2024
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/media-releases/2024/mr-24-12.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

More on the June 2024 monetary policy decision
Media Release
Statement by the Reserve Bank Board: Monetary Policy Decision
Number
2024-12
Date
18 June 2024
At its meeting today, the Board decided to leave the cash rate target unchanged at 4.35 per cent

 and the interest rate paid on Exchange Settlement balances unchanged at 4.25 per cent.
Inflation remains above target and is proving persistent.
Inflation has fallen substantially since its peak in 2022, as higher interest rates have been working to

 bring aggregate demand and supply closer towards balance. But the pace of decline has slowed in the most

 recent data, with inflation still some way above the midpoint of the
2–3
per cent target range. Over the year to April, the monthly

 CPI indicator rose by 3.6 per cent in headline terms, and by 4.1 per cent excluding

 volatile items and holiday travel, which was similar to its pace in December 2023.
Broader data indicate continuing excess demand in the economy, coupled with elevated domestic cost

 pressures, for both labour and non-labour inputs. Conditions in the labour market eased further over the

 past month but remain tighter than is consistent with sustained full employment and inflation at target.

 Wages growth appears to have peaked but is still above the level that can be sustained given trend

 productivity growth. Recent data revisions suggest that consumption over the past year was stronger than

 previously suggested. At the same time, output growth has been subdued, and consumption per capita has

 been declining, as households restrain their discretionary expenditure and inflation weighs on real

 incomes.
The outlook remains highly uncertain.
The economic outlook remains uncertain and recent data have demonstrated that the process of returning

 inflation to target is unlikely to be smooth.
The central forecasts published in May were for inflation to return to the target range of
2–3
per cent in the second half of 2025 and to the midpoint in

 2026. Since then, there have been indications that momentum in economic activity is weak, including slow

 growth in GDP, a rise in the unemployment rate and slower-than-expected wages growth. At the same time,

 the revisions to consumption and the saving rate and the persistence of inflation suggest that risks to

 the upside remain. Recent budget outcomes may also have an impact on demand, although federal and state

 energy rebates will temporarily reduce headline inflation. The persistence of services price inflation is

 a key uncertainty. Also, although growth in unit labour costs has eased, it remains high. Productivity

 growth needs to pick up in a sustained way if inflation is to continue to decline.
There is uncertainty around consumption growth. Real disposable incomes have now stabilised and are

 expected to grow later in the year, assisted by lower inflation and tax cuts. There has also been an

 increase in wealth, driven by housing prices. Together, these factors are expected to support growth in

 consumption over the coming year. But there is a risk that household consumption picks up more slowly

 than expected, resulting in continued subdued output growth and a noticeable deterioration in the labour

 market.
More broadly, there are uncertainties regarding the lags in the effect of monetary policy and how

 firms’ pricing decisions and wages will respond to the slower growth in the economy at a time of

 excess demand, and while conditions in the labour market remain tight.
There also remains a high level of uncertainty about the overseas outlook. Output growth in most advanced

 economies appears to have troughed. There has been improvement in the outlook for the Chinese and US

 economies, and many commodity prices have picked up. Some central banks have eased policy, although they

 remain alert to the risk of persistent inflation. Nevertheless, geopolitical uncertainties, including

 those related to the conflicts in the Middle East and Ukraine, remain elevated, which may have

 implications for supply chains.
Returning inflation to target is the priority.
Returning inflation to target within a reasonable timeframe remains the Board’s highest priority.

 This is consistent with the RBA’s mandate for price stability and full employment. The Board needs

 to be confident that inflation is moving sustainably towards the target range. To date, medium-term

 inflation expectations have been consistent with the inflation target and it is important that this

 remains the case.
Inflation is easing but has been doing so more slowly than previously expected and it remains high. The

 Board expects that it will be some time yet before inflation is sustainably in the target range. While

 recent data have been mixed, they have reinforced the need to remain vigilant to upside risks to

 inflation. The path of interest rates that will best ensure that inflation returns to target in a

 reasonable timeframe remains uncertain and the Board is not ruling anything in or out. The Board will

 rely upon the data and the evolving assessment of risks. In doing so, it will continue to pay close

 attention to developments in the global economy, trends in domestic demand, and the outlook for inflation

 and the labour market. The Board remains resolute in its determination to return inflation to target and

 will do what is necessary to achieve that outcome.
Enquiries
Communications Department
Reserve Bank of Australia
SYDNEY
Phone:
+61 2 9551 8111
Email:
rbainfo@rba.gov.au
