BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: 6 August 2024
DATE: 01/06/2024
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/media-releases/2024/mr-24-15.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

More on the August 2024 monetary policy decision
Media Release
Statement by the Reserve Bank Board: Monetary Policy Decision
Number
2024-15
Date
6 August 2024
At its meeting today, the Board decided to leave the cash rate target unchanged at 4.35 per cent

 and the interest rate paid on Exchange Settlement balances unchanged at 4.25 per cent.
Inflation remains above target and is proving persistent.
Inflation has fallen substantially since its peak in 2022, as higher interest rates have been working to

 bring aggregate demand and supply closer towards balance. But inflation is still some way above the

 midpoint of the
2–3
per cent target range. In underlying

 terms, as represented by the trimmed mean, the CPI rose by 3.9 per cent over the year to the

 June quarter, broadly as forecast in the May
Statement on Monetary Policy
(SMP). But the

 latest numbers also demonstrate that inflation is proving persistent. In year-ended terms, underlying

 inflation has now been above the midpoint of the target for 11 consecutive quarters. And quarterly

 underlying CPI inflation has fallen very little over the past year.
The outlook remains highly uncertain.
The economic outlook is uncertain and recent data have demonstrated that the process of returning

 inflation to target has been slow and bumpy.
The central forecasts set out in the latest SMP are for inflation to return to the target range of
2–3
per cent late in 2025 and approach the midpoint in 2026.

 This represents a slightly slower return to target than forecast in May, based on estimates that the gap

 between aggregate demand and supply in the economy is larger than previously thought. In part, this

 reflects an increase in the forecast for domestic demand. But it also reflects a judgement that the

 economy’s capacity to meet that demand is somewhat weaker than previously thought, evidenced by the

 persistence of inflation and ongoing strength in the labour market.
There is substantial uncertainty around these forecasts. Revisions to consumption and the saving rate in

 the most recent National Accounts, high unit labour costs and the persistence of inflation –

 particularly in the services sector – suggest there are upside risks to inflation. Wages growth

 appears to have peaked but is still above the level that can be sustained given trend productivity

 growth.
On the other hand, momentum in economic activity has been weak, as evidenced by slow growth in GDP, a rise

 in the unemployment rate and reports that many businesses are under pressure. And there is a risk that

 household consumption picks up more slowly than expected, resulting in continued subdued output growth

 and a noticeable deterioration in the labour market.
More broadly, there are uncertainties regarding the lags in the effect of monetary policy and how

 firms’ pricing decisions and wages will respond to the slower growth in the economy at a time of

 excess demand, and while conditions in the labour market remain tight.
There also remains a high level of uncertainty about the overseas outlook. The outlook for the Chinese

 economy has softened and this has been reflected in commodity prices. Some central banks have eased

 policy, although they remain alert to the risk of persistent inflation. Globally, financial markets have

 been volatile of late and the Australian dollar has depreciated. Geopolitical uncertainties remain

 elevated, which may have implications for supply chains.
Returning inflation to target is the priority.
Returning inflation to target within a reasonable timeframe remains the Board’s highest priority.

 This is consistent with the RBA’s mandate for price stability and full employment. To date,

 longer-term inflation expectations have been consistent with the inflation target and it is important

 that this remain the case.
Inflation in underlying terms remains too high, and the latest projections show that it will be some time

 yet before inflation is sustainably in the target range. Data have reinforced the need to remain vigilant

 to upside risks to inflation and the Board is not ruling anything in or out. Policy will need to be

 sufficiently restrictive until the Board is confident that inflation is moving sustainably towards the

 target range.
The Board will rely upon the data and the evolving assessment of risks to guide its decisions. In doing

 so, it will continue to pay close attention to developments in the global economy and financial markets,

 trends in domestic demand, and the outlook for inflation and the labour market. The Board remains

 resolute in its determination to return inflation to target and will do what is necessary to achieve that

 outcome.
Enquiries
Communications Department
Reserve Bank of Australia
SYDNEY
Phone:
+61 2 9551 9720
Email:
rbainfo@rba.gov.au
