BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: 5 November 2024
DATE: 01/06/2024
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/media-releases/2024/mr-24-24.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

More on the November 2024 monetary policy decision
Media Release
Statement by the Reserve Bank Board: Monetary Policy Decision
Number
2024-24
Date
5 November 2024
At its meeting today, the Board decided to leave the cash rate target unchanged at 4.35 per cent

 and the interest rate paid on Exchange Settlement balances unchanged at 4.25 per cent.
Underlying inflation remains too high.
Inflation has fallen substantially since the peak in 2022, as higher interest rates have been working to

 bring aggregate demand and supply closer towards balance. Headline inflation was 2.8 per cent

 over the year to the September quarter, down from 3.8 per cent over the year to the June

 quarter. This was as expected due to declines in fuel and electricity prices in the September quarter.

 But part of this decline reflects temporary cost of living relief. Abstracting from these effects,

 underlying inflation (as represented by the trimmed mean) was 3.5 per cent over the year to the

 September quarter. This was as forecast but is still some way from the 2.5 per cent midpoint of

 the inflation target. The forecasts published in today’s
Statement on Monetary Policy
(SMP) do not see inflation returning sustainably to the midpoint of the target until 2026.
The outlook remains highly uncertain.
The forecasts published today are very similar to those published in August. The forecast path for

 underlying inflation reflects a judgement that aggregate demand remains above the economy’s supply

 capacity, evidenced by the persistence of underlying inflation, surveys of business conditions and

 ongoing strength in the labour market.
Growth in output has been weak. Past declines in real disposable incomes and the ongoing effect of

 restrictive financial conditions continue to weigh on household consumption, particularly discretionary

 consumption. However, growth in aggregate consumer demand, which includes spending by temporary residents

 such as students and tourists, has remained more resilient.
A range of indicators suggest that labour market conditions remain tight, and while conditions have been

 easing gradually, some indicators have recently stabilised. Employment grew strongly over the three

 months to September, by an average of 0.4 per cent per month. The unemployment rate was

 4.1 per cent in September, up from the trough of 3.5 per cent in late 2022. But the

 participation rate remains at record highs, vacancies are still elevated and average hours worked have

 stabilised. At the same time, some cyclical measures of the labour market including youth unemployment

 and underemployment have recently declined.
Wage pressures have eased somewhat but labour productivity is still only at 2016 levels, despite the

 pick-up over the past year.
Taking account of recent data and the updated forecasts, the Board’s assessment is that policy is

 currently restrictive and working broadly as anticipated. But there are uncertainties. The central

 projection is for growth in household consumption to increase from the second half of this year as income

 growth picks up – and there is tentative evidence of an increase in spending in the September

 quarter. But there is a risk that any pick-up is slower than expected, resulting in continued subdued

 output growth and a sharper deterioration in the labour market. More broadly, there are uncertainties

 regarding the lags in the effect of monetary policy and how firms’ pricing decisions and wages will

 respond to the slow growth in the economy and weak productivity outcomes at a time of excess demand, and

 while conditions in the labour market remain tight.
There remains a high level of uncertainty about the outlook abroad. Most central banks have eased monetary

 policy as they become more confident that inflation is moving sustainably back towards their respective

 targets. They note, however, that they are removing only some restrictiveness and remain alert to risks

 on both sides, namely weaker labour markets and stronger inflation. Public authorities in China have

 responded to the weak outlook for economic activity by implementing more expansionary policies, although

 the impact (and in some cases the specific details) of these measures remains to be seen. Geopolitical

 uncertainties remain pronounced.
Sustainably returning inflation to target is the priority.
Sustainably returning inflation to target within a reasonable timeframe remains the Board’s highest

 priority. This is consistent with the RBA’s mandate for price stability and full employment. To

 date, longer term inflation expectations have been consistent with the inflation target and it is

 important that this remains the case.
While headline inflation has declined substantially and will remain lower for a time, underlying inflation

 is more indicative of inflation momentum, and it remains too high. The November SMP forecasts suggest

 that it will be some time yet before inflation is sustainably in the target range and approaching the

 midpoint. This reinforces the need to remain vigilant to upside risks to inflation and the Board is not

 ruling anything in or out. Policy will need to be sufficiently restrictive until the Board is confident

 that inflation is moving sustainably towards the target range.
The Board will continue to rely upon the data and the evolving assessment of risks to guide its decisions.

 In doing so, it will pay close attention to developments in the global economy and financial markets,

 trends in domestic demand, and the outlook for inflation and the labour market. The Board remains

 resolute in its determination to return inflation to target and will do what is necessary to achieve that

 outcome.
Enquiries
Communications Department
Reserve Bank of Australia
SYDNEY
Phone:
+61 2 9551 9720
Email:
rbainfo@rba.gov.au
