BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: 1 April 2025
DATE: 01/06/2025
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/media-releases/2025/mr-25-10.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Media Release
Statement by the Monetary Policy Board: Monetary Policy Decision
Number
2025-10
Date
1 April 2025
At its meeting today, the Board decided to leave the cash rate target unchanged at 4.10 per cent

 and the interest rate paid on Exchange Settlement balances at 4 per cent.
Underlying inflation is moderating.
Inflation has fallen substantially since the peak in 2022, as higher interest rates have been working to

 bring aggregate demand and supply closer towards balance. Recent information suggests that underlying

 inflation continues to ease in line with the most recent forecasts published in the February
Statement on Monetary Policy
. Nevertheless, the Board needs to be confident that this

 progress will continue so that inflation returns to the midpoint of the target band on a sustainable

 basis. It is therefore cautious about the outlook.
The Board noted that monetary policy is well placed to respond to international developments if they were

 to have material implications for Australian activity and inflation.
The outlook remains uncertain.
Private domestic demand appears to be recovering, real household incomes have picked up and there has been

 an easing in some measures of financial stress. However, businesses in some sectors continue to report

 that weakness in demand makes it difficult to pass on cost increases to final prices.
At the same time, a range of indicators suggest that labour market conditions remain tight. Despite a

 decline in employment in February, measures of labour underutilisation are at relatively low rates and

 business surveys and liaison suggest that availability of labour is still a constraint for a range of

 employers. Wage pressures have eased a little more than expected but productivity growth has not picked

 up and growth in unit labour costs remains high.
There are notable uncertainties about the outlook for domestic economic activity and inflation. The

 central projection is for growth in household consumption to continue to increase as income growth rises.

 But there is a risk that any pick-up in consumption is slower than expected, resulting in continued

 subdued output growth and a sharper deterioration in the labour market than currently expected.

 Alternatively, labour market outcomes may prove stronger than expected, given the signal from a range of

 leading indicators.
More broadly, there are uncertainties regarding the lags in the effect of monetary policy and how

 firms’ pricing decisions and wages will respond to the demand environment and weak productivity

 outcomes while conditions in the labour market remain tight.
Uncertainty about the outlook abroad also remains significant. On the macroeconomic policy front, recent

 announcements from the United States on tariffs are having an impact on confidence globally and this

 would likely be amplified if the scope of tariffs widens, or other countries take retaliatory measures.

 Geopolitical uncertainties are also pronounced. These developments are expected to have an adverse effect

 on global activity, particularly if households and firms delay expenditures pending greater clarity on

 the outlook. Inflation, however, could move in either direction. Many central banks have eased monetary

 policy since the start of the year, but they have become increasingly attentive to the evolving risks

 from recent global policy developments.
Sustainably returning inflation to target is the priority.
Sustainably returning inflation to target within a reasonable timeframe is the Board’s highest

 priority. This is consistent with the RBA’s mandate for price stability and full employment. To

 date, longer term inflation expectations have been consistent with the inflation target and it is

 important that this remain the case.
The Board’s assessment is that monetary policy remains restrictive. The continued decline in

 underlying inflation is welcome, but there are nevertheless risks on both sides and the Board is cautious

 about the outlook.
The Board will rely upon the data and the evolving assessment of risks to guide its decisions. In doing

 so, it will pay close attention to developments in the global economy and financial markets, trends in

 domestic demand, and the outlook for inflation and the labour market. The Board is resolute in its

 determination to sustainably return inflation to target and will do what is necessary to achieve that

 outcome.
Enquiries
Communications Department
Reserve Bank of Australia
SYDNEY
Phone:
+61 2 9551 8111
Email:
rbainfo@rba.gov.au
