BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: 9 December 2025
DATE: 01/06/2025
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/media-releases/2025/mr-25-33.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Media Release
Statement by the Monetary Policy Board: Monetary Policy Decision
Number
2025-33
Date
9 December 2025
At its meeting today, the Board decided to leave the cash rate unchanged at 3.60 per cent.
While inflation has fallen substantially since its peak in 2022, it has picked up more

 recently. The Board’s judgement is that some of the recent increase in underlying

 inflation

 was due to temporary factors and there is uncertainty about how much signal to take from

 the

 monthly CPI data given it is a new data series. Nevertheless, the data do suggest some

 signs

 of a more broadly based pick-up in inflation, part of which may be persistent and will

 bear

 close monitoring.
Economic activity continues to recover. Growth in private demand has strengthened, driven

 by

 both consumption and investment. Activity and prices in the housing market are also

 continuing to pick up. Financial conditions have eased since the beginning of the year,

 credit is readily available to both households and businesses and the effects of earlier

 interest rate reductions are yet to flow through fully to demand, prices and wages. On

 the

 other hand, money market interest rates and government bond yields have risen more

 recently.
Various indicators suggest that labour market conditions remain a little tight. The

 unemployment rate has risen gradually over the past year and employment growth has

 slowed.

 However, measures of labour underutilisation remain at low rates, surveyed measures of

 capacity utilisation are above their long-run average and business surveys and liaison

 continue to suggest that a significant share of firms are experiencing difficulty

 sourcing

 labour. Wages growth, as measured by the Wage Price Index, has eased from its peak but

 broader measures of wages continue to show strong growth and growth in unit labour costs

 remains high.
There are uncertainties about the outlook for domestic economic activity and inflation

 and

 the extent to which monetary policy remains restrictive. On the domestic side, the

 pick-up

 in momentum has been stronger than anticipated, particularly in the private sector. If

 this

 continues, it is likely to add to capacity pressures. Uncertainty in the global economy

 remains significant but so far there has been minimal impact on overall growth and trade

 in

 Australia’s major trading partners.
Decision
The recent data suggest the risks to inflation have tilted to the upside, but it will

 take a

 little longer to assess the persistence of inflationary pressures. Private demand is

 recovering. Labour market conditions still appear a little tight but further modest

 easing

 is expected. The Board therefore judged that it was appropriate to remain cautious,

 updating

 its view of the outlook as the data evolve.
The Board will be attentive to the data and the evolving assessment of the outlook and

 risks

 to guide its decisions. In doing so, it will pay close attention to developments in the

 global economy and financial markets, trends in domestic demand, and the outlook for

 inflation and the labour market. The Board is focused on its mandate to deliver price

 stability and full employment and will do what it considers necessary to achieve that

 outcome.
Today’s policy decision was unanimous.
Enquiries
Communications Department
Reserve Bank of Australia
SYDNEY
Phone:
+61 2 9551 8111
Email:
rbainfo@rba.gov.au
