BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: 12 August 2025
DATE: 01/06/2025
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/media-releases/2025/mr-25-22.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

More on the August 2025 monetary policy decision
Media Release
Statement by the Monetary Policy Board: Monetary Policy Decision
Number
2025-22
Date
12 August 2025
At its meeting today, the Board decided to lower the cash rate target by 25 basis points to

 3.60 per cent.
Inflation has continued to moderate.
Inflation has fallen substantially since the peak in 2022, as higher interest rates have been working to

 bring aggregate demand and potential supply closer towards balance. In the June quarter, trimmed mean

 inflation over the year fell to 2.7 per cent, broadly as expected in May. Headline inflation,

 which has partly been affected by temporary cost of living relief measures, was 2.1 per cent,

 also as forecast. Updated staff forecasts for the August meeting suggest that underlying inflation will

 continue to moderate to around the midpoint of the
2–3 per cent
range, with the cash rate assumed to follow a

 gradual easing path.
The outlook remains uncertain.
Uncertainty in the world economy remains elevated. There is a little more clarity on the scope and scale

 of US tariffs and policy responses in other countries, suggesting that more extreme outcomes are likely

 to be avoided. Trade policy developments are nevertheless still expected to have an adverse effect on

 global economic activity, and there remains a risk that households and firms delay expenditure pending

 still greater clarity on the outlook. As in May, the forecasts assume that both effects weigh on activity

 and inflation in Australia for a period.
Domestically, private demand appears to have been recovering gradually, real household incomes have picked

 up and some measures of financial conditions have eased.
Various indicators suggest that labour market conditions remain a little tight, although have eased

 further in recent months. The unemployment rate rose to 4.3 per cent in the month of June and

 averaged 4.2 per cent in the June quarter as a whole, in line with the May forecasts. Measures

 of labour underutilisation nevertheless remain at low rates and business surveys and liaison suggest that

 availability of labour is still a constraint for a range of employers. Looking through quarterly

 volatility, wages growth has eased from its peak but productivity growth has not picked up and growth in

 unit labour costs remains high.
There are uncertainties about the outlook for domestic economic activity and inflation stemming from both

 domestic and international developments. The forecasts released today are for the recovery in household

 consumption growth to be sustained as real incomes rise. Businesses in some sectors, however, continue to

 report that weakness in demand is making it difficult to pass on cost increases to final prices. There is

 a risk that consumption growth is a little slower than expected, which could weigh on growth in aggregate

 demand and lead to weaker labour market conditions. Alternatively, as real incomes and wealth continue to

 rise, households might choose to consume more and save less than expected. Labour market outcomes may

 also prove stronger than expected, given the signal from a range of leading indicators.
There are also uncertainties regarding the lags in the effect of recent monetary policy easing and how

 firms’ pricing decisions and wages will respond to the balance between aggregate demand and

 potential supply for goods and services, conditions in the labour market and continued weak productivity

 outcomes.
Maintaining price stability and full employment is the priority.
With underlying inflation continuing to decline back towards the midpoint of the
2–3 per cent
range and labour market conditions easing

 slightly, as expected, the Board judged that a further easing of monetary policy was appropriate. This

 takes the decline in the cash rate since the beginning of the year to 75 basis points. The Board

 nevertheless remains cautious about the outlook, particularly given the heightened level of uncertainty

 about both aggregate demand and potential supply. It noted that monetary policy is well placed to respond

 decisively to international developments if they were to have material implications for activity and

 inflation in Australia.
The Board will be attentive to the data and the evolving assessment of risks to guide its decisions. In

 doing so, it will pay close attention to developments in the global economy and financial markets, trends

 in domestic demand, and the outlook for inflation and the labour market. The Board is focused on its

 mandate to deliver price stability and full employment and will do what it considers necessary to achieve

 that outcome.
Decision
Today’s policy decision was unanimous.
Enquiries
Communications Department
Reserve Bank of Australia
SYDNEY
Phone:
+61 2 9551 8111
Email:
rbainfo@rba.gov.au
