BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: 17 March 2026
DATE: 01/06/2026
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/media-releases/2026/mr-26-08.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

Media Release
Statement by the Monetary Policy Board: Monetary Policy Decision
Number
2026-08
Date
17 March 2026
At its meeting today, the Board decided to increase the cash rate target by 25 basis points to

 4.10 per cent.
While inflation has fallen substantially since its peak in 2022, it picked up materially in the

 second half of 2025. Information since the February meeting suggests that some of the increase in

 inflation reflects greater capacity pressures. In addition, the conflict in the Middle East has

 resulted in sharply higher fuel prices, which, if sustained, will add to inflation. Short-term

 measures of inflation expectations have already risen. As a result, the Board judged that there is a

 material risk that inflation will remain above target for longer than previously anticipated.
Higher capacity pressures reflect, in part, the greater momentum in demand in the latter part of

 2025. Growth in private demand strengthened substantially more than was expected in mid-2025,

 although the composition of that growth surprised in the December quarter. Business investment was

 above expectations and consumption was below expectations. Meanwhile, growth in unit labour costs

 declined. More recently, the unemployment rate has been a little lower than expected and measures of

 labour underutilisation remain at low rates. Activity and prices in the housing market grew strongly

 over the past year, although housing price growth moderated somewhat at the start of 2026.
Financial conditions have tightened a little this year, but the extent to which monetary policy is

 restrictive is uncertain. Credit is readily available to both households and businesses and the

 effects of interest rate reductions in 2025 are yet to flow through fully to aggregate demand, prices

 and wages. The exchange rate, money market interest rates and government bond yields have risen over

 the past month. In large part, higher interest rates reflect expectations for the path of monetary

 policy, which have risen in Australia and most other advanced economies in response to the expected

 inflationary implications of the conflict in the Middle East.
There are material uncertainties about the outlook for domestic economic activity and inflation and

 the extent to which monetary policy is restrictive. Globally, the conflict in the Middle East poses

 substantial risks in both directions. A longer or more severe conflict could put further upward

 pressure on global energy prices; this will push up near-term inflation and could also increase

 inflation further out if it impairs supply capacity or price rises get built into longer term

 inflation expectations. Higher prices and prolonged uncertainty may cause growth to be lower in

 Australia’s major trading partners and also in Australia.
Decision
A wide range of data over recent months have confirmed that inflationary pressures picked up

 materially in the second half of 2025. While part of the pick-up in inflation is assessed to reflect

 temporary factors, the Board judged that the labour market has tightened a little recently and

 capacity pressures are slightly greater than previously assessed. Developments in the Middle East

 remain highly uncertain, but under a wide range of possible scenarios could add to global and

 domestic inflation.
In light of these considerations, the Board judged that inflation is likely to remain above target

 for some time and that the risks have tilted further to the upside, including to inflation

 expectations. It was therefore appropriate to increase the cash rate target.
The Board will be attentive to the data and the evolving assessment of the outlook and risks to guide

 its decisions. In doing so, it will pay close attention to developments in the global economy and

 financial markets, trends in domestic demand and the outlook for inflation and the labour market.

 Monetary policy is well placed to respond to developments and the Board is focused on its mandate to

 deliver price stability and full employment. It will do what it considers necessary to achieve that

 outcome.
Today’s policy decision was made by majority: five members voted to increase the cash rate

 target by 25 basis points to 4.10 per cent; four members voted to leave the cash rate

 target unchanged at 3.85 per cent.
Enquiries
Communications Department
Reserve Bank of Australia
SYDNEY
Phone:
+61 2 9551 8111
Email:
rbainfo@rba.gov.au
