BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: 5 May 2026
DATE: 01/06/2026
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/media-releases/2026/mr-26-12.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

More on the May 2026 monetary policy decision
Media Release
Statement by the Monetary Policy Board: Monetary Policy Decision
Number
2026-12
Date
5 May 2026
At its meeting today, the Board decided to increase the cash rate target by 25 basis points to

 4.35 per cent.
Inflation picked up materially in the second half of 2025, and information since the beginning of

 this year confirms that some of this increase reflected greater capacity pressures. In addition, the

 conflict in the Middle East has resulted in sharply higher fuel and related commodity prices, which

 are already adding to inflation. There are early signs that many firms experiencing cost pressures

 are looking to increase prices of their goods and services. Short-term measures of inflation

 expectations have also risen.
The Bank has updated its forecasts to incorporate recent data and developments in the Middle East.

 The baseline forecast, which assumes that the conflict is resolved soon and fuel prices decline, sees

 underlying inflation peaking higher than was expected in February. It then declines as demand growth

 slows and capacity pressures ease in response to higher interest rates.
Financial conditions have tightened this year. Money market interest rates and government bond yields

 have risen, and the exchange rate has appreciated. But credit is readily available to both households

 and businesses.
There are materially heightened uncertainties about the outlook for domestic economic activity and

 inflation. With the conflict in the Middle East continuing, there are plausible scenarios where

 inflation is higher and activity lower than envisaged under the baseline forecast. A longer or more

 severe conflict could put further upward pressure on global energy prices; this would push up

 near-term inflation and could also increase inflation further out as these costs are passed through

 and if price rises get built into longer term inflation expectations. But higher prices and prolonged

 uncertainty may cause growth to be lower in Australia’s major trading partners and also in

 Australia.
Decision
As expected, developments in the Middle East are having an impact on inflation. Higher fuel prices

 are adding to inflation and there are indications that this is likely to have second-round effects on

 prices for goods and services more broadly. This inflation impulse is in addition to the high

 inflation recorded around the start of 2026, reflecting capacity pressures in the economy.
In light of these considerations, the Board assessed that inflation is likely to remain above target

 for some time and that the risks remain tilted to the upside, including to inflation expectations. It

 was therefore judged appropriate to increase the cash rate target.
The Board will be attentive to the data and the evolving assessment of the outlook and risks to guide

 its decisions. In doing so, it will pay close attention to developments in the global economy and

 financial markets, trends in domestic demand and the outlook for inflation and the labour market.

 Having raised the cash rate three times, monetary policy is well placed to respond to developments

 and the Board is focused on its mandate to deliver price stability and full employment. It will do

 what it considers necessary to achieve that outcome.
Today’s policy decision was made by majority: eight members voted to increase the cash rate

 target by 25 basis points to 4.35 per cent; one member voted to leave the cash rate

 target unchanged at 4.10 per cent.
Enquiries
Communications Department
Reserve Bank of Australia
SYDNEY
Phone:
+61 2 9551 8111
Email:
rbainfo@rba.gov.au
