BANK: RBA
CATEGORY: Monetary Policy
TITLE: 3 February 2026
DATE: 01/06/2026
SPEAKER: 
SPEAKER ROLE: 
SOURCE URL: https://www.rba.gov.au/media-releases/2026/mr-26-03.html
DOCUMENT TYPE: html

==== EXTRACTED TEXT START ====

More on the February 2026 monetary policy decision
Media Release
Statement by the Monetary Policy Board: Monetary Policy Decision
Number
2026-03
Date
3 February 2026
At its meeting today, the Board decided to increase the cash rate target by 25 basis points to

 3.85 per cent.
While inflation has fallen substantially since its peak in 2022, it picked up materially in the

 second half of 2025. The Board has been closely monitoring the economy and judges that some of the

 increase in inflation reflects greater capacity pressures. As a result, the Board considers that

 inflation is likely to remain above target for some time.
Capacity pressures reflect, in part, the greater momentum in demand seen in recent months. Growth in

 private demand has strengthened substantially more than expected, driven by both household spending

 and investment. Activity and prices in the housing market are also continuing to pick up. Financial

 conditions eased over 2025 and it is uncertain whether they remain restrictive. Credit is readily

 available to both households and businesses and the effects of earlier interest rate reductions are

 yet to flow through fully to aggregate demand, prices and wages. More recently, the exchange rate,

 money market interest rates and government bond yields have risen following a rise in market

 expectations for the cash rate.
Various indicators suggest that labour market conditions remain a little tight and that they have

 stabilised in recent months, in line with the pick-up in momentum in economic activity. The

 unemployment rate has been a little lower than expected and measures of labour underutilisation

 remain at low rates. Growth in the Wage Price Index has eased from its peak, but broader measures of

 wages growth continue to be strong and growth in unit labour costs remains high.
There are uncertainties about the outlook for domestic economic activity and inflation and the extent

 to which monetary policy is restrictive. On the domestic side, if growth in demand is stronger than

 expected, and growth in the economy’s supply capacity remains limited, it is likely to add

 further to capacity pressures. Uncertainty in the global economy remains significant but so far there

 has been little or no depressing effect on the Australian economy; indeed, recent growth and trade in

 Australia’s major trading partners has surprised on the upside.
Decision
A wide range of data over recent months have confirmed that inflationary pressures picked up

 materially in the second half of 2025. While part of the pick-up in inflation is assessed to reflect

 temporary factors, it is evident that private demand is growing more quickly than expected, capacity

 pressures are greater than previously assessed and labour market conditions are a little tight.
The Board judged that inflation is likely to remain above target for some time and it was appropriate

 to increase the cash rate target.
The Board will be attentive to the data and the evolving assessment of the outlook and risks to guide

 its decisions. In doing so, it will pay close attention to developments in the global economy and

 financial markets, trends in domestic demand, and the outlook for inflation and the labour market.

 The Board is focused on its mandate to deliver price stability and full employment and will do what

 it considers necessary to achieve that outcome.
Today’s policy decision was unanimous.
Enquiries
Communications Department
Reserve Bank of Australia
SYDNEY
Phone:
+61 2 9551 8111
Email:
rbainfo@rba.gov.au
